the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net








[Transcriber's note: Linenotes and Footnotes moved as close as
possible to their applicable entry to facilitate readability.]




ROYAL IRISH ACADEMY

TODD LECTURE SERIES

VOLUME XIII.


KUNO MEYER, PH.D.


THE TRIADS OF IRELAND

[Illustration]


  DUBLIN
  HODGES, FIGGIS, & CO., LTD.
  LONDON: WILLIAMS & NORGATE
  1906

_Printed by_ PONSONBY & GIBBS, _Dublin University Press_




CONTENTS

                                PAGE

  PREFACE,                      v-xv

  TEXT AND TRANSLATION,         1-35

  GLOSSES AND NOTES,           36-43

  INDEX LOCORUM,               45-46

  INDEX NOMINUM,                  46

  GLOSSARY,                    47-54




PREFACE


The collection of Irish Triads, which is here edited and translated for
the first time, has come down to us in the following nine manuscripts,
dating from the fourteenth to the nineteenth century:--

      =L=, _i.e._ the Yellow Book of Lecan, a vellum of the end of
      the fourteenth century, pp. 414_b_--418_a_, a complete copy.

      =B=, _i.e._ the Book of Ballymote, a vellum of the end of
      the fourteenth century, pp. 65_b_-66_b_ (ends imperfectly).

      =M=, _i.e._ the Book of Húi Maine, a vellum of the
      fourteenth century, fo. 190_a_[1]-fo. 191_a_[2]. A complete
      copy beginning: 'Ceand Erenn Ardmacha,' and ending: 'tri
      hurgairt bidh a caitheam díescaidheadh (_sic_) a chaitheam
      iarna coir a caitheam gan altughudh.' Then follow proverbial
      sayings from the 'colloquy of Cormac and Cairpre,' such as:
      'Dedhe ara ndligh gach maith domelar ithe [et] altugud. Anas
      deach gacha fleidhe a cainaltughudh [et] a mochdingbail.
      Caidhe deach samtha. Ni _hansa_. Gal gan forran. Deasgaidh
      codulta frislige,' &c., ending: 'deasgaidh aineolais
      imreasain. Ni d'agallaim Cormaic [et] Cairpre coruici sin.'

      =Lec=, _i.e._ the Book of Lecan, a vellum of the fifteenth
      century. The leaves on which the Triads are found are now
      bound up with the codex H. 2. 17 belonging to Trinity
      College. It is a complete copy beginning on p. 183_b_:
      'Ceand _erenn_ Ardmacha,' and ending on p. 184_b_:
      'ceitheora aipgitri baisi baig connailbi gell imreasain.'[1]
      =N=, _i.e._ 23. N. 10, a paper MS. written in the year
      1575,[2] pp. 98-101. A complete copy, the gap between pp.
      100 and 106 being made up by pp. 7_a_-10_b_ of the vellum
      portion of the manuscript.

[1] By an oversight I have referred to this MS. sometimes by Lec and
sometimes by H. In some cases both Lec and H will be found quoted in the
variants. The same MS. is always meant.

[2] As appears from the following colophon on p. 101: 'Oraoit uaim ar do
lebor a hOedh in c_éd_luan iar n-aurtach Johannes. Baile Tibhaird ar bla
maige mo mendad scribne hi farrad Se(a)ain hi Maoilconari. Mese
(Dubthach) do scrib in ball soin da derpiris [et] rlæ. Anno domini 1575.
Guroiuh maith ag_a_t.

      =H=[Prime], _i.e._ H. 1. 15, pp. 946-957. This is a paper
      manuscript written by Tadhg Tiorthach O Neachtain in 1745.
      It is a complete copy, with copious glosses in Modern Irish,
      the more important of which are printed below on pp. 36-43.
      At the end O Neachtain has added the following:--'Trí
      subhailce diadha: creidhemh, dothchus agus grádh. Trí a
      n-aon: athair, mac, spiorad naomh, da raibh gloir, mola[dh]
      [et] umhlacht tre bith sior tug ré don bhochtan bocht so.
      Aniu an 15 do bhealltuine 1745. Tadhg O Nechtuin mac Seain a
      n-aois ceithre bliadhna déag et trí fithchit roscriob na
      trithibh [.s]uas.'

These manuscripts have, on the whole, an identical text, though they all
occasionally omit a triad or two; and the order of the single triads
varies in all of them. They have all been used in constructing a
critical text, the most important variants being given in the
foot-notes. The order followed is in the main that of the Yellow Book of
Lecan.

There are at least three other manuscripts containing copies of the
Triads. One of them I discovered in the Stowe collection after the text
had been printed off. It is a paper quarto now marked 23. N. 27,
containing on fo. 1_a_-7_b_ a copy of the Triads, followed on fo.
7_b_-19_a_ by a glossed copy of the _Tecosca Cormaic_. It was written in
1714 by Domnall (or Daniel) O Duind mac Eimuinn. Its readings agree
closely with those of N. In § 237, it alone, of all manuscripts, gives
an intelligible reading of a corrupt passage. For _cia fochertar
im-muir, cia berthair hi tech fo glass dodeime a tiprait oca mbí_, it
reads: _cia focearta im-muir, cia beirthear hi tech fo glass no do
theine, dogeibther occan tiprait_, 'though it be thrown into the sea,
though it be put into a house under lock, or into fire, it will be found
at the well.' In § 121 for _cerdai_ it reads _cerd_; in § 139 it has
_rotioc_ and _rotocht_; in § 143 for _grúss_ its reading is _grís_; in
§153 it has _aibeuloit_ for _eplet_; in § 217 _tar a n-éisi_ for _dia
n-éisi_; in § 218 _lomradh_(twice) for _lobra_ and _indlighidh_ for _i
n-indligud_; in § 219 it has the correct reading _éiric_, and for
_dithechte_ it reads _ditheacht_; in § 220 it reads _fri aroile_ for
_fria céile_; in § 223 after _ile_ it adds _imchiana_; in § 224 it reads
_grís brond .i. galar_; in § 229 for _meraichne_ it has _mearaigheacht_;
in § 235 it has _mhamus_ for _mám_; in § 236 _Maig Hi_ for _Maig Lii_;
and for _co ndeirgenai in dam de_ it reads _co nderna in dam fria_.

Another copy, written in 1836 by Peter O'Longan, formerly in the
possession of the Earls of Crawford, now belongs to the Rylands Library,
Manchester, where it was found by Professor Strachan, who kindly copied
a page or two for me. It is evidently a very corrupt copy which I have
not thought worth the trouble of collating.

Lastly, there is in the Advocates' Library a copy in a vellum manuscript
marked Kilbride III. It begins on fo. 9_b_^2 as follows:--'Treching
breath annso. Ceann Eirind Ardmacha.' I hope to collate it before long,
and give some account of it in the next number of this series.

In all these manuscripts the Triads either follow upon, or precede, or
are incorporated in the collections of maxims and proverbial sayings
known as _Tecosca Cormaic_, _Auraicept Morainn_, and _Senbríathra
Fíthil_, the whole forming a body of early Irish gnomic literature which
deserves editing in its entirety. It is clear, however, that the Triads
do not originally belong to any of these texts. They had a separate
origin, and form a collection by themselves. This is also shown by the
fact that the Book of Leinster, the oldest manuscript containing the
_Tecosca Cormaic_ (pp. 343_a_-345_b_), the _Senbríathra Fíthail_ (pp.
345_b_-346_a_), and the _Bríathra Moraind_ (pp. 346_a_-_b_), does not
include them.

It is but a small portion of the large number of triads scattered
throughout early Irish literature that has been brought together in our
collection under the title of _Trecheng breth Féne_, i.e., literally 'a
triadic arrangement of the sayings of Irishmen.' I first drew attention
to the existence of Irish triads in a note on Irish proverbs in my
addition of the _Battle of Ventry_, p. 85, where a few will be found
quoted. A complete collection of them would fill a small volume,
especially if it were to include those still current among the people of
Ireland, both among Gaelic and English speakers. I must content myself
here with giving a few specimens taken at random from my own
collections:--

      Three kinds of martyrdom that are counted as a cross to man,
      _i.e._ white martyrdom, green martyrdom, and red
      martyrdom.--The Cambray Homily (_Thesaurus Palæohibernicus_,
      II., p. 246).

      Three enemies of the soul: the world, the devil, and an
      impious teacher.--Colman maccu Beognae's Alphabet of Piety
      (_Zeitschrift für celtische Philologie_, III., p. 452).

      Three things whereby the devil shows himself in man: by his
      face, by his gait, by his speech.--_Ib._, p. 453.

      Three profitable labours in the day: praying, working,
      reading.--Regula Choluimb Cille (_Zeitschr._, III., p. 29).

      Three laymen of Ireland who became monks: Beccan son of
      Cula, Mochu son of Lonan, and Enda of Arann.--Notes on the
      Félire of Oengus (Henry Bradshaw Society, vol. xxix., p.
      112).

      Three chief artisans of Ireland: Tassach with Patrick,
      Conlaed with Brigit, and Daig with Ciaran.--_Ib._, p. 186.

      Three poets of the world: Homer of the Greeks, Vergil of the
      Latins, Ruman of the Gaels.--Book of Leinster, p. 354_b_.

      The three worst counsels that have been acted on in Ireland
      through the advice of saints: the cutting short of Ciaran's
      life, the banishment of Colum Cille, the expulsion of
      Mochuta from Rathen.--Notes on the Félire of Oengus, p. 204,
      and Tripartite Life, p. 557.[3]

      [3] Where for 'wrong stories' read 'wrong counsels' (_sanasa sáeba_).

This triad is thus versified in the Brussels MS. 5100:--

  Teora saoba sanasa    Leithe Cuind roc[h]aras-[s]a:
  Mochuda cona clamhra[i]d     d'ionnarba a Rathain roghlain,
  cur Coluim Cille tar sal,   timdibhe saeghail Ciaráin.


      Three things there are for which the Son of living God is
      not grateful: haughty piety, harsh reproof, reviling a
      person if it is not certain.[4]

      [4] LB., p. 225 marg. inf., and Brussels MS. 5100, fo. 86_a_:

  Fuil trí ní (a trí Br.)       doná (danach Br.) buidech mac Dé bí:
  crábud úallach, coisced (coiccsed Br.) serb,    écnach duine mad inderb.


      Three things there are for which the King of the sun is
      grateful: union of brethren, upright conversation, serving
      at the altar of God.[5]

      [5] Edinburgh MS. xl, p. 28, and Brussels MS. 5100, fo. 86_a_:

  Fuil tréide       dianab buidech rí gréine:
  óenta bráthar, comrád (fodail Ed.) cert,   altóir Dé do thimthirecht.


      Woe to the three folk in horrid hell of great blasts: folk
      who practise poetry, folk who violate their orders,
      mercenaries.[6]

      [6] LB., p. 236, marg. inf.:

  Mairg na trí lucht a n-iffirn úathmar anside:
  óes dogní dán, óes choilles grád, óes amsaine.


      Three things there are which do not behove the poor of
      living God: ingratitude for his life whatever it be,
      grumbling, and flattery.[7]

      [7] LB., p. 238, marg. inf.:

  Fuil trí ní      ná dlegair do bocht Dé bí:
  dimmda da bethaid cipé,          cesacht ocus aibéle.




The following modern triads I owe to a communication from Dr. P.W.
Joyce, who heard them in his youth among the people of Limerick:--

      Three things to be distrusted: a cow's horn, a dog's tooth,
      and a horse's hoof.

      Three disagreeable things at home: a scolding wife, a
      squalling child, and a smoky chimney.

      The three finest sights in the world: a field of ripe wheat,
      a ship in full sail, and the wife of a Mac Donnell with
      child.[8]

[8] This triad comes from the Glynns of Antrim, the Mac Donnells'
district.

In our collection an arrangement of the Triads in certain groups,
according to their contents, is discernible. Thus, the first
sixty-one--of which, however, the opening thirty-one are no Triads at
all--are all topographical; and among the rest, those dealing with legal
matters stand out clearly (§§ 149-172).

When the collection was made we have no means of ascertaining, except
from internal evidence, such as the age of the language, and a few
allusions to events, the date of which we can approximately fix.

The language of the Triads may be described as late Old-Irish. Their
verbal system indeed is on the whole that of the Continental glosses,[9]
and would forbid us to put them later than the year 900. On the other
hand, the following peculiarities in declension, in which all the
manuscripts agree, make it impossible for us to put them much earlier
than the second half of the ninth century.

[9] I may mention particularly the relative forms _téite_ 167, _bíte_
127, _ata_ 75, 76, 224, &c., _berta_ (O. Ir. _berte_) 109, 110, _fíchte_
(145), _coillte_ (166), _téite_ (167), _aragellat_ (sic leg. with N)
171; the deponent _neimthigedar_ 116, &c.; _ató_, 'I am' (104), and the
use of the perfective _ad-_ in _conaittig_ 77, 78.

The genitive singular of _i-_ and _u-_stems no longer shows the ending
_-o_, which has been replaced throughout by _-a_.[10] Now, in the Annals
of Ulster, which are a sure guide in these matters and allow us to
follow the development of the language from century to century, this
genitive in _-o_ is found for the last time in A.D. 816 (_rátho,
Ailello_). Thence onward the ending _-a_ is always found.

[10] _rátha_ 56, _foglada_ 92, _flatha_ 151, 248, 253; _dara_ 4, 34;
_Ela_ 31, 35, 44 (cf. _Lainne Ela_, AU. 816); _átha_ 50, _betha_ 82, 83,
249.

The place-name _Lusca_, 'Lusk,' is originally an _n-_stem making its
genitive _Luscan_. This is the regular form in the Annals of Ulster till
the year 880, from which date onward it is always _Lusca_ (A.D. 916,
928, &c.). In our text (§ 46) all the manuscripts read _Lusca_.

In slender _io-_stems the dative singular in Old-Irish ends in _-iu_. I
find this form in the Annals of Ulster for the last time in A.D. 816
(_Gertidiu_). Thence onward it is always _-i_, as in our text (_hi
Cúailgni_ 43, _d'uisci_ 64).

The nasal stem _léimm_ makes its nom. plur. _léimmen_ in Old-Irish. In §
32 we find instead (_tair-_)_leme_. So also _foimrimm_ makes its nom.
plural _foimrimme_ in § 163.

The word _dorus_ is neuter in Old-Irish, making its nom. acc. plural
either _dorus_ or _doirsea_. In our text (§§ 173, 174) the word is
masculine, and makes its nom. plural _doruis_.

_Druimm_ is an _i-_stem in Old-Irish, but in the later language passes
into an _n-_stem. In § 51 we find the nom. pl. _drommanna_.

The neuter _grád_ in § 166 makes its nom. plur. _grúda_ for O. Ir.
_grád_.[11]

[11] The infinitive _bith_ for O. Ir. _buith_ (91), the dative _cinn_
for O. Ir. _ciunn_ (98, 135), the nom. pl. _sligthi_ for O. Ir. _sligid_
(which I have restored in § 49), the confusion between _do_ and _di_
(e.g. 83), and other details are probably due to the Middle-and
Modern-Irish transcribers.

On linguistic grounds, then, I should say that our collection was made
some time during the second half of the ninth century. That it cannot be
dated earlier is also apparent from another consideration. Professor
Zimmer has taught us to search in every ancient Irish text for
indications of its having been composed either before or after the
Viking period. I find no words from the Norse language in the Triads,
or, if there are any, they have escaped me; but there are two distinct
references to the Viking age. In § 232, a Viking in his hauberk (_Gall
ina lúirig_) is mentioned as one of three that are hardest to talk to;
and, in § 44, Bangor in Co. Down is called unlucky or unfortunate, no
doubt, as the gloss says, because of the repeated plunderings and
destruction of its monastery by the Norse during the early part of the
ninth century (A.D. 823, 824).

In endeavouring to trace the origin of the Triad as a form of literary
composition among the Irish, one must remember that it is but one of
several similar enumerative sayings common in Irish literature. Thus the
collection here printed contains three duads (124. 133. 134), seven
tetrads (223. 230. 234. 244. 248. 251. 252), and one heptad (235). A
whole Irish law-book is composed in the form of heptads;[12] while
triads, tetrads, &c., occur in every part of the Laws.[13] Such
schematic arrangements were of course a great aid to memory.

[12] See _Ancient Laws of Ireland_, vol, v., pp. 118-373.

[13] Thus in the first volume of the Laws we find duads on p. 228, 15;
294, 27; triads on p. 50, 9. 27; 230, 4; 264, 20; 288, 28; tetrads 40,
21; 54, 7; 64, 1; 240, 24; 256, 4, &c.; 272, 25; 274, 3, &c.; pentads
30, 21; 50, 32; 90, 29; 102, 6; hexads 68, 11; 248, 7: a heptad 134, 9;
an ennead 16, 20.

If the Triad stood alone, the idea that it owes its origin to the effect
of the doctrine of the Trinity upon the Celtic imagination might
reasonably be entertained. The fact that this doctrine has led to many
peculiar phenomena in Irish folklore, literature, and art has frequently
been pointed out. Nor would I deny that the sacred character of the
number three, together with the greater facility of composition, may
have contributed to the popularity of the Triad, which is certainly the
most common among the various numerical sayings as well as the only one
that has survived to the present day.

However that may be, I believe that the model upon which the Irish
triads, tetrads, pentads, &c., were formed is to be sought in those
enumerative sayings--_Zahlensprüche_, as the German technical term
is--of Hebrew poetry to be found in several books of the Old Testament.
I am indebted to my friend the Rev. Carl Grüneisen for the following
list of such sayings, which I quote in the Vulgate version.

      DUADS AND TRIADS.

      Ecclus. 23: 21, Duo genera abundant in peccatis, et tertium
      adducit iram et perditionem, &c.

      _Ib._ 26: 25, In duobus contristatum est cor meum, et in
      tertio iracundia mihi advenit: 26 vir bellator deficiens per
      inopiam, et vir sensatus contemptus, 27 et qui transgreditur
      a iustitia ad peccatum, Deus paravit eum ad romphaeam.

      _Ib._ 26: 28, Duae species difficiles et periculosae mihi
      apparuerunt: difficile exuitur negotians a neglegentia, et
      non iustificabitur caupo a peccatis labiorum.


      TRIADS AND TETRADS.

      Proverb. 30: 15, Tria sunt insaturabilia, et quartum quod
      nunquam dicit: sufficit. 16 Inferuns, et os vulvae, et terra
      quae non satiatur aqua; ignis vero nunquam dicit: sufficit.

      _Ib._ 30: 18, Tria sunt difficilia mihi, et quartum penitus
      ignoro: 19 viam aquilae in caelo, viam colubri super petram,
      viam navis in medio mari, et viam viri in adolescentia.

      _Ib._ 30: 21, Per tria movetur terra, et quartum non potest
      sustinere: 22 per servum cum regnaverit: per stultum cum
      saturatus fuerit cibo, 23 per odiosam mulierem cum in
      matrimonio fuerit assumpta, et per ancillam cum fuerit heres
      dominae suae.

      _Ib._ 30: 29, Tria sunt quae bene gradiuntur, et quartum
      quod incedit feliciter: 30 leo fortissimus bestiarum, ad
      nullius pavebit occursum, 31 gallus succinctus lumbos, et
      aries, nec est rex qui resistat ei.

      Ecclus. 26: 5, A tribus timuit cor meum, et in quarto facies
      mea metuit: 6 delaturam civitatis, et collectionem populi, 7
      calumniam mendacem, super montem, omnia gravia, 8 dolor
      cordis et luctus mulier zelotypa.


      A TETRAD.

      Proverb. 30, 24: Quattuor sunt minima terrae, et ipsa sunt
      sapientiora sapientibus: 25 formicae, populus infirmus qui
      praeparat in messe cibum sibi, 26 lepusculus, plebs invalida
      qui collocat in petra cubile suum.


      A HEXAD AND HEPTAD.

      Proverb. 6. 16 Sex sunt quae odit Dominus, et septimum
      detestatur anima eius: 17 oculos sublimes, linguam mendacem,
      manus effundentes innoxium sanguinem, 18 cor machinans
      cogitationes pessimas, pedes veloces ad currendum in malum,
      19 proferentem mendacia testem fallacem, et eum qui seminat
      intra fratres discordias.


      AN ENNEAD.

      Ecclus. 25, 9: Novem insuspicabilia cordis magnificavi, et
      decimum dicam in lingua hominibus, &c.

The question arises whether these biblical sayings were the direct
source from which the Irish imitations are derived, or whether the Irish
became acquainted with the numerical Proverb through the medium of Greek
and Latin literature. As the Irish clerics ever since the days of St.
Patrick were diligent students of the Bible, there would be nothing
strange in the former assumption. But there exists at least one early
document which renders the latter equally possible. Under the title of
_Proverbia Grecorum_ we possess a collection of sayings translated by
some Irish scholar in Ireland from the Greek into Latin before the
seventh century.[14] Among them we find three triads,[15] two
pentads,[16] three heptads,[17] and two octads.[18]

[14] This is the opinion of S. Hellmann, their latest editor. See his
_Sedulius Scottus_, p. 135, in Traube's _Quellen und Untersuchungen zur
lateinischen Philologie des Mittelalters_, vol. i.: München, 1906.

[15] A. 39, 41. B. 5.

[16] A. 52.

[17] A. 54. B. 3, 7.

[18] B. 1, 2.

As examples I select the following two triads:--

      Tres bacheriosi(?) sunt: terribilis bellator armatus
      promptusque ad praelium, leo de spelunca quando praedam
      devorat, aper ferus de silva quando furore in aliquem
      irruit.

      Tres sunt imperfecti qui numquam ad perfectionem vitae
      disciplinae pervenire possunt; tunc enim a vitiis recedunt,
      quando mala facere non possunt. Antiquus nauta qui multis
      annis seductis onmibus emere et vendere poterat; senex
      auriga qui in curribus et in equis Deo derelicto vana cura
      atque conversatione meditatur atque utitur; vetula ancilla
      quae dominae suae subdole in omnibus rebus quae cottidiano
      ministerio perficiuntur male retribuit.

Triads occur sporadically in the literature of most other nations, and
have occasionally been collected. But I am not aware that this kind of
composition has ever attained the same popularity elsewhere as in Wales
and Ireland, where the manufacture of triads seems at times almost to
have become a sport.

The wittiest triads are undoubtedly those in which the third item
contains an anticlimax. Two perfect examples of this kind were composed
by Heine when he tells the foreigner visiting Germany that he need but
know three words of the language: _Brot_, _Kuss_, _Ehre_; and in his
often quoted witticism: _Der Franzose liebt die Freiheit wie seine
Braut, der Engländer wie seine Frau, der Deutsche wie seine alte
Grossmutter._

K.M.




THE TRIADS OF IRELAND




TRECHENG BRETH FÉNI INSO SÍS[1]


1. Cenn Hérenn Ardmacha.

  [Note 1: _om._ BMHNLec]

2. Ordan Hérenn Clúain Maic Nóis.

3. Ana Hérenn Clúain Iraird.

4. Cride Hérenn Cell Dara.

5. Sruithe Hérenn Bendchor.

6. Cóemna Hérenn Lusca.

7. Áinius Hérenn Cenannus.

8. Dí [.s]úil Hérenn Tamlachta [et] Findglais.

  [Note 8: dá súil L Finnglaisi N Findglais Lec]

9. Tech commairce Hérenn Tech Cairnig for sligid Assail.

  [Note 9: _om._ L]

10. Idna Hérenn Inis Cathaig.

11. Reclés Hérenn Glenn Dá Locha.

12. Féinechas Hérenn Clúain Húama.

13. Tech Foichle Hérenn Fernæ.

14. Litánacht Hérenn Less Mór.

15. Senchas Hérenn Imblech Ibair.

16. Bérla Féine Hérenn Corcach.

17. Légend Hérenn Ross Ailithre.

  [Note 17: Ailaicre B Elichre M]

18. Téite Hérenn Tír Dá Glas.

  [Note 18: téde N teide BM]

19. Anmchairde Hérenn Clúain Ferta Brénainn.

  [Note 19: ancairde BLec Brenainde N]

20. Escaine Hérenn Lothra.

  [Note 20: hescoemna L]

21. Brethemnas Hérenn Sláine.

22. Dúire chrábaid Hérenn Fobur Féichín.

  [Note 22: dire BM Féichín _om._ BM Fabair Feithin N]

23. Áibne Hérenn Ard mBreccáin.

24. Diúite Hérenn Ross Commáin.

  [Note 24: diuidus BM diuitecht L]

25. Fáilte Hérenn Ráith mBoth nó Druimm Lethan.

26. De[.s]erc Hérenn Dún Dá Lethglas.

  [Note 26: desearc L deeirc B deirc M]





THE TRIADS OF IRELAND


1. The Head of Ireland--Armagh.

2. The Dignity of Ireland--Clonmacnois.

3. The Wealth of Ireland--Clonard.

4. The Heart of Ireland--Kildare.

5. The Seniority of Ireland--Bangor.

6. The Comfort[19] of Ireland--Lusk.

[19] Or, perhaps, 'good cheer.'

7. The Sport of Ireland--Kells.

8. The Two Eyes of Ireland--Tallaght and Finglas.

9. The Sanctuary of Ireland--the House of Cairnech upon the Road of
Asal.[20]

[20] A road running from Tara westward into Westmeath.

10. The Purity of Ireland--Scattery Island.

11. The Abbey-church of Ireland--Glendalough.

12. The Jurisprudence of Ireland--Cloyne.

13. The House of Wages[21] of Ireland--Ferns.

[21] Or 'hire.'

14. The Singing the Litany of Ireland--Lismore.

15. The Lore of Ireland--Emly.

16. The Legal Speech of Ireland--Cork.

17. The Learning of Ireland--Roscarbery.

18. The Wantonness of Ireland--Terryglas.

19. The Spiritual Guidance of Ireland--Clonfert.

20. The Curse of Ireland--Lorrha.

21. The Judgment of Ireland--Slane.

22. The Severity of Piety of Ireland--Fore.

23. The Delight of Ireland--Ardbrackan.

24. The Simplicity[22] of Ireland--Roscommon.

[22] Or 'uprightness.'

25. The Welcome of Ireland--Raphoe or Drumlane.

26. The Charity of Ireland--Downpatrick.

27. Trichtach Hérenn Dairchaill.

  [Note 27: _om._ BM techtach E Durcaill N Darachill L]

28. Fossugud Hérenn Mag mBile.

  [Note 28: Mag Mile L]

29. Martra Hérenn Tulen.

  [Note 29: _om._ L]

30. Ailbéimm Hérenn Cell Rúaid.

  [Note 30: aulbeimnech L Ruadh N Ruadain L]

31. Genas Hérenn Lann Ela.

32. Trí tairleme Érenn: Daire Calgaig [et] Tech Munna [et] Cell
Maignenn.

  [Note 32: _om._ HBM]

33. Tri aithechpuirt Hérenn: Clúain Iraird, Glenn Dá Locha, Lugbad.

  [Note 33: aithich Lec heathachbuirg M Lugmag NBM]

34. Trí clochraid Hérenn: Ard Macha, Clúain Maic Nóis, Cell Dara.

  [Note 34: clothraige BM clot_hr_ai N clochraid L clochraidi Lec]

35. Trí háenaig Hérenn: áenach Tailten, áenach Crúachan, áenach Colmáin
Ela.

  [Note 35: haenaigi L Colman MSS]

36. Trí dúine Hérenn: Dún Sobairche, Dún Cermna, Cathair Chonrúi.

  [Note 36: duin NBM]

37. Trí slébe Hérenn: Slíab Cúa, Slíab Mis, Slíab Cúalann.

  [Note 37: sleibte BM]

38. Trí haird Hérenn: Crúachán Aigli, Ae Chúalann, Benn mBoirchi.

  [Note 38: hard N cích Cualann L benna LN]

39. Trí locha Hérenn: Loch nEchach, Loch Rí, Loch nErni.

  [Note 39: Rib BM Rig N]

40. Trí srotha Hérenn: Sinann, Bóand, Banda.

41. Trí machaire Hérenn: Mag Midi, Mag Line, Mag Lifi.

  [Note 41: maige HBM]

42. Trí dorcha Hérenn: úam Chnogba, úam Slángæ, dercc Ferna.

  [Note 42: doirchi L uaim Chruachan NL uaim Condba B uaim Cnodba HM
  Slaingai BM Slaine N Slaine [et] uaim Chruachan nó dearc Fearna _add._
  H]

43. Trí díthruib Hérenn: Fid Mór hi Cúailgni, Fid Déicsen hi Tuirtri,
Fid Moithre hi Connachtaib.

  [Note 43: dithreba BM Fid Dexin N]

44. Trí dotcaid Hérenn: abbdaine Bendchuir, [A] abbdaine Lainne Ela, ríge
Mugdorn Maigen.

  [Note 44: dotchaid LHLec [A] .i. ar imad argain air L
  abdaine Sláne nó Colmain Ela BM Laind Ela BM]

27. The ... of Ireland--Dairchaill.

28. The Stability of Ireland--Moville.

29. The Martyrdom of Ireland--Dulane.

30. The Reproach of Ireland--Cell Ruaid (Ruad's Church).[23]

[23] 'Ruadan's Church,' L.

31. The Chastity of Ireland--Lynally.

32. The three places of Ireland to alight at: Derry, Taghmon,
Kilmainham.

33. The three rent-paying places of Ireland: Clonard, Glendalough,
Louth.

34. The three stone-buildings of Ireland: Armagh, Clonmacnois, Kildare.

35. The three fairs of Ireland: the fair of Teltown, the fair of
Croghan, the fair of Colman Elo.

36. The three forts of Ireland: Dunseverick, Dun Cermna,[24] Cathir
Conree.

[24] On the Old Head of Kinsale.

37. The three mountains of Ireland: Slieve Gua,[25] Slieve Mis, Slieve
Cualann.[26]

[25] _i.e._ the Knockmealdown mountains.

[26] The Wicklow mountains.

38. The three heights of Ireland: Croagh Patrick, Ae Chualann,[27] Benn
Boirche.[28]

[27] 'The Liver ('Pap,' L.) of Cualu,' either the Great Sugarloaf or
Lugnaquilla.

[28] _i.e._ Slieve Donard.

39. The three lakes of Ireland: Lough Neagh, Lough Ree, Lough Erne.

40. The three rivers of Ireland: the Shannon, the Boyne, the Bann.

41. The three plains of Ireland: the plain of Meath, Moylinny,
Moy-Liffey.[29]

[29] _i.e._ the plain of Kildare.

42. The three dark places of Ireland: the cave of Knowth, the cave of
Slaney, the cave of Ferns.

43. The three desert places of Ireland: Fid Mór (Great Wood) in Coolney,
Fid Déicsen (Spy-wood) in Tuirtri,[30] the Wood of Moher in Connaught.

[30] The Húi Tuirtri were settled in the four baronies of Upper and
Lower Antrim, and Upper and Lower Toome in county Antrim.

44. The three unlucky places of Ireland: the abbotship of Bangor, the
abbotship of Lynally, the kingship of Mugdorn Maigen.[31]

[31] Now Cremorne barony, county Monaghan.

45. Trí huilc Hérenn: Crecraigi, Glasraigi, Benntraigi.

  [Note 45: Grecraigi HBM]

46. Trí cáemnai Hérenn: abbdaine Lusca, ríge trí Cualann, secnabbóite
Arda Macha.

  [Note 46: ríge fer Cúalann NL sechnap L segnab-i nArdmachai N]

47. Trí trága Hérenn: Tráig Ruis Airgit, Tráig Ruis Téiti, Tráig Baili.

  [Note 47: trachtai L]

48. Trí hátha Hérenn: Áth Clíath, Áth Lúain, Áth Caille.

49. Trí sligid Hérenn: slige Dála, slige Asail, slige Midlúachra.

  [Note 49: sligthi MSS]

50. Trí belaige Hérenn: Belach Conglais, Belach Luimnig, Belach
Duiblinne .i. Átha Clíath.

  [Note 50: belaig L Conglaisi N Luimne N .i. Átha Clíath _om_. N]

51. Trí drommanna Hérenn: Druimm Fingin, Druimm nDrobeoil, Druimm
Leithe.

  [Note 52: _om._ HBM]

52. Trí maige Hérenn: Mag mBreg, Mag Crúachan, Mac Liphi.

53. Trí clúana Hérenn: Clúain Maic Nóis, Clúain Eois, Clúain Iraird.

54. Trí tellaige Hérenn: tellach Temrach, tellach Caisil, tellach
Crúachan.

  [Note 54: Temair Crúachu Caisel HBM]

55. Trí hessa Hérenn: Ess Rúaid, Ess Danainne, Ess Maige.

56. Trí fothirbi Hérenn: Tír Rátha Laidcniáin, Slíab Commáin, Slíab
Mancháin.

  [Note 56: _om._ HBM fothairbe N]

57. Trí tiprata Hérenn: Tipra na nDési, Tipra Húarbeoil, Tipra Úaráin
Garaid.

  [Note 57: tiubrai N tipra Cuirp N nDési HBM tipra Uarainn Garaid HBM
  t. Uaran nGarad N Breifene N tipra Braithcleasan Brigdi H Braichleasan
  Brigde BM]

58. Trí haimréide Hérenn: Breifne, Bairenn, Bérre[A].

  [Note 58: haimreid L Boirind M [A] Beandtraigi H]

59. Trí hinbera Hérenn: Inber na mBárc, Inber Féile, Inber Túaige.

60. Trí hairderca Hérenn: Léimm Conculaind, Dún Cáin, Srub Brain.

  [Note 60: hirrdraici H oirrdirc M]

45. The three evil ones of Ireland: the Crecraige,[32] the Glasraige,
the Benntraige.[33]

[32] A tribe settled in the barony of Coolavin, county Sligo, and in the
adjacent part of county Roscommon.

[33] Either Bantry in county Cork, or Bantry in county Wexford.

46. The three comfortable places of Ireland: the abbotship of Lusk, the
kingship of the three Cualu,[34] the vice-abbotship of Armagh.

[34] 'Of the men of Cualu,' NL.

47. The three strands of Ireland: the strand of Ross Airgit,[35] the
strand of Ross Teiti, the strand of Baile.[36]

[35] A territory in the barony of Upper Ormond, county Tipperary.

[36] Now Dundalk.

48. The three fords of Ireland: Ath Cliath (Hurdle-ford), Athlone (the
Ford of Luan), Ath Caille (Wood-ford).[37]

[37] Perhaps Áth Caille Rúaide on the Shannon.

49. The three highroads of Ireland: Slige Dala,[38] Slige Asail, Slige
Luachra.[39]

[38] The great south-western road from Tara into Ossory.

[39] A road running northward from Tara.

50. The three mountain-passes of Ireland: Baltinglass, the Pass of
Limerick, the Pass of Dublin.

51. The three ridges of Ireland: Druim Fingin, Druim nDrobeoil, Druim
Leithe.[40]

[40] In Breffny.

52. The three plains of Ireland: Moy Bray, Moy Croghan, Moy Liffey.

53. The three meadows of Ireland: Clonmacnois, Clones, Clonard.

54. The three households of Ireland: the household of Tara, the
household of Cashel, the household of Croghan.

55. The three waterfalls of Ireland: Assaroe, Eas Danainne,[41] Eas
Maige.

[41] On the Shannon opposite Dunass, co. Clare.

56. The three fields (?) of Ireland: the land of Rathlynan, Slieve
Comman, Slieve Manchain.

57. The three wells of Ireland: the Well of the Desi, the Well of
Uarbel,[42] the Well of Uaran Garaid.

[42] Probably near _Sescenn Uarbéoil_ in Leinster (Mountseskenn?).

58. The three uneven places of Ireland: Breffny, the Burren, Beare.

59. The three estuaries of Ireland: Inver na mBarc,[43] Inver Feile,[44]
Inver Tuaige.[45]

[43] _Dún na mBárc_ is in Bantry Bay.

[44] The estuary of the Feale.

[45] 'The axe-shaped estuary,' _i.e._ the mouth of the Bann.

60. The three conspicuous places of Ireland: Cuchulinn's Leap,[46]
Dunquinn, Sruve Brain.[47]

[46] _i.e._ Loop Head.

[47] In the west of Kerry (i n-iarthar Hérenn, YBL. 123^b31).

61. Trí gnátha Hérenn: Tráig Lí, Lúachair Dedad, Slíab Fúait.

  [Note 61: gnath N gnáith HM Líí N]

62. Trí hamrai la Táin Bó Cúailnge: .i. in cuilmen dara héisi i nÉrinn;
in marb dia haisnéis don bíu .i. Fergus mac Róig dia hinnisin do Ninníne
éicius i n-aimsir Corbmaic maic Fáeláin; intí dia n-aisnéth_er_, coimge
bliadna dó.

  [Note 62: _om._ HBMLec coimde N]

63. Trí meinistri fer Féne: .i. cích, grúad, glún.

64. Trí dotcaid duine: deog therc d'uisci, ítu i cormthig, suide cumang
for achad.

  [Note 64: dotchaid L dodcaid BM luige dige BM luige re dig H]

65. Trí dotcaid threbtha: gort salach, iarmur cléithe, tech
drithlennach.

  [Note 65: dotchaid L dodcaid B iarmor B]

66. Trí hairgarta ecalse: caillech fri clocc, athláech i n-apdaine,
banna for altóir.

  [Note 66: hairgairt L hairgair H hurgoirt B ina habdaine B bainne NM
  bæ[=n] for a haltoir B]

67. Trí fáilti co n-íarduibi: fer tochmairc, fer gaite, fer aisnéise.

  [Note 67: fochmairc NHBMLec aisneidsi N]

68. Trí bróin ata ferr fáilti: brón treóit oc ithe messa, brón guirt
apaig, brón feda fo mess.

  [Note 68: is ferr H ita ferr L at ferr N broin MB ac aipgiudud BM ig
  messrugud H]

69. Trí fáilti ata messu brón: fáilti fir íar ndiupairt, fáilti fir íar
luga eithig, fáilti fir íar fingail.

  [Note 69: measum B iar ndiubairt N iar mbreith diubarta BM iar
  mbreith a dibirta H failte fir luga eithig B fir _om._ BM failte fir iar
  marbad a bráthar a[c] cosnom a [.f]eraind fris BM]

70. Trí fiada co n-an[.f]iad: gréss i n-óentig fri muintir, uisce rothé
dar cosa, bíad goirt cen dig.

  [Note 70: fiad L anbfiad N tri fiaidaichi ad mesa H greasa BM for
  cosaib HM dar cosaib NB biad goirt doib B]

71. Trí dotcaid maic athaig: clemnas fri hócthigern, gabáil for tascor
ríg, commaid fri meirlechu.

  [Note 71: dotchaid L dodca d B hoigthigearna MN tarscur BM tascor
  (nó tarcor) N tairrseach (!) L]

72. Trí dotcaid threbairi: tarcud do drochmnái, fognam do
droch[.f]laith, cóemchlód fri droch[.f]erann.

  [Note 72: dodchaidh B targad BM drochlaith M drochlaech H claechlud
  H caemclodh M drochírind B]

73. Trí búada trebairi: tarcud do degmnái, fognam do deg[.f]laith,
cóemchlód fri dag[.f]erann.

  [Note 73: trebtha N targad B deadlaech H claechmod H deigferand HM
  degthigern (!) B]

61. The three familiar places[48] of Ireland: Tralee, Logher, the Fews.

[48] Or, perhaps, 'places of common resort.'

62. Three wonders concerning the Táin Bó Cúailnge; that the _cuilmen_
came to Ireland in its stead; the dead relating it to the living, viz.
Fergus mac Róig reciting it to Ninníne the poet in the time of Cormac
mac Fáeláin; one year's protection to him to whom it is recited.

63. The three halidoms of the men of Ireland: breast, cheek, knee.

64. Three unfortunate things for a man: a scant drink of water, thirst
in an ale-house, a narrow seat upon a field.

65. Three unfortunate things of husbandry: a dirty field, leavings of
the hurdle, a house full of sparks.

66. Three forbidden things of a church: a nun as bellringer, a veteran
in the abbotship, a drop upon the altar.

67. Three rejoicings followed by sorrow: a wooer's, a thief's, a
tale-bearer's.

68. Three sorrows that are better than joy: the heaviness of a herd
feeding on mast, the heaviness of a ripe field,[49] the heaviness of a
wood under mast.

[49] 'Of a ripening field,' BM.

69. Three rejoicings that are worse than sorrow: the joy of a man who
has defrauded another, the joy of a man who has perjured himself, the
joy of a man who has committed parricide.[50]

[50] 'Of a man who has slain his brother in contesting his land,' BM.

70. The three worst welcomes: a handicraft in the same house with the
inmates, scalding water upon the feet, salt food without a drink.

71. Three unfortunate things for the son of a peasant: marrying into the
family of a franklin, attaching himself to the retinue of a king,
consorting with thieves.

72. Three unfortunate things for a householder: proposing to a bad
woman, serving a bad chief, exchanging for bad land.

73. Three excellent things for a householder: proposing to a good woman,
serving a good chief, exchanging for good land.

74. Trí hóenaig eserte: célide hi tig gobann, célide hi tig [.s]áir, dul do
chennuch cen áirche.

  [Note 74: hænaigi nasearta B neiseirti H haonaige neserte N esertai
  Lec airrdhe N]

75. Trí cóil ata ferr folongat in mbith: cóil srithide hi folldeirb,
cóil foichne for tuinn, cóil snáithe dar dorn dagmná.

  [Note 75: foloingead imbith B is ferr isin mbith N sreibe LLec
  srithide B srithide foildeirb N]

76. Trí duirn ata dech for bith: dorn deg[.s]áir, dorn degmná, dorn
deggobann.

  [Note 76: for doman BM dorn sair dorn gabonn dorn daim N degdaim BM]

77. Tréde conaittig fírinne: mess, tomus, cubus.

  [Note 77: tri conaitig B]

78. Tréde conaittig brethemnas: gáis, féige, fiss.

  [Note 78: a tri conaitig B]

79. Trí túarascbála étraid: osnad, cluiche, céilide.

  [Note 79: osnaid N miad LBM]

80. Tréde ara carthar escara: máin, cruth, innraccus.

  [Note 80: a tri BM treidi H gnás alaig erlabra HM airdearcus B]

81. Tréde ara miscnigther cara: fogal, dognas, dímainche.

  [Note 81: treidi H a tri M tri L fogail H dimainecht HM]

82. Trí buirb in betha: óc contibi sen, slán contibi galarach, gáeth
contibi báeth.

  [Note 82: contib BM contibe N gallrach BM gallrai N bæth contib gæth
  BM]

83. Trí buidir in betha: robud do throich, airchisecht fri faigdech,
cosc mná báithe do drúis.

  [Note 83: urchuidme ria foidhech N ærcuidmed fri foigeaeh B mná
  druithi B]

84. Trí cáin docelat éitchi: sobés la anricht, áne la dóer, ecna la
dodelb.

  [Note 84: doceilead eitig B handracht B dodealb B dodeilb N]

85. Trí héitich docelat cáin: bó binnech cen as, ech án amlúath, sodelb
cen tothucht.

  [Note 85: doceiled BM beinnech N]

86. Trí óible adannat seirc: gnúis, alaig, erlabra.

  [Note 86: haibne adannaid searc B adanta serce N alaid N]

87. Trí haithne co fomailt: aithne mná, aithne eich, aithne [.s]alainn.

  [Note 87: haithneada Lec tomailt B salainn L]

88. Trí búada téiti: ben cháem, ech maith, cú lúath.

  [Note 88: teite N buadnasa tétnai HBMLec]

89. Trí ségainni Hérenn: fáthrann, adbann a cruit, berrad aigthe.

  [Note 89: segaind M tri comartha segainn N segraind B Hérenn _om._
  MB fatraind B fadbann N fadhbond MB aigthe _om._ BM a cruit _om._ MN]

74. Three holidays[51] of a landless man[52]: visiting in the house of a
blacksmith, visiting in the house of a carpenter, buying without bonds.

[51] Or, perhaps, 'fairs, foregatherings.'

[52] Or 'vagrant.'

75. Three slender things that best support the world: the slender stream
of milk from the cow's dug into the pail, the slender blade of green
corn upon the ground, the slender thread over the hand of a skilled
woman.

76. Three hands that are best in the world: the hand of a good
carpenter, the hand of a skilled woman, the hand of a good smith.

77. Three things which justice demands: judgment, measure, conscience.

78. Three things which judgment demands: wisdom, penetration, knowledge.

79. Three characteristics of concupiscence: sighing, playfulness,[53]
visiting.

[53] Or 'dalliance.'

80. Three things for which an enemy is loved: wealth, beauty, worth.[54]

[54] 'distinction,' B. 'familiarity, fame (leg. allad), speech,' H.

81. Three things for which a friend is hated: trespassing,[55] keeping
aloof,[56] fecklessness.

[55] Or 'encroaching.'

[56] Literally, 'unfamiliarity.'

82. Three rude ones of the world: a youngster mocking an old man, a
healthy person mocking an invalid, a wise man mocking a fool.

83. Three deaf ones of the world: warning to a doomed man, mocking[57] a
beggar, keeping a loose woman from lust.

[57] 'pitying,' L.

84. Three fair things that hide ugliness: good manners in the
ill-favoured, skill in a serf, wisdom in the misshapen.

85. Three ugly things that hide fairness: a sweet-lowing cow without
milk, a fine horse without speed, a fine person without substance.

86. Three sparks that kindle love: a face, demeanour, speech.

87. Three deposits with usufruct: depositing a woman, a horse, salt.

88. Three glories of a gathering: a beautiful wife, a good horse, a
swift hound.

89. Three accomplishments of Ireland: a witty stave, a tune on the
harp,[58] shaving a face.

[58] Literally, 'out of a harp.'

90. Trí comartha clúanaigi: búaidriud scél, cluiche tenn, abucht co
n-imdergad.

  [Note 90: tri comartha cluanaide N clu ænaigh M cluænaige B teinn L
  tind BM abocht HLec abhacht M co n-imnead nó imdergad HLec co n-uaithiss
  L co n-aitis N]

91. Trí gena ata messu brón: gen snechta oc legad, gen do mná frit íar
mbith [.f]ir aili lé, gen chon [.f]oilmnich.

  [Note 91: ad meassam HMB mesom L drochmna LN frit _om._ L iar fes le
  fer n-aili H iar mbeith fri araile BM foleimnighe N foilmig dot letrad H
  foleimnigh (foilmnig B) agud rochtain dott ithe MB]

92. Trí báis ata ferr bethaid: bás iach, bás muicce méithe, bás foglada.

  [Note 92: ad HBM beatha H iaich L bás iaich bás muici meithi bás
  fodhladlu L fogladai N fodalada B bás bithbenaig B luifenaich Lec]

93. Trí húathaid ata ferr sochaidi: úathad dagbríathar, úathad bó hi
feór, úathad carat im chuirm.

  [Note 93: uath ada N ad M is H deagbriathar H degflaith MB]

94. Trí brónaig choirmthige: fer dogní fleid, fer dia ndéntar, fer ibes
menip sáithech

  [Note 94: fleid _om._ B fer nostairbir H fer teid dia tairtiud minab
  saitheach M]

95. Trí cuitbidi in domain: fer lonn, fer étaid, fer díbech.

  [Note 95: cuidmidi H]

96. Trí cuil túaithe: flaith brécach, breithem gúach, sacart colach.

  [Note 96: flaitheamh BM sacart tuisledach N sagart diultach B
  diultadhach M]

97. Trí fuiric thige degduni: cuirm, fothrucud, tene mór.

  [Note 97: fuiric .i. fleadh nó féasta B daghduine N]

98. Trí fuiric thige drochduni: debuid ar do chinn, athchosan frit, a
chú dot gabáil.

  [Note 98: achmusan NBM a cu dod ledrad N do congabail M drochscel
  lat immach L]

99. Trí gretha tige degláich: grith fodla, grith suide, grith coméirge.

  [Note 99: tri grith L tri gartha M fogla L suigidhe BM]

100. Trí dorchæ ná dlegat mná do imthecht: dorcha cíach, dorcha aidche,
dorcha feda.

  [Note 100: nach dleguid N narfacad do mnai imteact B d'imtecht NM]

101. Trí sailge boccachta: imgellad, immarbág, imreson.

  [Note 101: soilge BM imgellad bag L imarbaid imreasain BM imarbaigh
  imressain N imreason nó imraichni L]

102. Trí airisena boccachta: sírchéilide, sírdécsain, síriarfaige.

  [Note 102: hærsenna BM hairisin N sirfiarfaighe M sirfiarfaigid N]

90. Three ungentlemanly things: interrupting stories, a mischievous
game, jesting so as to raise a blush.

91. Three smiles that are worse than sorrow: the smile of the snow as it
melts, the smile of your wife[59] on you after another man has been with
her,[60] the grin of a hound ready to leap at you.[61]

[59] 'Of a bad woman,' LN.

[60] 'After sleeping with another man,' H.

[61] 'To tear you to pieces,' H. 'Coming up to devour you,' MB.

92. Three deaths that are better than life: the death of a salmon, the
death of a fat pig, the death of a robber.[62]

[62] 'Of a criminal,' B.

93. Three fewnesses that are better than plenty: a fewness of fine
words, a fewness of cows in grass, a fewness of friends around ale.[63]

[63] 'good ale,' MB.

94. Three sorrowful ones of an alehouse: the man who gives the feast,
the man to whom it is given, the man who drinks without being
satiated.[64]

[64] 'Who goes to it unsatiated,' M. _i.e._ who drinks on an empty
stomach.

95. Three laughing-stocks of the world: an angry man, a jealous man, a
niggard.

96. Three ruins of a tribe: a lying chief, a false judge, a lustful[65]
priest.

[65] 'Stumbling, offending,' N. 'Fond of refusing,' B.

97. Three preparations of a good man's house: ale, a bath, a large fire.

98. Three preparations of a bad man's house: strife before you,
complaining to you, his hound taking hold of you.[66]

[66] 'Tearing you,' N. 'A bad story to speed you on your way,' L.

99. Three shouts of a good warrior's house: the shout of distribution,
the shout of sitting down, the shout of rising up.

100. Three darknesses into which women should not go: the darkness of
mist, the darkness of night, the darkness of a wood.

101. Three props of obstinacy[67]: pledging oneself, contending,
wrangling.

102. Three characteristics of obstinacy[67]: long visits, staring,
constant questioning.

[67] Literally, 'buckishness.'

103. Trí comartha meraigi: slicht a chíre ina [.f]olt, slicht a
[.f]íacal ina chuit, slicht a luirge ina diaid.

  [Note 103: comarthadha M meraigthe N 'na cend BM 'na cuit BM
  inandiaig B na diaidh M]

104. Trí máidme clúanaigi: ató ar do scáth, rosaltrus fort,
rotflinch_us_ com étach.

  [Note 104: cluainige BM ato BM atu L rodsaltar M rosaltrur ort L
  rosflinch_us_ com edach N rofliuchus com ediuch BM comh edach L]

105. Trí bí focherdat marbdili: oss foceird a congna, fid foceird a
duille, cethra focerdat a mbrén[.f]inda.

  [Note 105: _om._ BMHLec]

106. Trí scenb Hérenn: Tulach na nEpscop, Ached Déo, Duma mBúirig.

  [Note 106: _om._ BMHLec achad N]

107. Trí hingnad Hérenn: lige inn abaic, lige nEothuili, allabair i
foccus.

  [Note 107: _om._ BMHLec hinganta N allubuir a fogus N]

108. Trí daurthige Hérenn: daurthech Birra, daurthech Clúana Eidnech,
daurthech Leithglinde.

  [Note 108: _om._ BMHLec]

109. Trí hingena berta miscais do míthocod: labra, lesca, anidna.

  [Note 109: do mitocuid N do togud BM lesce N anidna N nemidna BM .i.
  esinrucas _add._ H]

110. Trí hingena berta seirc do cháintocud: túa, éscuss, idnæ.

  [Note 110: beres L berta seircce de caintogud BM serc N caintocaid N
  tri hadbair serci Lec tóa esces idna N esca BMLec]

111. Trí túa ata ferr labra: túa fri forcital, túa fri hairfitiud, túa
fri procept.

  [Note 111: labrai N sproicept B sproicepht M fri aithfrend N]

112. Trí labra ata ferr túa: ochán rig do chath, sreth immais, molad iar
lúag.

  [Note 112: uchan N ocon_n_ BM hairfidiud _nó_ fís BM luadh B]

113. Trí hailgesa étúalaing .i. éirg cen co dechais, tuc cenitbé, déna
ceni derna.

  [Note 113: haisgeadha edualaing B erg gen cotis H tuc gen gud beirg
  (?) gen go gaemais dena gen go heda B tuca gen cobe N gen gudbe M gen
  [go] dernais N gen go feta HM]

114. Trí hamaite bít[e] i ndrochthig óiged .i. sentrichem senchaillige,
roschaullach ingine móile, sirite gillai.

  [Note 114: hamaide drochtoighe BM sentriche caillige BM sentrichim N
  rosc cailleach ingine siridhe gillai BM siride N sirithe L]

115. Trí hairig na ndúalche: sant, cráes, étrad.

103. Three signs of a fop: the track of his comb in his hair, the track
of his teeth in his food, the track of his stick[68] behind him.

[68] Or 'cudgel.'

104. Three ungentlemanly boasts: I am on your track, I have trampled on
you, I have wet you with my dress.

105. Three live ones that put away dead things: a deer shedding its
horn, a wood shedding its leaves, cattle shedding their coat.[69]

[69] Literally, 'stinking hair.'

106. Three places of Ireland to make you start: Tulach na n-Escop,[70]
Achad Deo,[71] Duma mBuirig.

[70] A hill near Kildare. See Thesaurus Palæo-hibernicus ii.. p. 335.

[71] At Tara. See Todd's _Irish Nennius_, p. 200.

107. Three wonders of Ireland: the grave of the dwarf,[72] the grave of
Trawohelly,[73] an echo near.[74]

[72] Somewhere in the west (i n-iarthar Erenn, Fél., p. clvii).

[73] See Todd's _Irish Nennius_, p. 199, and Zeitschrift für Celt. Phil,
v., p. 23.

[74] Nothing is known to me about this wonder.

108. Three oratories of Ireland: the oratory of Birr, the oratory of
Clonenagh, the oratory of Leighlin.

109. Three maidens that bring hatred upon misfortune: talking, laziness,
insincerity.

110. Three maidens that bring love to good fortune: silence, diligence,
sincerity.

111. Three silences that are better than speech: silence during
instruction, silence during music, silence during preaching.

112. Three speeches that are better than silence: inciting a king to
battle, spreading knowledge (?),[75] praise after reward.[76]

[75] _Sreth immais_, which I have tentatively translated by 'spreading
knowledge,' is used as a technical term in poetry for connecting all the
words of a verse-line by alliteration, as e.g. _slatt_, _sacc_, _socc_,
_simend_, _saland_. See Ir. Texte iii., p. 30.

[76] _Cf._ LL. 344_a_: Carpre asks Cormac what are the sweetest things
he has heard, and Cormac answers: 'A shout of triumph after victory,
praise after reward, the invitation of a fair woman to her pillow.'

113. Three impossible demands: go! though you cannot go, bring what you
have not got, do what you cannot do.

114. Three idiots that are in a bad guest-house: the chronic cough of an
old hag, a brainless tartar of a girl, a hobgoblin of a gillie.

115. The three chief sins: avarice, gluttony, lust.

116. Tréde neimthigedar crossán: rige óile, rige théighe, rige bronn.

117. Tréde neimthigedar círmaire: coimrith fri coin hi[c] cosnum chnáma,
adarc reithi do dírgud dia anáil cen tenid, dichetal for ochtraig co
rathochra a mbí ina íchtur for a úachtar do cho[.n]gna [et] cnámaib [et]
adarcaib.

  [Note 117: _om._ BMHLec dirge N otrach N corotochra N a mbid na
  hichtar N huachtar N congnaim N]

118. Tréde nemthigedar sáer: dlúthud cen fomus, cen fescred, lúd
lúadrinna, béimm fo chommus.

  [Note 118: _om._ BMHLec tri ara neimit_er_ N dluthugud N feiscre N
  ludh luaithreand N]

119. Tréde neimthigedar liaig: dígallræ, díainme, comchissi ce_n_
ainchiss.

  [Note 119: _om._ BMHLec ara neimit_er_ liagh N coimcisin gin ainces N]

120. Tréde neimthigedar gobainn: bir Neithin, fulacht na Morrígna,
inneóin in Dagda.

  [Note 120: _om._ BMHLec ara neimit_er_ gobaind N bir ndechin N]

121. Tréde neimthigedar cerdai: fige ronn, cær comraic, plett for fæbur.

  [Note 121: _om._ BMHLec cerd N flet N]

122. Tréde neimthigedar cruitire: golltraige, gentraige, súantraige.

  [Note 122-123: _om._ BMHLec]

123. Tréde neimthigedar filid: immas forosna, teinm læda, dichetal di
chennaib.

124. Dá mígairm míthocaid: commáidem do chétguine, do ben la fer n-aile.

  [Note 124: atte dá ní igairm (!) do neoch .i. maidem a
  c_hét_guine [et] a bean do beith fri fer n-aill BM mitocaid N a cedgona
  N a ben la fer n-aile N]

125. Teora airi[se]na iarnduba: comar, cocless, clemnas.

  [Note 125: tri hairnadmand BMN iardubha M coicless LM coicle M]

126. Trí bainne cétmuintire: bainne fola, bainne dér, bainne aillse.

  [Note 126: banda NBM]

127. Trí coiri bíte in cach dúini: coire érma, coire goriath, coire
áiged.

  [Note 127: core B duini L duine B goiriat N aitiu N notead B
  notheadh M]

116. Three things that constitute a buffoon: blowing out his cheek,
blowing out his satchel, blowing out his belly.

117. Three things that constitute a comb-maker: racing a hound in
contending for a bone; straightening a ram's horn by his breath, without
fire; chanting upon a dunghill so that all antlers and bones and horns
that are below come to the top.

118. Three things that constitute a carpenter: joining together without
calculating (?), without warping (?); agility with the compass; a
well-measured stroke.

119. Three things that constitute a physician: a complete cure, leaving
no blemish behind, a painless examination.

120. Three things that constitute a blacksmith: Nethin's spit, the
cooking-hearth of the Morrigan, the Dagda's anvil.[77]

[77] For a description and pictures of these appliances, see YBL., p.
419_a_, and Egerton, 1782, fo. 46_a_.

121. Three things that constitute an artificer: weaving chains, a mosaic
ball,[78] an edge upon a blade.

[78] O'Curry, Manners and Customs, ii., p. 253, thought that a _caer
comraic_ was 'a ball of convergent ribs or lines,' perhaps such a bead
or ball of mosaic glass as is depicted in Joyce's _Social History of
Ancient Ireland_, vol. ii., p. 32, fig. 171. _A cáer comraic_ of eight
different colours is mentioned in LB. 108_b_ 20.

122. Three things that constitute a harper: a tune to make you cry, a
tune to make you laugh, a tune to put you to sleep.[79]

[79] _Cf._ H. 3. 18, p. 87: tréide nemtighther cruit; goltraiges,
gentraiges, suantraiges.

123. Three things that constitute a poet: 'knowledge that illumines,'
'_teinm laeda_,'[80] improvisation.

[80] The names of various kinds of incantations. See Cormac's Glossary
and Ancient Laws, s.v.

124. Two ominous cries of ill-luck: boasting of your first slaughter,
and of your wife being with another man.

125. Three things betokening trouble: holding a plough-land in common,
performing feats together, alliance in marriage.

126. Three drops of a wedded woman: a drop of blood, a tear-drop, a drop
of sweat.

127. Three caldrons that are in every fort: the caldron of running, the
caldron _goriath_,[81] the caldron of guests.

[81] Quite obscure to me. There is a heavily glossed poem in H. 3. 18,
beginning _Coire goriath_. In H. 2. 15, p. 117^b, after the colophon to
Dúil Laithne (Goid.,^2 p. 79), there are some further glosses, among
which I find: goiriath .i. gardhamh in gach iath, erma .i. uasal-iompú
no iar-iompa. But _érma_ seems the genitive of _érim_, 'a course.'

128. Trí comartha láthraig bendachtan: clocc, salm, senad.

  [Note 128: lathrach bennachtan H bendacht L senad NBMH ocsenad L]

129. Trí comartha láthraig mallachtan: tromm, tradna, nenaid.

  [Note 129: mallachtan HM neanad B neanntoch M tradnai BM tradna H]

130. Teora muimmecha táide: caill, coim, adaig.

  [Note 130: tri muime BM tri buime gaiti H coill HM]

131. Teora ranna sluinte fri cáintocad: trumma, toicthiu, talchaire.

  [Note 131: sloindti caintocaid N toicte N]

132. Teora ranna sluinte dotcaid: tlás, áes, airbire.

  [Note 132: dotcaid N tlass ois oirbire N]

133. Dí derb[.s]iair: tlás [et] trúaige.

  [Note 133: siair L tlas [et] trousca N truaighe BMH]

134. Dá derbráthair: tocad [et] brugaide.

  [Note 134: brathair M toice [et] blailaige N togud B tacad H]

135. Trí fuidb dotcadaig: ráthaiges, etargaire, fiadnaise. Dotoing dia
fiadnaisi, íccaid dia ráthaiges, doberar béimm n-etaigaire ina chinn.

  [Note 135: foidb dothcadaigh M toindid a fiadnaisi BM iccaid a
  rathaigecht beiridh builleadha etargaire ina cind BM.]

136. Trí sethraeha góa: béss, dóig, toimtiu.

  [Note 136: toimdi L]

137. Trí bráthair uamain: sta! sit! coiste!

  [Note 137: braitri N omain BM ist sta [et] coisde BM sta sit coist N]

138. Trí mairb fortgellat for bíu: med, airmed, forrach.

  [Note 138: forgellait H for fiu BM meid armeid BM forach H]

139. Trí brothcáin rátha: rothicc, rosiacht, rotochtaig.

  [Note 139: brothcain ratha N raithi L rodícc rosiacht roto_n_cai N]

140. Trí dubthrebtha: tuga co fúatchai, imme co for[.n]gaire, tírad co
n-aurgorad.

  [Note 140: doidbtrebtai tugai co fodaib imed co forrngaire N tuighe
  go foidibh M co foitib Lec tiriudh M]

141. Trí hiarnduba: fer tochmairc, fer gaite meirle, fer hic aisnéis.

  [Note 141: fear fochairc Lec fer aisneisi N]

142. Trí maic beres drús do lonnus: tuilféth, fidchell, dulsaine.

  [Note 142: lundus N tulfeith N dullsaine L]

143. Trí maic beres féile do ainmnit: grúss, rúss, rucca.

  [Note 143: ainmned N grús rús rucad N]

144. Trí maic beres neóit do deinmnait: crith, dochell, grith.

  [Note 144: deinmnet N grith crith doicell N]

145. Trí húar fíchte: tipra, muir, núæ corma.

  [Note 145: huara N]

146. Trí fúammann móaigthe: fúam bó mblecht, fúam cerdchæ, fúam
aratbair.

  [Note 146: fuamandu moaigti N moigthi L fuaim bo mblicht N]

128. Three tokens of a blessed site: a bell, psalm-singing, a synod (of
elders).

129. Three tokens of a cursed site: elder, a corncrake, nettles.[82]

[82] See my edition of _Cáin Adamnáin_, p. 13, note 3, and p. 38.

130. Three nurses of theft: a wood, a cloak, night.

131. Three qualities[83] that bespeak good fortune: self-importance,
..., self-will.

[83] Literally, 'parts.'

132. Three qualities[84] that bespeak misfortune: weariness, (premature)
old age, reproachfulness.

[84] Literally, 'heaviness, weight.'

133. Two sisters: weariness and wretchedness.

134. Two brothers: prosperity and husbandry.

135. Three unlucky...:[85] guaranteeing, mediating, witnessing. The
witness has to swear to his evidence, the guarantor has to pay for his
security, the mediator gets a blow on his head.[86]

[85] The usual meanings of _fodb_, 'accoutrement, equipment, arms,' do
not seem to suit here.

[86] Literally, 'the blow of mediation is dealt on his head.'

136. Three false sisters: 'perhaps,' 'may be,' 'I dare say.'

137. Three timid brothers: 'hush!' 'stop!' 'listen!'

138. Three dead things that give evidence on live things: a pair of
scales, a bushel, a measuring-rod.

139. Three pottages of guaranteeing....[87]

[87] Obscure and probably corrupt. Cf. § 219.

140. Three black husbandries: thatching with stolen things,[88] putting
up a fence with a proclamation of trespass, kiln-drying with scorching.

[88] 'with sods,' NML, perperam.

141. Three after-sorrows: a wooer's, a thief's, a tale-bearer's.

142. Three sons whom folly bears to anger: frowning, ... ,[89] mockery
(?).

[89] _fidchell_, the well-known game, gives no sense here.

143. Three sons whom generosity bears to patience: ... , blushing,
shame.

144. Three sons whom churlishness bears to impatience: trembling,
niggardliness, vociferation.

145. Three cold things that seethe: a well, the sea, new ale.

146. Three sounds of increase: the lowing of a cow in milk, the din of a
smithy, the swish of a plough.

147. Trí hana antreinn: tipra i sléib, tene a liic, ana la fer calad.

  [Note 147: luc MSS. anai la fear calaid N]

148. Trí aithgine in domuin: brú mná, uth bó, ness gobann.

  [Note 148: haitgine N aithgeinit L corathgen B coratgen M bru birite
  BM meas(!) BMLec]

149. Trí diubarta forsná íada dílse: tinnscra mná, imthomailt lánamna,
iarraid maicc.

  [Note 149: hiad N imtomailt N iarr_aid_ menicc(!) L]

150. Trí cuir tintaiter do réir britheman: cor mná [et] micc [et]
bothaich.

  [Note 150: tinntaigter N]

151. Trí nata[t] túalaing sainchuir: mac beo-athar, ben aurnadma, dóer
flatha.

  [Note 151: nad N]

152. Trí maic nad rannat orbai: mac muini [et] aurlai [et] ingine fo
thrilis.

  [Note 152: erlai N]

153. Trí ái nad eplet faill: ái dochuind, [et] dochraite, [et] anfis.

  [Note 153: dochainn N docraite N]

154. Trí fuile ná dlegat frecor: fuil catha, [et] eóit, [et] etargaire.

  [Note 154: nad N etargaire N]

155. Trí fuchachta nad increnat slabrai: a gabáil ar écin, a sleith tri
mescai, a turtugud do ríg.

  [Note 155: fúíchechta N slaibri N]

156. Trí ná dlegat turbaidi: athchor maic, aicdi cherdai, gíallaigecht.

  [Note 156: nad dlegait turbaid N aige cerda N]

157. Trí aithne ná dlegat taisec: aithne n-écuind, [et] ardneimid [et]
aithne fuirmeda.

  [Note 157: haitne nad dlegait taisec N ecoind N fuirmidai L]

158. Trí mairb direnaiter beoaib: aball, coll, fidnemed.

  [Note 158: dorenatar beo N]

159. Trí[ar] ná ditoing ná fortongar: ben, angar, amlabar.

  [Note 159: dotoing na fortoing_er_ L amlobar N]

160. Trí ná dlegat athchommus: mac [et] a athair, ben [et] a céile, dóer
[et] a thigerna.

  [Note 160: na dlegait N]

161. Trí nát fuigletar cia beith ar a ngáes: fer adgair [et] adgairther
[et] focrenar fri breith.

  [Note 161: nat fuigletar cia beit N fer adgair [et] adgair (sic)
  [et] adgairter [et] rocrenar N]

162. Trí fors ná tuit aititiu 'na ré: bás, anfis, anfaitches.

  [Note 162: anfuichc_h_es L anbaitces N]

147. Three wealths in barren places: a well in a mountain, fire out of a
stone, wealth in the possession of a hard man.

148. Three renovators of the world: the womb of woman, a cow's udder, a
smith's moulding-block.

149. Three concealments upon which forfeiture does not close: a wife's
dowry, the food of a married couple, a boy's foster-fee.

150. Three contracts that are reversed by the decision of a judge: the
contracts of a woman, of a son, of a cottar.

151. Three that are incapable of special contracts[90]: a son whose
father is alive, a betrothed woman, the serf of a chief.

[90] Or, 'of contracts on their own behalf.'

152. Three sons that do not share inheritance: a son begotten in a
brake,[91] the son of a slave, the son of a girl still wearing tresses.

[91] Cf. the expression _meirdrech muine_, 'a bush-strumpet,' Laws v.
176, 4.

153. Three causes that do not die with neglect: the causes of an
imbecile, and of oppression, and of ignorance.

154. Three bloodsheds that need not be impugned: the bloodshed of
battle, of jealousy, of mediating.

155. Three cohabitations[92] that do not pay a marriage-portion: taking
her by force, outraging her without her knowledge through drunkenness,
her being violated by a king.

[92] _fuchacht_, or _fuichecht_, usually means 'cuckoldry,' a meaning
which does not seem to suit here.

156. Three that are not entitled to exemption: restoring a son, the
tools of an artificer, hostageship.

157. Three deposits that need not be returned: the deposits of an
imbecile,[93] and of a high dignitary, and a fixed deposit.[94]

[93] _i.e._ a deposit made by an imbecile. _Cf._ Plato, Republic: "But
surely you would never give back to a mad friend a sword which he had
lent you?"

[94] But in the Heptads (Laws v. 196, 3) _aithne fuirmida_, there
rendered by 'a deposited charge,' is enumerated as one of those to be
restored even if there are no bonds to that effect.

158. Three dead ones that are paid for with living things: an
apple-tree, a hazle-bush, a sacred grove.[95]

[95] there is nothing in the laws to explain this.

159. Three that neither swear nor are sworn: a woman, a son who does not
support his father, a dumb person.

160. Three that are not entitled to renunciation of authority: a son and
his father, a wife and her husband, a serf and his lord.

161. Three who do not adjudicate though they are possessed of wisdom: a
man who sues, a man who is being sued, a man who is bribed to give
judgment.

162. Three on whom acknowledgment does not fall in its time: death,
ignorance, carelessness.

163. Trí foimrimme ná dlegad díre: homan, robud, toxal.

  [Note 163: foimrime N foimrenn L na dlegaid N robad N]

164. Trí duilgine conrannat gníaid: duilgine coiri, duilgine muilinn,
duilgine tige.

  [Note 164: duilcinne N conrenad gnia N]

165. Trí nóill doná dlegar frithnóill: nóill mná fri húaitni, nóill fir
mairb, nóill díthir.

  [Note 165: naill nad dlegad fritnáill luige mna N luide N luige
  ditire N]

166. Trí gráda coillte túath ina ngói: gói ríg, gói [.s]enchada, gói
bretheman.

  [Note 166-220: _om._ HBMLec inango N go N]

167. Trí sóir dogníat dóeru díb féin: tigerna renas a déiss, rígan téite
co haithech, mac filed léces a cheird.

  [Note 167: daoir dib fein N des N deissi L teid N treiges a cerd N]

168. Trí ruip conberat duinechinaid: cú áraig, reithe lonn, ech
daintech.

  [Note 168: araid N reithid N daindtech N]

169. Trí ruip ara tíagat cinta: cú foilm[n]ech, sleg caille, slissén
chomneibi.

170. Trí imuserenat: saill, imm, iarn, fechemnas toisc leimmid eicsi.

  [Note 170: imus crenait saill N sall L iaronn N feitemnus toisc
  leine im eiccsi N]

171. Trí comartha aragella i tig britheman: ecna, aisnéis, intlecht.

  [Note 171: comardda L aragellat a tig bretheman N taig L aisnesen
  intliuchtach L]

172. Trí dlegat aurfocrai: aél coire, fidba cen [.s]eim, ord cen dimosc.

  [Note 172: dlegait urfogræ N fidbaigh can tseim ord gan dimosc N
  dinsem L]

173. Trí doruis gúa: tacra fergach, fotha n-utmall n-eolais, aisnéis cen
chuimni.

  [Note 173: fothad utmall N eolus aisena oca_n_ coimni N]

174. Trí doruis a n-aichnither fír: frecra n-ainmnetach, ái fossad, sóud
fri fíadnu.

  [Note 174: an aithnit_er_ fiorinne N freaccra n-ainmnedach N ainmeta
  L ai fosaid sodad N]

175. Trí búada airechta: brithem cen fúasnad, etirchert cen écnach, coma
cen diupairt.

  [Note 175: fuasna L]

176. Trí tonna cen gáissi: tacra calad, breth cen eolas, airecht labar.

  [Note 176: ton_n_a gaisi N donnadgaissi L tonna gan gaoise H. 1. 11
  brethem N]

177. Trí búada insci: fosta, gáis, gairde.

  [Note 177: buadad innsce N gois N]

178. Trí cumtaig gáisse: immed n-eolais, lín fássach, dagaigni do
airbirt.

  [Note 178: lion fasaid N]

163. Three usucaptions that are not entitled to a fine: fear, warning,
asportation.

164. Three wages that labourers share: the wages of a caldron,[96] the
wages of a mill, the wages of a house.

[96] _i.e._ of making a caldron, &c.

165. Three oaths that do not require fulfilment[97]: the oath of a woman
in birth-pangs, the oath of a dead man, the oath of a landless man.

[97] Literally, 'a counter-oath, a second oath.'

166. Three ranks that ruin tribes in their falsehood: the falsehood of a
king, of a historian, of a judge.

167. Three free ones that make slaves of themselves: a lord who sells
his land, a queen who goes to a boor, a poet's son who abandons his
(father's) craft.

168. Three brutes whose trespasses count as human crimes: a chained
hound, a ferocious ram, a biting horse.

169. Three brutish things that atone for crimes: a leashed hound, a
spike in a wood, a lath....[98]

[98] _comneibi_ is a [Greek: hapax legomenon] to me.

170. Three things that ... salt-meat, butter, iron....[99]

171. Three signs that ... [99] in a judge's house: wisdom, information,
intellect.

172. Three things that should be proclaimed: the flesh-fork of a
caldron, a bill-hook without a rivet, a sledge-hammer without....[99]

[99] Obscure and probably corrupt.

173. Three doors of falsehood: an angry pleading, a shifting foundation
of knowledge, giving information without memory.

174. Three doors through which truth is recognised: a patient answer, a
firm pleading, appealing to witnesses.

175. Three glories of a gathering: a judge without perturbation, a
decision without reviling, terms (agreed upon) without fraud.

176. Three waves without wisdom: hard pleading, judgment without
knowledge, a talkative gathering.

177. Three glories of speech: steadiness, wisdom, brevity.

178. Three ornaments of wisdom: abundance of knowledge, a number of
precedents, to employ a good counsel.

179. Trí miscena indsci: rigne, dlúithe, dulbaire.

  [Note 179: miscne indsce N raighni L]

180. Trí fostai dagbanais: fosta thengad [et] gensa [et] airnb_ern_tais.

  [Note 180: fosta N fostadh tengad N airb_er_tais N]

181. Trí fóindil drochbanais: fóindil scél [et] ataid [et] airberntais.

  [Note 181: _om._ N]

182. Trí búada étaig: maisse, clithcha, suthaine.

  [Note 182: buadhad N cliche N]

183. Trí ná dlegat othras: fer aslúi flaith [et] fini [et] fili.

  [Note 183: nad d_leg_ait dire fer doslaig flaith [et] file [et] fine
  N feili L]

184. Trí tharsuinn archuillet othras: echmuir, mil, saillti.

  [Note 184: tharsunn L tarsuind aircaillti othiais N]

185. Trí mná ná dlegat díri: ben lasma cuma cipé las fái, ben gatach,
ben aupthach.

  [Note 185: nat d_leg_ait N cia las f(a)oi N optach N]

186. Trí dofortat cach flaith: góu, forsnaidm, fingal.

  [Note 186: dofortad gach fl_ath_a N]

187. Trí túarascbait cach ngenmnaide: fosta, féile, sobraide.

  [Note 187: tuarascb_ál_a genmnaid fostad N]

188. Trí ara n-aichnider cach fergach: ír, crith, imbánad.

  [Note 188: tri aichnider L aranaithnent_ur_ N hir L]

189. Trí thúarascbait cach n-ainmnetach: sámtha, túa, imderead.

  [Note 189: tuarascbalai gach nainmnedaigh samtad N tuai L]

19O. Trí thúarascbait cach n-úallach: mórthu, maisse, máine.

  [Note 190: tuaruscbalai cach ndubalcai mortha N]

191. Trí forindet cach n-umal: bochtatu, dínnime, humallóit.

  [Note 191: forinded N bochtai N]

192. Trí airdi gáisse: ainmne, faiscsiu, fáthaige.

  [Note 192: hairdhe N faicsi fathaidhi N]

193. Trí airdi drúisse: bág, imresain, condailbe.

  [Note 193: _om._ N]

194. Tréde immifoilnge gáis do báeth: ecna, fosta, sochoisce.

  [Note 194: imfuilnge N]

195. Tréde immifoilnge báis do gáeth: fúasnad, ferg, mesca.

  [Note 195: imfailnge baoth N]

196. Tréde faillsiges cach ndag[.f]eras: dán, gaisced, crésine.

  [Note 196: cach degfer_us_ N cresenai N]

197. Tréde faillsigedar cach ndroch[.f]eras: serba, miscais, midlachas.

  [Note 197: faillsigh_us_ cach drochferus N]

198. Trí foglúaiset fóenledchu: ingreim, dolud, dommatu.

  [Note 198: fainnelca N dolai N]

179. Three hateful things in speech: stiffness,[100] obscurity, a bad
delivery.

[100] In Mod. Ir. _righneas labhartha_ means 'an impediment in speech.'
See Dinneen's Dictionary, s.v.

180. Three steadinesses of good womanhood: keeping a steady tongue, a
steady chastity, and a steady housewifery.

181. Three strayings of bad womanhood: letting her tongue,[101] and ...
and her housewifery go astray.

[101] Literally, 'stories.'

182. Three excellences of dress: elegance, comfort, lastingness.

183. Three that are not entitled to sick-maintenance: a man who absconds
from his chief, from his family, from a poet.

184. Three sauces that spoil a sick-bed: ...,[102] honey, salt food.

[102] I believe _echmuir_ to be the name of a plant: but I cannot find
the reference.

185. Three women that are not entitled to a fine: a woman who does not
care with whom she sleeps, a thievish woman, a sorceress.

186. Three things that ruin every chief: falsehood, overreaching,
parricide.[103]

[103] Or rather 'murder of relations.'

187. Three things that characterise every chaste person: steadiness,
modesty, sobriety.

188. Three things by which every angry person is known: an outburst of
passion, trembling, growing pale.

189. Three things that characterise every patient person: repose,
silence, blushing.

190. Three things that characterise every haughty person: pompousness,
elegance, (display of) wealth.

191. Three things that tell every humble person: poverty, homeliness,
servility.

192. Three signs of wisdom: patience, closeness, the gift of prophecy.

193. Three signs of folly: contention, wrangling, attachment (to
everybody).

194. Three things that make a fool wise: learning, steadiness,
docility.[104]

[104] _Cf._ dán ecna dogni ríg do bocht, dogni gáeth do báeth, &c., LL.
346^a35.

195. Three things that make a wise man foolish: quarrelling, anger,
drunkenness.

196. Three things that show every good man: a special gift,[105] valour,
piety.

[105] Such as art, poetry, &c.

197. Three things that show a bad man: bitterness, hatred, cowardice.

198. Three things that set waifs a-wandering: persecution, loss,
poverty.

199. Trí slabrada hi cumregar clóine: cotach, ríagail, rechtge.

  [Note 199: racht N]

200. Trí all frisa timargar béscna: mainister, flaith, fine.

  [Note 200: tri frisa N mineistir N flatha N]

201. Trí caindle forosnat cach ndorcha: fír, aicned, ecna.

202. Tréde neimthigedar ríg: fonaidm ruirech, feis Temrach, roimse inna
[.f]laith.

  [Note 202: tri aran_em_it_er_ rí N]

203. Trí glais foríadat rúine: náire, túa, dochta.

  [Note 203: ruini L]

204. Trí heochracha aroslicet imráitiu: mescca, tairisiu, serc.

  [Note 204: oslaice imraite N]

205. Trí orbai rannaiter fiad chomarbaib: orba drúith [et] orba
dásachtaig [et] orba sin.

  [Note 205: rannait fia comarbaoibh (_sic_) N]

206. Trí seithir óited: tol, áilde, féile.

  [Note 206: aide toil N]

207. Trí seithir sentad: cnet, genas, éitche.

208. Trí seithir sognáise: feidle, soithnges, cuinnmíne.

  [Note 208: feili soingtes connamno N soithgnes L]

209. Trí seithir dognáise: luinne, cétludche, tairismige.

  [Note 209: cetluithche N]

210. Trí seithir sotcaid: sognas, sochell, súarcus.

  [Note 210: sottch N sothchaidh L sognais L]

211. Trí seithir sochlatad: léire, trebaire, rathmaire.

212. Trí seithir dochlatad: laxa, díbe, prapchaillte.

  [Note 212: doclata N]

213. Trí seithir ferge: écnach, augra, doithnges.

  [Note 213: doingteas N]

214. Trí seithir deirmiten: tromdatu, espatu, utmaille.

215. Trí seithir airmiten: torbatu, airétrumma, fosta.

216. Trí banlæ: lúan, mairt, cétáin. Mná co firu innib, bid mó a serc la
firu indá serc a fer leo-som [et] beit a mná tar éis na fer sin.

  [Note 216: bandla N at mna beit tara n-eiseiu N]

217. Trí ferlæ: .i. dardáin, áine, domnach. Mná co firu intib, beitit na
mná sin fo dígrad [et] beitit a fir dia n-éisi. Satharn im_morro_ is
laithe coitchenn. Is comlíth dóib. Lúan sáer do dul fri cach les.

  [Note 217: aoine satharn _nó_ domnach N innib N beidis N]

218. Trí gníma rátha: fosta, féile, lobra. Fosta i n-árus, féile, arná
ebra góe, lobra hícce .i. lécud a lomartha i n-indligud dar a
[.f]echimain.

  [Note 218: om. ratha L lubrai N anarus N heibre gói N lubrai ice .i.
  leacadh lomartha anindli_ged_ dar cenn feichi_man_ N]

199. Three chains by which evil propensity is bound: a covenant, a
(monastic) rule, law.

200. Three rocks to which lawful behaviour is tied: a monastery,[106] a
chieftain, the family.

[106] 'The credence-table,' N., perperam.

201. Three candles that illumine every darkness: truth, nature,
knowledge.

202. Three things that constitute a king: a contract with (other) kings,
the feast of Tara, abundance during his reign.

203. Three locks that lock up secrets: shame, silence, closeness.

204. Three keys that unlock thoughts: drunkenness, trustfulness, love.

205. Three inheritances that are divided in the presence of heirs: the
inheritance of a jester, of a madman, and of an old man.

206. Three youthful sisters: desire, beauty, generosity.

207. Three aged sisters: groaning, chastity, ugliness.

208. Three well-bred sisters: constancy, well-spokenness, kindliness.

209. Three ill-bred sisters: fierceness, lustfulness, obduracy.

210. Three sisters of good fortune: good breeding, liberality, mirth.

211. Three sisters of good repute: diligence, prudence, bountifulness.

212. Three sisters of ill repute: inertness, grudging, closefistedness.

213. Three angry sisters: blasphemy, strife, foulmouthedness.

214. Three irreverent sisters: importunity, frivolity, flightiness.

215. Three reverent sisters: usefulness, an easy bearing, firmness.

216. Three woman-days: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday. If women go to men on
those days, the men will love them better than they the men, and the
women will survive the men.

217. Three man-days: Thursday, Friday, Sunday. If women go to men on
those days, they will not be loved, and their husbands will survive
them. Saturday, however, is a common day. It is equally lucky to them.
Monday is a free day to undertake any business.

218. Three duties of guarantorship: staying (at home), honesty,
suffering (?); staying in one's residence, honesty lest he utter
falsehood, suffering (?) payment, viz. letting oneself be stripped for
an illegal action instead of the debtor.

219. Trí brothcháin rátha: éir[i]c nó thogním fecheman no díthechte.

  [Note 219: brocain N _no_ no thognim L ditechta N dithechdi L]

220. Trí húais rátha [et] aitiri [et] nadma .i. dul fri dénam dúine ríg
[et] daurthaige [et] choiri. Ar is úais do fir fine do thabairt fria
céili.

  [Note 220: eit_er_i N nadmadh fri N]

221. Trí as anergnaid do neoch: slaide a eich ríana thigerna co salaig a
étach, dul ina chocar cen gairm, a sírdéicsiu ina agaid oc caithem
neich.

  [Note 221: is ainergna N tri saineargnaidh M slaige BN rena BMN
  sirdeicsin N sirdegsain BM caithium BM aeaitniem a coda N]

222. Trí bassa téchtai: bass etir a assa [et] a ochrai, bass etir a ó
[et] a berrad, bass etir chorthair a léined [et] a glún.

  [Note 222: corrthair M]

223. Cia mesam hi trebod? Maic mná méile, fleda menci, clemna ile, immat
meda scéo fína: notchrínat, ní thormaiget.

  [Note 223: cidh is messa do treb_ad_ ni _hansa_ N mic B imad fianna
  nodcrinaid [et] nítoirmuigid BM imchiana (!) N nitormaigett N]

224. Trí galair ata ferr sláinti: seola mná for mac, gríss bronn-galair
glanas broinn, gríss timgaire olc dia maith.

  [Note 224: seol N sceola(!) for fermac BM galar timargur olc do
  maith N timgaire B di maith B do maith M]

225. Trí fáilti coirmthige: immed [et] dúthracht [et] elathó.

  [Note 225: ealathaoi N ealado do neoch carthar BM]

226. Trí fognama ata messam dogní duine: fognam do drochmnái [et] do
drochthigerna [et] do drochgobainn.

  [Note 226: mesa N drochflaith B drochf_er_ann N]

227. Trí ata ferr i tig: daim, fir, béla.

  [Note 227: dam N]

228. Trí ata messum i tig: m_ai_c, mná, méile.

  [Note 228: measum bite a taig mic BM]

229. Trí comartha tirdachta .i. immargal [et] immarbág [et] meraichne.

  [Note 229: im_ur_cal im_ur_baid imraithne N imabad LBM]

230. Cenéle amus: salanaig buale [et] buicc brodnai [et] eóin erchoille
[et] seiche corad.

  [Note 230: cenela BM buale _om._ BM earcaille M córadh M]

231. Cenéle dáileman: mórmenmnach meda, bolcsrónach brocóiti, itfa
eserni, cúacroessach, donndabach, bolcra paitte, abartach escrai, geir
grainne, cranndretel cuirn.

  [Note 231: cenela BM metha H bolgsronach BM itfa eserne BM
  cuachroeasach BM cuachrochesach H baite BM haiti H abarthach easgraidh
  M gearr grandai B grenn graindi H crand rebartach H treiteal cuirnd M
  cuirnn L]

219. The pottages of guarantorship: wer-geld or a debtor's ... or
non-possession (?)[107]

[107] Obscure and probably corrupt. Cp. § 139.

220. Three things hard to guarantee and to become a hostage and to make
a contract for: to go security for constructing the fort of a king, an
oratory, and a caldron. For it is hard for a man of a family to be given
with (?) his fellow.[108]

[108] I cannot make out the meaning of _doberim fri_.

221. Three things that are undignified for everyone: driving one's horse
before one's lord so as to soil his dress, going to speak to him without
being summoned, staring in his face as he is eating his food.

222. Three lawful handbreadths: a handbreadth between shoes and hose, a
handbreadth between ear and hair, a handbreadth between the fringe of
the tunic and the knee.

223. What is worst in a household? Sons of a bawd, frequent feasts,
numerous alliances in marriages, abundance of mead and wine. They waste
you and do not profit.

224. Three illnesses that are better than health: the lying-in of a
woman with a male child, the fever of an abdominal disease that clears
the bowels, a feverish passion to check evil by its good (?).

225. Three welcomes of an ale-house: plenty and kindliness and art.

226. Three services the worst that a man can serve: serving a bad woman,
a bad lord, and a bad smith.[109]

[109] 'bad land,' N.

227. Three things that are best in a house: oxen,[110] men, axes.

[110] 'an ox,' N.

228. Three that are worst in a house: boys, women, lewdness.[111]

[111] 'Or, perhaps, as in § 223, 'sons of a lewd woman,' only in that
case we have no triad.

229. Three signs of boorishness: strife, and contention, and mistaking a
person for another (?)[112]

[112] Or, perhaps, 'slight or superficial knowledge.'

230. Various kinds of mercenaries: ....[113]

231. Various kinds of dispensers: ....[113]

[113] As I could only offer unsatisfactory guess-work as a translation
of these passages, I omit them altogether.

232. Trí as anso bís do accallaim .i. rí imma gabáil [et] Gall ina
lúirig [et] athech do muin commairchi.

  [Note 232: annsom (andso H) do agallaim bís BHM rig M cumairce N a
  chumairci H]

233. Trí as mó menma bís .i. scolóc íar légad a [.s]alm [et] gilla íar
lécud a erraid úad [et] ingen íar ndénam mná dí.

  [Note 233: trede BMHN scol_aigi_ N scolaidi H íar lecun a eri uada H
  íar leccad a arad uad N]

234. Cetharda forná bí cosc nó ríagail .i. gilla sacairt [et] cú
muilleórach [et] mac bantrebthaige [et] gamain gamnaige.

  [Note 234: fornach bi BM ná BM gamnaidhe M]

235. Tri húais dóib: dul ar ríg nó úasal nemid, ar is lethiu enech ríg
aidbriud; dul fri cath, ar ní túalaing nech glinni fri cath acht ríg
lasmbíat secht túatha foa mám; dul fri cimmidecht acht nech lasa mbí mug
dóer. Secht n-aurgarta dóib: dul ar deoraid, ar drúth [et] ar
dásachtach, ar díaraig, ar angar, ar éconn, ar essconn. Imnedach da_no_
cach ráth, ar is écen dí díanapud im cach ngell dob_eir_, aill riam,
aill íarum.

  [Note 235: n_em_i N it lethai L lethe N aidbriu N tulaing N glinde N
  acht nech laisimbiad N fo mam_m_i N cimbidheacht acht nech lasambiad
  mogh daor dil_es_ N dasachtaig N imnedach do_no_ cech raith N imni
  da_no_ L dianapad N dobeir N]

236. Trí hamra Glinne Dalláin i tír Eogain: torcc Dromma Leithe, is ass
rochin [et] is dó-side for[.f]éimid Finn ní, co torchair im Maig Lii la
aithech búi hic tírad, ut dixit Finn:

    Ní mad biadsam ar cono. ní mad ríadsam ar n-echa
    tan is aithechán átha. romarb torcc Dromma Letha.

Míl Leittreach Dalláin, cenn duine fair, dénam builc gobann olchena .i.
ech usci robói isind loch i tóeb na cille, is hé dochúaid ar ingín in
t[.s]acairt co ndergene in míl frie. Dam Dili in tres ingnad. Asind loch
cétna táinic a athair co ndechaid for boin do búaib in brugad robói i
fail na cille, co ndeirgenai in dam de.

  [Note 236: as as rocin N forfeimdi N Muig Hi N Muig Hith H. 1.15 ma
  biasam N ma riadsim ar n-eacha N ricsam andechi L L_et_hæ N Leithi L ase
  docoid N fria N isin N co nderrna an dam fria N]

232. Three that are most difficult to talk to: a king about his booty, a
viking in his hauberk, a boor who is under patronage.

233. Three whose spirits are highest: a young scholar after having read
his psalms, a youngster who has put on man's attire,[114] a maiden who
has been made a woman.

[114] Literally, 'who has doffed his (boy's) clothes.'

234. Four on whom there is neither restraint nor rule: the servant of a
priest, a miller's hound, a widow's son, and a stripper's calf.

235. Three hard things[115]: to go security on behalf of a king or
highly privileged person, for a king's honour is wider than any claim;
to go security for battle, for no one is capable of any security for a
battle save a king under whose yoke are seven tribes; to go security for
captivity, except one who owns a serf.

Seven prohibitions: to go security for an outlaw, for a jester and for a
madman, for a person without bonds, for an unfilial person, for an
imbecile, for one excommunicated. Troublesome moreover is every
security, for it is necessary for it to give sudden notice as regards
every pledge which he gives, now beforehand, now afterwards.

[115] I do not understand the force of _dóib_, 'to them,' either here or
below after _secht n-aurgarta_.

236. Three wonders of Glenn Dallan[116] in Tirowen: the boar of Druim
Leithe. It was born there, and Finn was unable to do aught against it,
until it fell in Mag Li[117] by a peasant who was kiln-drying. Whence
Finn said:

[116] Now Glencar, six miles to the north of the town of Sligo.

[117] The territory of the Tir Lí, west of the river Bann.


    "Not well have we fed our hounds,
    Not well have we driven our horses,
    Since a little boor from a kiln
    Has killed the boar of Druim Leithe."

The Beast of Lettir Dallan. It has a human head and otherwise the shape
of a smith's bellows. The water-horse which lived in the lake by the
side of the church cohabited with the daughter of the priest and begot
the beast upon her.

The Ox of Dil[118] is the third wonder. Its father came out of the same
lake, and went upon one of the cows of the landholder who lived near the
church, and begot the ox upon her.

[118] The oxen of Dil, daughter of Míl or Legmannair, are mentioned in
the Dindsenchas, No. 44 and 111 (Rev. Celt. xv.).

237. Trí hamra Connacht: lige nÉothaili 'na thrácht. Comard hé frisin
trácht. Intan atraig in muir, comard hé fria lán. Dirna (.i. cloch) in
Dagdai, cia fochertar im-muir, cia berthair hi tech fo glass, dodeime a
tiprait oca mbí. In dá chorr i n-Inis Cathaig, nocha légat corra aili
leo inna n-insi [et] téit in banchorr isin fairrgi síar do duth, co tóet
cona heisínib essi [et] nocon fagbat curaig eolus cia airm in doithi.

  [Note 237: comaird i frisin lan N focerda a muir no cia bert_ar_ N
  _no_ do deime _no_ dogeibt_er_ a tibr_aid_ oca mbid N do _nó_ todeime L
  corr N chuirr L Ceitig N leigitt N do doich N heisenaib eisib [et]
  nochan fagbuid N eolus _om._ L hairm in doich N]

238. Trí luchra ata mesa: luchra tuinde, luchra mná bóithe, luchra con
foléimnige.

  [Note 238: _om._ LHBM luchra duine H^1 foleimnigh N]

239. Cisne trí ana soitcedach? Ní handsa són. Immarchor erlam, cuirm cen
árus, cummairce for sét.

  [Note 239: a tri N]

240. Trí maic beres genas do gáis: gal, gart, gaire.

241. Trí airfite dála: drúth, fuirsire, oirce.

  [Note 241: druith H^1]

242. Trí ata ferr do [.f]laith: fír, síth, slóg.

  [Note 242: adda H^1]

243. Trí ata mesa do [.f]laith: lén, brath, míairle.

  [Note 243: adda H^1 ada N]

244. Ceithre báis breithe: a breith i ngó, a breith cen dilse, a breith
cen ailig, a breith cen forus.

  [Note 244: disle H^1 disliu N]

245. Trí adcoillet gáis: anfis, doas, díchuimne.

  [Note 245: a tri N ainbh[.f]es H^1 duas H^1]

246. Trí muime ordain: delb cháin, cuimne maith, creisine.

  [Note 246: ordan H^1 chaoin H^1]

247. Trí muime menman: sotla, suirge, mesce.

  [Note 247: socla .i. sochlú H^1]

248. Cetheora miscne flatha: .i. fer báeth utmall, fer dóer dímáin. fer
gúach esindraic, fer labor dísceoil; ar ní tabair labrai acht do
chethrur: .i. fer cerda fri háir [et] molad, fer coimgni cuimnech fri
haisnéis [et] scélugud, brethem fri bretha, sencha fri senchas.

249. Trí dorcha in betha: aithne, ráthaiges, altrom.

237. Three wonders of Connaught: the grave of Eothaile[119] on its
strand. It is as high as the strand. When the sea rises, it is as high
as the tide.

The stone of the Dagda. Though it be thrown into the sea, though it be
put into a house under lock, ... out of the well at which it is.

The two herons in Scattery island. They let no other herons to them into
the island, and the she-heron goes on the ocean westwards to hatch and
returns thence with her young ones. And coracles have not discovered the
place of hatching.

[119] _Cf._ § 197.

238. Three worst smiles: the smile of a wave, the smile of a lewd woman,
the grin of a dog ready to leap.[120]

[120] _Cf._ § 91.

239. What are the three wealths of fortunate people? Not hard to tell. A
ready conveyance(?), ale without a habitation(?), a safeguard upon the
road.

240. Three sons whom chastity bears to wisdom: valour, generosity,
laughter (filial piety?).

241. Three entertainers of a gathering: a jester, a juggler, a lap-dog.

242. Three things that are best for a chief: justice, peace, an army.

243. Three things that are worst for a chief: sloth, treachery, evil
counsel.

244. The four deaths of judgment: to give it in falsehood, to give it
without forfeiture, to give it without precedent, to give it without
knowledge.

245. Three things that ruin wisdom: ignorance, inaccurate knowledge,
forgetfulness.

246. Three nurses of dignity: a fine figure, a good memory, piety.

247. Three nurses of high spirits: pride, wooing, drunkenness.

248. Four hatreds of a chief: a silly flighty man, a slavish useless
man, a lying dishonourable man, a talkative man who has no story to
tell.[121] For a chief does not grant speech save to four: a poet for
satire and praise, a chronicler of good memory for narration and
story-telling, a judge for giving judgments, an historian for ancient
lore.[122]

[121] _i.e._, who has nothing worth hearing to say.

[122] See a similar passage in Ancient Laws i., p. 18, and in the tale
called, 'The Conversion of Loegaire to the Faith' (Rev. Celt. iv., p.
165).

249. Three dark[123] things of the world: giving a thing into keeping,
guaranteeing, fostering.

[123] _i.e._, uncertain what will come of them.

250. Trí urgarta bíd: a chaithem cen altugud, a chaithem d'éis óiged, a
chaithem réna thrath cóir.

  [Note 250: haurgartho N^1 hurgairt HM hurghairrthe H^2 d'aithli
  aidead H cóir om. NH^2 iarna coir M]

251. Cetheora aipgitre gáise: ainmne, sonmathe, sobraid[e], sothnges; ar
is gáeth cach ainmnetach [et] sái cach somnath, fairsing cach sobraid,
sochoisc cach sothengtha.

  [Note 251: somna sobraicch H^2 sobés N soingthes H^2 somnoigh H^2
  farsigh [_leg._ farsing] .i. sgaoiltech H^2]

252. Cetheora aipgitre báise: báithe, condailbe, imresan, doingthe.

253. Teora sírechta flatha: cuirmthech cen aisnéis, buiden cen erdonail,
dírim cen chona.

  [Note 253: airdanail N erdanail N^1]

254. Trí indchoisc ordain do duine: .i. sodelb, sáire, sulbaire.

  [Note 254: a tri ina coisceadh ordan M suirbire H]

255. Trí gúala doná fess fudomain: gúala flatha, gúala ecalse, gúala
nemid filed.

  [Note 255: dana H fodhomain M]

256. Trí féich nach dlegar faill: féich thíre, duilgine achaid, argius
aiste.

  [Note 256: nat eple faill M aichid M argui_us_ H]

250. Three prohibitions of food: to eat it without giving thanks, to eat
it before its proper time, to eat it after a guest.

251. Four elements[124] of wisdom: patience, docility, sobriety,
well-spokenness; for every patient person is wise, and every docile
person is a sage, every sober person is generous, every well-spoken
person is tractable.

252. Four elements[124] of folly: silliness, bias, wrangling,
foulmouthedness.

[124] Literally, 'alphabets.'

253. Three tabus of a chief: an ale-house without story-telling, a troop
without a herald, a great company without wolfhounds.[125]

[125] This triad has been wrongly read (fais_cre_ instead of fais_n_e_is_)
and rendered by O'Grady in his Catalogue of Ir. mss. in the British
Museum, p. 91.

254. Three indications of dignity in a person: a fine figure, a free
bearing, eloquence.

255. Three coffers whose depth is not known: the coffer of a chieftain,
of the Church,[126] of a privileged poet.

[126] "Die Kirche hat einen guten Magen," Goethe, Faust.

256. Three debts which must not be neglected:[127] debts of land,
payment of a field, instruction (?) of poetry.

[127] 'Which do not die by neglect,' M.




GLOSSES AND NOTES


1. Gloss in H. 1. 15: oir gurab innte do bhí suidhe príomhaigh Éirenn.

2. .i. ordaighecht nó ord uaisle nó airechas .i. arduaislighecht tre
adhluicedh na ríogh inte [et] na naoimh.

4. .i. serc Éirenn ó annsacht cháich uirre tre Muire na nGaodhal .i.
Brighid.

5. .i. naomthacht tre naomaibh, nó foghluim sruth .i. saoi-raith.

7. .i. feronn buird riogh Éirenn.

11. .i. tre cáich innte nó tre n-iomad taisi innte.

13. .i. eircille ar grádhuibh dar ndóigh fa tuarasdul giolla foic[h]le,
nó tuarastail.

14. .i. liodáin do gnáth.

15. .i. ealadhna mór ann [et] senchaoi [.f]esa na sen.

16. .i. a n-iomat breithemhuin, nó cúirt, nó sgol féinechuis ann.

17. .i. ó iomad scol innte.

18. .i. aoibnes nó conách nó er tír fo sliocht Éireann.

19. .i. ag guidhe ar gach duine.

20. .i. tre leigen Temhrach. This refers to the curse pronounced by
Ruadan, the founder of Lorrha, against King Diarmait and Tara.

22. .i. cairedh inte. St. Feichin, the founder of Fore, was famous for
the austerity of his devotion. 'He used to set his wretched rib against
the hard cell without raiment,' says Cuimmine in his poem on the Saints
of Ireland (_Zeitschr._, I., p. 63).

24. .i. diamharracht nó aon ar anacht nó gloine.

25. .i. luathghaire a mBreifne.

26. .i. grádh Dé.

28. .i. áit comhnuidhe.

30. .i. cill as mesa do cheallaibh nó béim aithesach nó ceall dáir.

31. .i. genmnacht.

32. .i. léime tara do tugsat.

33. .i. bailte bodaich.

34. trí clothra .i. coimhthineoil cluacha nó uirdherca.

36. Dún Sobairchi and Dún Cermna are, according to tradition, the oldest
stone forts in Ireland, having been built by Sobairche and Cermna, who
divided Ireland between them, about 1500 B.C., the former placing his
dún in the extreme north, the latter in the extreme south on the Old
Head of Kinsale.

37. Slíab Cua (or, by eclipse after the neuter _slíab_, Gúa), 'the
hollow mountain,' or 'mountain of hollows' (_cúa_ = Lat. _cavus_), the
native name for the Knockmealdown mountains on the borders of Tipperary
and Waterford.

42. Dercc Ferna was demolished by the Norse in 930. Hennessy, in a note
on the entry in the AU., says that it is supposed to be the cave of
Dunmore, not far from the city of Kilkenny, but adds "apparently on
insufficient evidence."

44. i. ionadha dona no nemhchonáig. Here we get the only gloss in L.
Bangor is said to be unlucky, "because of its having been destroyed so
often." It was frequently plundered by the Norse during the ninth
century. As to the kingship of Mugdorn Maigen (now Cremorne barony, Co.
Monaghan), it certainly was an ill-fated dynasty. Of the sixteen kings
of this tribe who are mentioned in the Annals of Ulster, ten were put to
death, of whom one (Suibne) was slain by his own brothers, while two
brothers, Gilla Ciaráin and Máelmúaid, were slain within the same year
(1020), the latter after having been king for but one day.

45. Beyond the fact that the three tribes here mentioned belonged to the
_aithech-thuatha_ or rent-paying tribes, I know nothing to throw light
on the triad.

51. In Harl. 5280, p. 75a, marg. inf., Druimm nDrobeoil is said to
derive its name from a horse called Drobel. (Ech Dedad. i. Drobel a ainm
diatá Druim nDrob_eoil_.)

56. Here H. has the absurd etymological gloss futhairbhe .i. fothirbhe
.i. tír mhaith na mbeo, nó ferann maith.

60. Léim Congcoluinn i gcondae in Chláir.

64. .i. miodhchonách duine. Suighe cumhang .i. deireoil.

65. iarmar cléithe .i. salchar na cléithe d'fágbhail a bferann.
drithlennach .i. ferthain anuas nó linn thríd.

66. The first two items occur also in the list of proverbial sayings
addressed by the Wizard Doctor to Mac Conglinne (_Aisl. Maic C._, p.
73), with the significant variation that 'a veteran in the abbotship'
has become 'a veteran in the bishop's chair,' showing that the 'Vision
of Mac Conglinne' was composed at a time when the diocese had superseded
the old monastic constitution. As to the 'drop upon the altar,' though
O'Neachtain's gloss explains it as 'rain' (bainne .i. fer[th]uinn
anuas), the Rev. Mr. O'Sullivan has furnished me with a much more likely
explanation. He thinks it refers to the spilling of the consecrated wine
from the chalice, which is considered a most unfortunate accident. No
one but a priest is allowed to touch or remove it.

71. .i. tri donais mhic bodaigh. re óigthigerna .i. re duine uasal. for
thascar rígh .i. céimionnadh móra do ghlacadh air (!) .i. do thabhairt
uaidhe do striopach (!) .i. do thocaidhibh nó ar son gatuigechtadh.

72. targha .i. tineol no cruinnugadh .i. malairt [.f]erainn mhaith ar
dhrochferonn.

74. haonaighe nesairte .i. eisert .i. bochtain lag. gan airdhe .i. gan
comhartha nó arra aige le gcennocha ní.

75. caol srithide a foilleirb .i. an sreab bainne da chrú .i. soidech.
.i. fochan an gheamhair. for tuinn .i. faoi an cennar chroichin .i. ag
denamh druithnechuis.

76. dorn daimh .i. cos ag treabhath.

77. mes .i. ó laimh. tomharas .i. ó [.s]úil. cubhus .i. óna coimhesa .i.
coimhfiosa.

79. eadruidh .i. adhaltraigh. cluithe .i. clesuighes. céilighe .i.
cuairt.

80. maoin .i. tabhartus d'faghail uaide.

81. dognas .i. nemhghnas. diomaoinche .i. díth maoine .i. do chuid do
bhuain dhiod.

83. troich .i. do gerr[.s]aoghul. Cp. _Aisl. Maic Conglinne_, p. 71, 20.

84. áine la daor .i. saidhbrios ag daor neimhnidh .i. aithioch nó fer
gan senchus. doidheilbh .i. duine grán[n]amh.

85. bó bennach gan eas .i. sreibh nó bainne. tothacht .i. gan tábhacht
faoithe .i. tochus.

86. áibhle .i. splangca lasta grádha. aladh .i. hésa maith.

87. .i. trí ní curthar a ttaisge ara ccurtar caithemh. mná .i. taisge.

88. teidhe (_sic_) .i. aonaigh.

89. Seghaine .i. caomha nó séimhe. fáthrann .i. rann fáthach. adhbhann
tri ciuil do [.s]einimh duine eile. berradh .i. eolus berr[th]a nó do
bherrath go des. These three accomplishments were united in the person
of Mac Díchóeme, the barber of King Eochaid with horse's ears (_Otia
Merseiana_, III., p. 47), and in Donnbó (_Three Fragments_, p. 34, and
Rev. Celt. 24, p. 44).

90. cluiche tenn .i. súgradh ten[n]. abhacht go n-aithis .i. súgradh le
masla do thabairt.

91. .i. iar n-ealó óna fer féin. foileimnighe .i. chum do gerrtha .i.
iar leigion sealga uaithe.

92. foghladha .i. gadaighe.

93. .i. trí haonarain is ferr ioná iomad. .i. begán do chaint mhaith.
.i. ag ól fleadha nó sec[h]na imresain.

94 bróna .i. hamghaire. .i. deglaoch nach sáiseocha cách. .i. ga nderna
ina ainim munath sásaigh[th]e é.

95. .i. faoi ndéntar magaid. lonn .i. fergach. éataigh .i. eudmhar.
díbhach .i. doichleach.

99. gretha .i. garrtha. .i. gáir ag fodhail a mbídh. grith suidhe .i.
chuman[n] bhídh. .i. ag éirghe ón mbiadh.

101. .i. postaidhe fir boigechta .i. boiggniomh. imgellad .i.
síor-c[h]ur geallta. iomarbhaigh .i. comórtas. imresain .i.
conspóidedha.

103. luirge .i. a bhata nó a mhná (lorg .i. ben, abhall, laoch, leo,
arg).

104. da maoidhemh air féin gan nech da chur cuige.

105. os focherd a congan .i. fiadh chuires de a benna.

106. sceinbh .i. ionadha baoghlacha dochum sceinm do chur i neach nó
ionada sccunamhla.

107. allabair .i. mac-alla nó iollabhar is gnáth a bhfod ó neach.

109. labra .i. iomad cainte. aimhiodhna .i. nemhgloine.

110. toa .i. bailbhe .i. éistecht. eiscis .i. escuidhecht. iodhna .i.
glaine.

112. moladh iar luag .i. cennach tabhairt ar moladh.

113. .i. imthecht gion nach bh[.f]édann tú imthecht. .i. ní do thabhairt
uaid na mbia agat. .i. gen go bfédann tú a dhénamh.

114. .i. senchaillioch triudhach casachtach ar aondhacht ann. .i. amhail
cullach le buille ar choin, ar chat, ar mhada. .i. gach gránna
siobharrtha 'na ghiolla.

116. .i. a n-onoruighther nó uaislighther. .i. pluice ag síneadh a
beoil. righe a bhronn .i. a bhuilg.

117. círmaire .i. 'fer dénta na gcíor. dichetal for otrach .i.
adhbhal-cantainn le rosg nó orrtha. go rothochra .i. go docuiredh.

118. dlughughadh .i. cnesughadh. freiscre .i. frisearadh gan sergadh.
lúth tar luaitbrenn .i. for a tighibh nó templuibh .i. rennaigheacht do
cuiredh sa luaith. béim fo chumas .i. buille a coimhmheiseamnuighe féin.

119. dighalra .i. leighios iomlán na ngalar. diainmhe .i. gan ainiomh d'
fágail iar genedhuibh. .i. coimh[.f]écsin nó fíoradharc.

120. .i. bior dobheir sásadh as gach ní rachad fair.

121. caer comraic .i. raed cruinn go ccomhtharrachtain d'iomat dath ann.
fleath for faobhar .i. faobhar for faobhar.

122. cruitire .i. cláirseoir.

125. comar .i. docum treabtha nó coimhghélsine.

131. truime .i. tromdhacht. toice .i. saidhbhres. talchaire .i. toil
charthanach ag gach duine do.

132. .i. tri neithe aisnéisi an doconáigh.

133. tlás [.i.] doní an trosgadh an duine tláit[h].

135. .i. cnapáin mísénamhla nó nemhconáigh.

139. trí brothc[h]áin rátha .i. trí neithe breithemhnuighther nó
caoinbherthar ar antí théid a ráithiges nó a n-urrughas. roitioc .i.
íocaidh na fiacha. rosiacht .i. éigion do nech do leanamhuin. rotho_cht_
.i. [et] mionnughadh 'sa gcúis.

140. tugha go bh[.f]óidibh .i. fóide os toighe ar tech. imme go
bfoighnagare (sic) .i. fál [et] fíoriongaire maille ris. .i. go ngoradh
gér cloch a ndiaigh gortath na hátha.

141. trí fáilte go n-iarnduibhe. fer gaide .i. an tan bhíos da
chrochadh. .i. doní faisnéis.

142. tulfeaith (_sic_) .i. drúis .i. toil féithe. dulsaine .i.
cáinedh no cáinseoireacht.

143. grís .i. imdhergadh. rus .i. roifios. ruccaidh .i. ancroidhe.

145. nua corma .i. braitlis.

146. moaighthe .i. médaighthe sochair do neoch.

147. teine a lucc (!) .i. [a] tteallach. næ la fer calaigh (!) .i.
naomhóg, coite, bád, long, do dhuine le purt.

148. aithgionta .i. neithe dobheir aithghin tarais no aithgini uatha.
nes gabhann .i. mála cré.

149. .i. neithe ann a ttabhair neach iomarcaith naith [et] nach iadhann
dísle orrtha ó nech dar ben iad. iarraid mic .i. luach oileamhna.

151. aurnadhma .i. pósta.

153. .i. trí cúisi nach básaighenn d'faill do dhénamh umpa iad eibiulait
.i. básaighenn. dochraidhe .i. duine díochairdigh.

155. slabhra .i. imdhergtha .i. pecughadh le mnái neich gan coibhche do
dhíol ionnta, nach gcennuighther le airnéis nó éiric do díol ionnta. .i.
coimhéigniughadh do rígh.

156. turbhadh .i. cairde d'iarraigh da ccur amach .i. da ttabhairt
amach. .i. da athair tar éis altroma. .i. tar éis anbhaill do dhénamh a
thabhairt da sealbhaightheoir. .i. braighe do tabhairt as láimh le
comhall síotha.

157. .i. taisce do fúigfidhe ag égciallaidh. .i. do fuigfidhe ag duine
mór. aithne formeda .i. do fuigfidhe gan aithne do thabhairt go cinnte i
ccumhdach acht go héccinte air.

158. dorenathar bí .i. nech eirnighther no híocthar le beo do thabhairt
da gcenn. fidnemed .i. coill ar a bhfuil neimh[.s]enchus nó atá da
gcumhdach la huasal.

159. Trí ná dotoing ná fortongar. angar .i. mac ionghar nach bhfoghann
da senoir do réir a dhualgais.

160. athchumas .i. do ghlacadh orra na athchomhasan (no do thabhairt
daibh) (.i. ar a ceile).

161. .i. nach teighther faoi a bhfuigheall .i. a mbreitheamnuis. .i. cia
do bheithdaois glic. fer adgair (.i. cu rios fios ort) agas adghairther
(.i. an fer ar a gcuirther fios) agas ro crenair ria breith (.i. agas
cennuighther mar breithemh le bríb le haghaidh breithe).

162. aitide .i. aonta. ainbhfaitches.

163. Trí fo imrime ná dleagaid (.i. imthechta amhuil ar marcuigheght)
dire (.i. dire enecluise). toxal .i. tóccbhail agus ag dénamh
athghabála.

164. duilchinn.

165. Trí naoill .i. luighe nó mionna nach cóir mhionnughadh 'na
n-aghaidh. fir mairb .i. do bheith le bás go cinnte. ditire .i. do
thréig a thír .i. do chur cúram an t[.s]aoighil de.

166. .i. céimionna mhilleas an tuaith le bréig.

167. renus a dheis .i. a dhúthaigh nó a feronn .i. bodach é [et] ní
bh[.f]uil ced sencuis air.

168. For _comberat_ H^1 has _conrannat_. dainntech .i. gremannach nó
buailtech.

170. feichemhnas .i. lucht tagartha nó oificc na bh[.f]eithemhan. toisc.
leimim. eicsi .i. muna foghluma.

171. aradgeallad. breithemhuin .i. fuasglais neach.

172. urfogradh .i. air ar coir miothaithnemh. ael coire .i. ag tógbhail
feola coiri. fiodhbhaigh gan tseinm .i. meileg gan semann no thairn[g]e
da chengal. ord ghabhan[n] gan dinesc gan tairn[g]e annsa bpoll .i. díon
ina eis.

173. fotha utmhall gan eolus .i. bunadhas gan forus acht haimhnech,
utmhall .i. roluath.

174. soadh fri fiadnaib .i. iompodh a n-aghaidh na bhfiadhan do
haondaighe.

175. breithemh gan [.f]uasna .i. techt 'na aghaidh. eidirchert gan
éaccnach .i. breithemhnas gan idhiomradh 'na dhiaigh. comha gan
diubhairt .i. gan bhreith do bhreith le caomhmha nó gan leatrom
aonroinn.

176. Trí tonna gan gaoise .i. do chuires anfa ar ghaois .i. gliocas.

177. fostadh .i. foisdinecht. gairde .i. athchumairecht.

179. .i. cúisi far cóir mioscuis don urlabhra. dlúithe .i. ar muin a
chéile.

180. fostadh .i. na tengan 'na sost. airnbertais .i. ag dénamh [et] ag
ordughadh gach neithe mar as dú.

182. maise .i. bregha. clithighe .i. bheith clithar.

183. trí ná dleaghaidh dire .i. truaighe nó comairce. .i. ealaighes ó
flaith. agas file .i. ó eglais (!).

184. .i. trí hanlain[n] chrosta don othar. each .i. feoil eich. muir .i.
míl mhoir .i. cointinn ar coinntinn.

186. Instead of _forsnaidm_, H. 1. 15 has forran .i. fírbrised.

187. sobhraidhe .i. brígh maith nó láidir.

188. ír .i. fer[g].

189. sam (_sic_) .i. anmhuin go socair. tua .i. socht nó éistecht.
imdhergadh .i. gríosadh nó náire.

190. mórt[h]a .i. mórthacht. maise .i. maisech lais féin. maoine .i. a
mhes gurab maoineach é.

191. forindet .i. doní faisnéis ar in umhal. dinmhe .i. dith inmbe.

192. faicse (sic) .i. meabair maith. fáthaidhe .i. bheith foghluma
fáith-chialluigh.

195. fuasnadh .i. imresan.

196. cach ndagferas .i. guch feidhm nó gníomh iomlán nó feramhuil.

197. serbha .i. goid.

198. .i. docuires chum siubhail iad fainealca. ingreim .i. do [.s]lad nó da
gcrechadh. dola .i. da ngremughadh. domata .i. boichtecht.

200. fine .i. iomad fine nó móirmhes an fine.

202. fornaidm ruirioch .i. ríogha eile congbhail faoi. roimhse .i.
roimhes nó torad mór ina [.f]laith.

203. tua .i. bailbhe. dochta .i. éistecht (!).

204. tairisamh .i. coimhniughadh alfaire neich.

205. .i. i bh[.f]iadhnuise na gcomharcadh. .i. daoine gan chéill .i.
daoine ag imthecht le gaoith.

207. éitche .i. gráinche.

208. soingthes .i. urlabhradh mhaith. connamhna .i. coma degmhana nó
de[g]mianadh.

209. luinne .i. fergaighe. cétludche .i. cédluath ghaire. tairismidhe
.i. iomarcraidh griaidh da chur a gcéill .i. tairismidhe.

210. sognas .i. goma maith le a ghnáthugadh. soicheall .i. goma
soichellach nó luathghairech.

211. .i. trí 'ga mbíonn clú maith. trebaire .i. gliocas. rathmaire .i.
rath mór do techt air nó bhfás fair.

212. dochlatad .i. miochluid. laxa .i. faillidhe. prapcaillte .i. a
bheith cruaidh [et] luath .i. bheith caillte anna chuid go luath.

213. ecnach .i. ithiomradh. doingthes .i. droichtengadh.

214. deirmiten .i. athairmhidin. easpata .i. diomhaoines.

216. .i. trí laithe as sona do mhnáibh pósta. mná go fiora .i. mná do
thabhairt chum pósta. .i. biadh na mná beo 'na ndiaidh.

217. fri gach leas .i. gach neithe bhus leas dó.

218. rátha .i. urradha. fostadh .i. comhnuidhe. féile .i. náire. lomradh
.i. ag lomairt ag díol fiachadh. fostodha a n-arus .i. comhnuidhe a
bpriosún lomradh íce .i. da lomairt féin ag díol fiachadh nó fulang é
féin do lomradh do réir dlighe .i. leigen lomartha an dlighe dar cenn
feichemhan.

219. eiric no toghniomh feichemhan (.i. an t-íoc do dhénamh darcenn a
bhiodhbha) no dithecht.

220. .i. trí neithe as anfæ (leg. ansa) nó as doiligh dhaibh. .i. dol a
n-urrudhas dún righ do dhénamh, decair sin. coire .i. coire longan. .i.
do thabhairt an urrudhas re cechtar doibh sin aroile do dhénamh.

221. trí as ainer[g]na (.i. neimhealadhanta) do neach. .i. no go
salaighenn a eudach do scarduibh.

222. ochradh .i. alt. berradh .i. mullach a chinn.

223. mic .i. iomad mac. mná .i. iomad ban. méile .i. amadan. cleamhna
ile imchiana .i. iomad clemhnas a gcéin. notcrionad (.i. dibrid) agus ní
thormaighid (.i. ní mhédaighid a tighes).

224. seol mná for mac .i. luighe seola. gris bronn .i. tesuighecht.
galar tiomargar olc .i. togbhus an t-olc [et] [.f]ágbhus an mhaith 'na
háit féin.

225. .i. gar cóir fáilte rompa, no dobheir an [.f]áilte a ttigh fleadha
im duthracht [et] ealatha .i. ealadha do thaisbeana[dh].

227. daimh. bealai .i. tuadh, biail.

229. tiordhachta .i. tuathamhlacht no bodamhlacht. iomargal .i. ime ro
mheraighe focal. iomarbhaidh .i. comartus gníomh. meraigecht .i. mire.

230-231. omitted in H. 2. 15.

232. rí ima gabhail .i. im geall nó chreich. aithech do mhuin coimeirce
.i. bodach ar a mbeith dhó ar coimeirce, nó tenn ar chúl aige.

233. .i. scolaire iar gcriochnughadh a leighen .i. iar leagha nó
egluisech iar ndénamh ornaidhe. iar leaccad a araidhechta uadh .i. iar
ccriochnughadh a term a nó aimsire.

235. trí huais doibh .i. gar doilge doibh. .i. a n-urrdhas ar righ, ar
esbog do bhrigh a leithe eneaclann an righ, nó inté atá na cronughadh
ann. dul fri cath .i. dul a n-urrughas le cur catha. fri cimidh .i. dul
a n-urrughas le brughaidh nó le siothcain. .i. secht neithe crosta donté
rachadh a n-urrughas orra. dol ar dheoruighe .i. dol a n-urrughas. ar
dhiaraigh .i. gan árus no coimhnaidhe aige. ar druith .i. duine gan
céill, ar dhiaraigh .i. nach feidir árach air. ar angar .i. mac iongar.
ar esccong (!) .i. senoir iar ndul a chéille uaidh. imnedhach dona gacha
ráth (im[.s]níomhach go fírinnech gach urrughas díobh sin), .i. fulang
dianbhás no dianollmhughadh no urfogra fa gach gealla dobheir aill ria
n-aill iaromh .i. mionna a n-aghaidh mionn an [.f]ir oile .i. nach decha
sé a n-urrudhas no le díola.

236. ag tioradh .i. ag goradh arbha.

238. luchra .i. gaire nó genamh.

239. .i. cia hiat na trí sonais dogheibh an duine sonadh? Ní handsa son
.i. ní hainbh[.f]esach misi ar sin. iomarchor .i. iomchar. cuirm gan ára
.i. deoch gan tech aige. .i. ar an tslighe go teghmaisech.

240. gaire .i. gaire maith.

241. .i. do ní oirfide nó comhluadar i gcomhdáil. druith .i. amatán.
foirsire abhlóir nó ursoire. oircc (_sic_) .i. mesan nó cú beg.

243. léan .i. amhgar. brath .i. ar comarsan.

244. a breith a ngó .i. gúbreith brégach. gan disle .i. faoi omhan gan
árach. gan ailic .i. gan hailche 'na timchioll .i. rosg [et] fasach.

246. duas .i. droich[.f]ios.

247. socla (_sic_) .i. sochlú. suirge .i. le mnáibh.

248. .i. ceitheora da ttugann flaith mioscais nó nemhdhúil. baoth .i.
leamh. uttmhall .i. roluath. fer labhar disceoil .i. labharrach
cainntech gan sceol aige. fer coimhghne cuimhnech .i. go caoimhegna [et]
cuimhne senchusa.

251. somna .i. so-omhnach .i. so-eglach (!). sobraicch .i. sobríoghach.

252. condailbhe .i. bághach nó leathtaobhach. doingthe .i. doitenguighe.

253. trí sirrechta flatha .i. suthainghesa nó neithe bhíos toirmisc ar
uasal. .i. fleadha gan ealadha da [.f]aisnéis. .i. cuitechta gan donail
píobaire 'na tosach.




INDEX LOCORUM


  Ached Déo, 106.

  Ae Chúalann, 38.

  Ardmacha _Armagh_, 1, 34, 46.

  Ard mBreccáin _Ardbrackan_, 23.

  Ath Caille, 48.

  Ath Clíath Duiblinne, 48, 50.

  Ath Lúain _Athlone_, 48.


  Bairenn _the Burren_, 58.

  Banna _the Bann_, 40.

  Belach Conglais _Baltinglass_, 50.

  Belach Duiblinne, 50.

  Belach Luimnig, 50.

  Bennchor _Bangor_, 5, 44.

  Benn mBoirchi _Slieve Donard_, 38.

  Benntraige _Bantry_, 45.

  Bérre _Beare_, 58.

  Birra _Birr_, 108.

  Bóand _the Boyne_, 40.

  Braichlesan Brigde, 57.

  Breifne, 58.


  Caisel _Cashel_, 54.

  Cathair Chonrúi, 36.

  Cell Dara _Kildare_, 4, 34.

  Cell Maignenn _Kilmainham_, 32.

  Cell Rúaid, 30.

  Cenannus _Kells_, 7.

  Clúain Eidnech _Clonenagh_, 108.

  Clúain Eois _Clones_, 53.

  Clúain Ferta Brénainn _Clonfert_, 19.

  Clúain Iraird _Clonard_, 3, 33, 53.

  Clúain Maic Nóis _Clonmacnois_, 2, 34, 53.

  Clúain Úama _Cloyne_, 12.

  Connacht, 43, 237.

  Corcach _Cork_, 16.

  Crecraige, 43.[TN 45]

  Crúachán Aigli _Croagh Patrick_, 38.

  Crúachu _Croghan_, 35, 54.

  Cúailgne _Coolney_, 43, 62.

  Cúalu, 46.


  Dairchaill, 27.

  Daire Calgaig _Derry_, 32.

  Derc Ferna, 42.

  Druimm Fingin, 51.
    In Munster, famous for its fertility. See LL. 15^a 11.

  Druimm Lethan _Drumlane_, 25.

  Druimm nDrobeóil, 51.

  Druimm Leithe, 51, 236.

  Dublinn _Dublin_, 50.

  Duma mBúrig, 106.

  Dún Cáin _Dunquin_, 60.

  Dún Cermna, 36.

  Dún Dá Lethglas _Downpatrick_, 26.

  Dún Sobairche _Dunseverick_, 36.


  Ess Danainne, 55.

  Ess Maige, 55.

  Ess Rúaid _Assaroe_, 55.


  Fid Déicsen i Tuirtri, 43.

  Fid Moithre i Connachtaib, 43.

  Fid Mór i Cúailgni, 43.

  Findglais _Finglas_, 8.

  Fobur Féichín _Fore_, 22.


  Glasraige, 45.

  Glenn Dá Locha _Glendalough_, 11, 33.

  Glenn Dalláin _Glencar_, 236.


  Imblech Ibair _Emly_, 15.

  Inber Féile, 59.

  Inber na mBárc, 59.

  Inber Túaige, 59.

  Inis Cathaig _Scattery Island_, 10, 237.


  Lann Ela _Lynally_, 31, 44.

  Léimm Conculainn _Loop Head_, 60.

  Leithglend _Leighlin_, 108.

  Less Mór _Lismore_, 14.

  Lettir Dalláin, 236.

  Loch nEchach _Lough Neagh_, 39.

  Loch nErni _Lough Erne_, 39.

  Loch Rí _Lough Ree_, 39.

  Lothra _Lorrha_, 20.

  Lúachair Dedad _Logher_, 61.

  Lugbad _Louth_, 33.

  Luimnech _Limerick_, 50.

  Lusca _Lusk_, 6, 46.


  Mag Crúachan, 52.

  Mag mBile _Moville_, 28.

  Mag mBreg, 52.

  Mag Lí, 236.

  Mag Lifi, 41, 52.

  Mag Line, 41.

  Mag Midi, 41.

  Mugdorn Maigen _Cremorne barony_, 44.


  Ráith mBoth _Raphoe_, 25.

  Ráith Laidcniáin _Rathlynan_, 56.

  Ross Ailithre _Roscarbery_, 17.

  Ross Commáin _Roscommon_, 24.


  Sinann _the Shannon_, 40.

  Sláine _Slane_, 21.

  Slíab Commáin, 56.

  Slíab Cúa, 37.

  Slíab Cúalann, 37.

  Slíab Fúait _the Fews_, 61.

  Slíab Mancháin, 56.

  Slíab Mis, 37.

  Slige Assail, 9, 49.

  Slige Dála, 49.

  Slige Midlúachra, 49.

  Srub Brain, 60.


  Tailtiu _Teltown_, 35.

  Tamlachta _Tallaght_, 8.

  Tech Cairnig, 9.

  Tech Munna _Taghmon_, 32.

  Temair _Tara_; gen. Temrach 54, 202.

  Tipra Cuirp, 57.
    See Tog. Br. Dá Derga § 154, YBL.

  Tipra na nDési, 57.

  Tipra Uaráin Garaid, 57.

  Tipra Uarbeóil, 57.

  Tír Dá Glas _Terryglas_, 18.

  Tír Eogain _Tirowen_, 236.

  Tráig Baili, 47.

  Tráig Lí _Tralee_, 61.

  Tráig Ruis Airgit, 47.

  Tráig Ruis Téiti, 47.

  Tuirtri, 43.

  Tulach na nEpscop, 106.

  Tulen _Dulane_, 29.


  Uam Chnogba _Knowth_, 42.

  Uam Slángæ _Slaney_, 42.




INDEX NOMINUM


  Colmán Ela, 35.

  Corbmac mac Fáeláin, 62.


  in Dagda 120, 237.

  Dil, 236.


  Eothaile, 107, 237.


  Fergus mac Róich, 62.

  Finn, 236.


  Morrígan, 120.


  Neithin, 120.

  Ninníne éces, 62.




GLOSSARY


      abartach, from abairt, _practice_, _feat_, a. escrai 231.

      abucht (abocht, abacht) _a joke_, _jest_ 90.

      adbann _a strain of music_ 89. With prothetic f., fadbann,
      ib. N.

      ad-coillim _I destroy_, _ruin_ 245.

      ái _a cause_, n. pl. ái 153, 174.

      áibne f. _delightfulness_ 23.

      aigne m. _a pleader_, _counsel_, dag-a. 178.

      ailbéimm n. _a reproach_ 30.

      áilde f. _beauty_ 206.

      aill .. aill _once_ ... _again_, _now_ ... _now_ 235.

      ainchess _bodily pain_, acc. cen ainchiss 119 (ainces N).

      ainmne f. _patience_ 192, 251, dat. ainmnit 143 (ainmnet N).

      ainmnetach _patient_ 174, 189.

      airberntas (airnbertas) m. (?) 180, 181.

      airbert _a using_, _employing_ 178.

      air-gorad _a scorching_ 140.

      airisiu _a narration_, _tale_, cétna airisiu, Cóir Amn. 80.
      n. pl. airisena 102, 125.

      airmed _a certain dry measure_ 138. Corm. Tr. 68. eirmed,
      .i. tomus, 4, 3, 18, 70^a. dorat do Patraic in n-airmid
      mini, Trip. 186, 9.

      aithech-borg m., aithech-port m. _a rent-paying town_ 33.

      aithne n. (later f.) _a deposit_ 87, 157, 249; aithne
      [.s]alainn 87 L.

      alaig _behaviour_, _demeanour_ 86.

      all n. _a rock_, n. pl. trí all 200.

      allabair _an echo_ 107; O'Dav. 144.

      ana _wealth_ 147, 239.

      áne f. _agility_, _deftness_, _skill_ 84.

      an-ergnaid _undignified_ 221.

      an-faitches m. _carelessness_ 162.

      an-fiad _a bad welcome_ 70.

      an-gar _unfilial_, _impious_ 159, 235.

      an-idna f. _impurity_ 109.

      an-richt m. _a misshapen person_ 84.

      antrenn _rough ground_, gen. antreinn 147.

      apaig _ripe_ 68.

      ar-cuillim _I destroy_, _ruin_ 184; verb-noun, gen.
      aircaillti, ib. (N).

      ard-nemed m. _a high dignitary_ 157.

      árech (árach) (1) _a tie_, _fetter_, gen. cú áraig 168; (2)
      _a bond_, _surety_, acc. pl. cen áirche 74; cin gealladh,
      cin airge, Laws II. 78, 4.

      argius _instruction_ (?), a. aiste 256. Cf. felmac fri ré na
      argaisi, Laws V. 364, 17.

      aroslicim _I open_, aroslicet 204.

      árus _residence_, _habitation_ 218, 239.

      ata _which are_ 68, 69, 75, 76, &c.

      ataid (?) 181.

      ath-chommus m. _renunciation of control or authority_ 160.

      athchosan, better athchomsan (later achmusan) _a
      complaining_ 98; tossach augrai athchosan, LL. 345^b18.

      augra _strife_ 213.

      aupthach _veneficus_ 185.

      aurla (1) _a long lock of hair_, .i. ciab, Corm. Tr. 166;
      (2) _a person wearing_ aurla, _a serf_ (?); mac aurlai
      (erlai) 152.


      báithe _foolishness_ 252.

      banas m. _womanhood_, gen. dag-banais 180; droch-banais 181.

      ban-chorr f. _a she-heron_ 237.

      ban-lá _a lucky day for women_ 216.

      belach n. _a mountain-pass_, n. pl. belaige 50.

      beó-athair m. _a live father_ 151. Compare the following
      extract from H. 3, 18, p. 19_b_: _Cest._ Cid diatá "ní nais ná
      torbais"? Ar atáit nadmanna naisce ni na torbongat, ar ni
      rochat a nadmann naisce .i. mac beoathar for a athair, céile
      for a flaith, manach for a airchindech, hulach for inn
      ail_e_, ar ní tobongat díb ar comrac, acht atá folaith
      gaibthi friu.

      béss _perhaps_ 136.

      binnech _melodious_, bó b. 85.

      birit, f. _a sow_, gen. birite, 148 BM.

      bithbenach m. _a criminal_ 92 B.

      bocc m. _a buck_, _he-goat_, n. pl. buicc 230.

      boccacht f. _buckishness_, _obstinacy_ 101, 102.

      bolcra (?) 231. Cf. bolcaire m. _a hector_, O'Gr. Cat. 584,
      4.

      bolc-srónach _having distended nostrils_ 231.

      bothach m. _a hut-dweller_, _cottar_ 150.

      brén-[.f]inn _stinking or rotten hair_, acc. pl. -a 105.

      brodna (?) gen. brodnai 230.

      bronn-galar m. _a disease of the abdomen_ 224.

      brugaide f. _keeping a hostel_, _hospitality_ 134.

      búadnas _a triumph_, _excellence_, n. pl. -a 88 H.


      cáer comraic 121 note.

      cáin-thocad m. _fair fortune_, dat. cáin-thocud 110.

      calad _hard_ 176; fer c. 147.

      cetludche f. _lustfulness_ 209.

      círmaire m. _a comb-maker_ 117.

      cisne _what are?_ 239.

      clithcha f. _comfort_ (of dress) 182.

      clochrad (clochrach?) _a stone building_(?) (from clochur?),
      n. pl. trí clochraid 34.

      clúanaige m. _a rogue_ 90, 104.

      co-cless _performing feats together_ 125.

      cóemna _comfort_, _good cheer_ 6, 46.

      coim (coimm) _a cloak_ 130.

      coimgne (com-ecne) _synchronistic knowledge_; fer coimgni
      248 = fer cumocni, Rev. Celt. vi. 165, 11.

      coire _a caldron_ 220. c. érma, c. goriath, c. áiged 127.

      com-ar (W. cyf-ar) _holding ploughland in common_ 125.

      com-chissiu _an examination_ 119.

      com-líth _equally lucky_ 217.

      comneibe (?) 169.

      com-rith (fri) _a racing together_ 117.

      con-beraim _I bear liabilities_ 168.

      condailbe f. _attachment_, _bias_ 193, 252.

      congna (collective) _horns_ 105, 117.

      con-rannaim _I share_ 164.

      con-tibim _I mock_ 82.

      córad-gein _a champion birth_ 148 BM.

      crann-dretel (?) 231.

      crésine f. _piety_ 196.

      crossán m. _a buffoon_ 116.

      cúacróessach (?) 231.

      cuilmen _a volume_, _tome_ 62.

      cuinnmíne f. _kindliness_ 208.


      daintech _biting_ 168; gl. dentatus Sg. 159^{b}2.

      debuid f. _strife_ 98.

      déicsiu _a seeing_, _spying_, gen. déicsen 43.

      deinmne _impatience_, dat. deinmnait 144.

      deirmitiu _irreverence_, gen. deirmiten 214.

      derc _a hole_, _cave_ 42; dat. i nderc a oxaille, LU.
      70^{a}45; resiu dorattar isin deirc, Lism. fo. 43^{b}1.

      déss f. _land_, acc. déiss 167 (dés N); acc. pl. déissi, ib.
      L. See Cáin Adamnáin, p. 46.

      dí-ainme f. _an unblemished state_ 119.

      dían-apud _a sudden notice_ 235.

      dí-araig _a person without bonds_ (árach) 235.

      díbe _a refusing_, _denying_ 212, LL 117^{a}43, 121^{b}9,
      188^{a}2, 188^{b}33.

      díbech _refusing_, _denying_ 95; .i. diultadach, C. 1, 2.

      dí-chuimne f. _lack of memory_ 245; ar dermat nó díchumni,
      LL. 74^{a}30.

      dí-galrae f. _sicklessness_ 119.

      dí-grad n. _hatred_ 217.

      dímainche f. _uselessness_ 81.

      dímainecht f. _uselessness_ 81 H.

      dímosc (?) 172.

      dínnime f. _meanness_, _lowliness_ 191; ferr trumma dínnimi,
      LL. 345^{c}30. Cf. dín[n]imus, Alex. 996.

      dirna _a stone_ 237.

      dí-sceóil _taleless_ 248.

      díthechte f. _non-possession_ 219.

      díthir _a landless person_, gen. díthir (díthire N) 165.

      díthrub m. _a desert_, _uninhabited place_, n. pl. díthruib
      43. In the later language it is inflected like _treb_ (n.p.
      díthreba 43 BM).

      diúite f. _simplicity_ 24; LL. 294^{a}38. d. cridi, Lism.
      Lives 4543: Diúide ingen Slánchridi, Rawl. B. 512,
      112^{2}b2.

      diultadach (diultach) _fond of refusing_ 96 MB.

      dlúithe f. _compactness_, _obscurity_ (?) (of speech) 179.

      doas m. _ignorance_ 245.

      do-celaim _I hide_ 84, 85.

      dochell _niggardliness_ 144; Dochall [et] Díbe [et]
      Do[th]chernas, Rawl. B. 512, 112^{b}1.

      dochlatu m. _ill repute_. gen. dochlatad 212.

      do-chond m. _an imbecile_, gen. dochuind 153.

      dochraite f. _oppression_ 153. Alex. 367, atchota daidbre
      d., LL. 345^{c}3.

      dodeime (?) 237 (todeime L).

      dochta f. _closeness_ 203.

      do-delb _a misshapen person_, acc. la dodelb (dodeilb B) 84.

      dofortaim _I pour out_, _spill_, _spoil_, _ruin_, dofortat
      186; dofortatar .i. dotodsat, MI. 124^{d}12.

      do-gnás f. _ill-breeding_ 81; gen. dognáise 209.

      doingthe f. _foulmouthedness_ 252; for do-thengthe.

      doingthes m. _id._ 213.

      dolud _loss_, _damage_ 198; gen. mét tar ndolaid, LL.
      172^{b}33; in cach níth ba dáel dolaid, 157^{b}14.

      dommatu m. _poverty_ 198, Alex. 847.

      dorenaim _I pay a fine_ (díre) 158.

      dotcad m. _misfortune_, n. pl. dotcaid 44, 64, 65, 71.

      dotcadach _unfortunate_ 135.

      doth _a hatching_, cach d. toirthech, LL. 293^{b}48; gen. in
      doithe 237; dat. do duth, ib.; gen. pl. cerce trí ndoth,
      O'Dav. 1375.

      do-tongim _I swear_, ná dítoing 159.

      drithlennach _full of sparks_ 65.

      drús f. _folly_; gen. drúise 193.

      duine-chin m. _human crime_ 168.

      dul in the phrases, dul ar _to go security on behalf of_
      235; dul fri _to go security for_ 235. See Glossary to Laws
      s.v. dul.

      dulbaire f. _lack of eloquence_, _bad delivery_ 179.

      dulsaine f. _mockery_ 142; in cerd mac húi Dulsine, Corm.
      37. Cf. dulaige, O'Dav. 622.

      dúthracht f. _good will_, _kindliness_ 225.


      ech usci _a water-horse_ 236.

      echmuir(?) 184.

      eisíne _a young bird_ 237.

      eó m. _a salmon_: gen. iach 92; n. pl., iaich, LL.
      297^{a}34.

      eochair _a key_ n. pl. eochracha 204.

      erchoille (?) 230.

      erdonal f. _a trumpeter_, _piper_; eardanal .i. stucaire no
      píobaire, BB. 65 m.s. acc. cen erdonail 253.

      érim n. _a course_, _running_, gen. érma 127. Later fem., ar
      tressa na hérma, LL. 110^{a}13.

      erlam _ready_ 239.

      errad n. _dress_, _attire_: gen. erraid 233.

      escaine _a curse_ 20.

      esconn _excommunicated_ 235.

      escra _a cup for drawing wine_ 231.

      éscus (é-scíss) m. _unweariedness_ 110 (esces N). daurnaisce
      .i. aurlattu nó greschae nó escas, H. 3, 18, 80^a.

      eserni (?) 231.

      eserte f. _landlessness_, _vagrancy_ 74.

      espatu m. _frivolity_ 214.

      étach (verb-n. of in-tugur, O'Mulc. 462) n. _a dress_; gen.
      étaig 182.

      étaid _jealous_ 95.

      etargaire _a separating_, _interposing_, _mediating_, 135,
      154; LL. 31^{b}15; dligid ugra e. 345^{d}10.

      etir-chert _a decision_ 175.


      faigdech (foigdech.) m. _a beggar_ 83, Aisl. M. 71, 21.

      faiscsiu _closeness_ (?) 192 (faicsi N).

      fássach _a precedent_ 178; brithemnacht ar roscadaib [et]
      fasaigib, LU. 118^b.

      fáthaige f. _the gift of prophecy_ 192.

      fáth-rann m. _a witty quatrain_ 89; do fáthrannaib espa [et]
      airchetail, Otia Mers. III., p. 47, § 2.

      fechemnas m. _debtorship_ 170.

      féige f. _sharpness_, _sagacity_ 78.

      feras m. _manhood_, _man's estate_, gen. dag-ferais 196;
      droch-ferais 197. Cf. feras léiginn _lectorship_ AU.

      fer-lá n. _a lucky day for men_ 217.

      fescred (feiscre N.) 118 = feascradh '_shrivelling_,
      _decaying_,' O'R. Cf. feasgor .i. dealugud, Lec. Voc. 403:
      dligid cach forcradach féscred, LL. 294^{a}9.

      fiad _a welcome_. n. pl. fiada (fiad L) 70.

      fidchell (?) 142.

      fid-nemed n. _a sacred grove_, _sanctuary_;[TN 158] '_lucus_,' BB.
      469^{a}46, O'Mulc. 830, n. pl. fidnemeda fírdorchra [et]
      cráeb-chaill comdígainn, C. Cath.

      flett see plett.

      fliuchaim _I wet_, rotfliuchus, 104.

      fodb m. _accoutrement_, n. pl. fuidb 135.

      fo-crenaim (verb-n. fochraic) _I bribe_ 261.[TN Yes, printed as 261]

      foglaid m. _a robber_, gen. foglada 92.

      fo-glúaisim _I move_ (trans.) 198.

      foichell f. _hire_, _wages_, gen. foichle 13.

      foichne _a blade of green corn_ 75: ith-[.f]oichne .i.
      foichne in etha, O'Dav. 1080.

      1. foilmnech _roped_, _leashed_, cú f. 169.

      2. foilmnech (fo-lémnech) _ready to leap_ 91, 238.

      foimrimm _a using_, _usucaption_, gen. foille foimrimme, LL.
      344^{c}55; n. pl. -e 163, Laws.

      fóindledach m. _a waif_ 198.

      foll-derb f. _a milk-pail_, dat. hi foll-deirb 75, Laws.

      fóindel m. _a straying_, n. pl. fóindil 181.

      fomailt (verb-n. of fo-melim) f. _usufruct_ 87.

      fomus (verb-n. of fo-midiur) m. _calculation_ (?) 118; béim
      co fomus, LU. 73^{a}1. béim co fommus, LL. 74^{a}26.
      roláosa, ol sé, fomus forsaní sin, LU. 58 24.

      fo-naidm n. _a contract_ 202.

      for-íadaim _I close upon_ 203.

      for-ind-fedaim _I relate_. forindet 191: O'Dav. 511.

      forngaire _a proclaiming_ 140.

      forrach _a measuring-rod_ 138, O'Don. Suppl.

      for-[.s]naidm (= for-naidm, with epenthetic _s_) n. _an
      overreaching_ (?) 186: co fornadmaim níad náir, LU. 73^{a}7.

      fortgellaim _I give evidence_, _bear witness_ 138.

      for-tongim _I swear_, fortoinger (fortongar) 158.

      fossad _steady_, _firm_ 174 (fossaid N).

      fossugud _stability_ 28.

      fosta f. _staidness_, _steadiness_ 180, 187, 194, 215, 218.

      fotha n. _foundation_, f. n-utmall 173. Cf. ní cóir in fotha
      utmall, Sg. 4^b.

      fothirbe _a field_ (?) 56, Trip. 82, 2; 168, 26.

      freccor (verb-n. of fris-curim) _opposition_, _objection_
      154, ML 131^{a}8.

      frecra (verb-n. of fris-garim) n. _an answer_ 174.

      frith-nóill _a counter-oath_ 165.

      fúaimm n. _a din_, _noise_ 146, f. nglan, LL. 150^{b}4; f.
      in churaig risin tracht, YBL 89^b; n. pl. fúammann 146.

      fúatche f. _a snatching_, _carrying off_ 140.

      fuchacht (fuichecht) f. _copulation_, _cohabitation_ 155.

      fuigliur _I pronounce judgment_, fuigletar 161.

      fuirec (verb-n. of foricim) m. _preparation_, n. pl. fuiric
      97, 98.

      fuirmed _a sitting_, _placing_, gen. aithne fuirmeda, 157.

      fuirsire m. _a juggler_ 241.


      gáir _a cry_, _shout_, n. pl. gártha 99 M.

      gáis f. _wisdom_ 177, gen. gáisse 178, 192, 251.

      gáisse f. _wisdom_, acc. cen gáissi 176.

      gait (verb-noun of gataim) f. _a taking away_, _carrying
      off_, gen. fer gaite meirle 141.

      gamnach f. _a stripper_, gen. gamnaige 234.

      gart _generosity_ 240.

      gatach _thievish_ 185.

      geir (?) 231.

      gen f. _a smile_ 91, n. pl. gena, _ib._

      genmnaide _chaste_ 187, genmnaide ben aenfir, H. 3, 18,
      79^b.

      glass m. _a lock_, n. pl. glais 203.

      goirt _salted_, bíad g. 70.

      goriath (?) 127.

      grainne (?) 231.

      gréss _handicraft_ 70, ferr g. soos, LL. 345^{c}51.

      gríss _heat_, _fever_, _ardour_, _fervour_ 224; colum co
      crábud, co ngrís, LL. 35^{a}48.

      grith _a cry_, _shout_ 99, n. pl. gretha, _ib._

      grúss (?) 143.

      gúala _a large vessel_, _vat_ 255; n. pl. gúala, _ib._ Cf.
      iern-gúala.


      íach (a late nom. formed from the oblique cases of eó) m. _a
      salmon_, gen. iaich 92, L.

      íarduibe f. _after-grief_ 67. Cf. íarnduba.

      íarmur f. _remnant_, _leavings_ 65.

      íarnduba f. _after-grief_ 125, 141.

      íarraid _foster-fee_ 149.

      im-bánad _a growing pale_ 188.

      im-gellad _a pledging oneself_ 101.

      immarchor _a conveying about or across_ 239.

      immed n. _plenty_ 178, 225.

      imreson, O. Ir. imbressan (verb-n. of im-fresnaim) f. _a
      wrangling_ 101, 252, acc. pro nom. imresain 193.

      imraichne _a mistake_ 101, imraithne 229 N.

      im-thomailt f. _food_ 149.

      im-crenaim _pay or buy mutually_, imuscrenat 170.

      ind-chosc m. _an indication_, n. pl. ind-choisc 254.

      in-crenaim _I pay_, _buy_ 155. Enclitic: ní écriae. Ériu 1.,
      p. 199, §21.

      ír f. _wrath_ 188. O'Dav. 1103.

      itfa (?) 231. Cf. itfaide toile, LL. 344^{c}36.


      labor _talkative_ 248; bat l. fri labra, bat tó fri tó, LL.
      346^{a}12.

      lán _the full-tide_ 237.

      laxa f. _inertness_ 212.

      lén _sloth_ 243; tossach lubra lén, LL. 345^{b}33.

      lethiu _broader_, _wider_ 235.

      lia m. _a stone_, dat. liic 147.

      litánacht f. _singing the litany_, 14.

      lobra = lomrad _a stripping_ 218; gen. lomartha, _ib._

      luaithrind _a pair of compasses_, gen. lúd -e 118; fo
      chosmailius luaithrinde, Corm. 13, s.v. Coire Brecáin.

      luchra _a smile_ 238.

      lúd = lúth _agility_, _quick motion_ 118. Wi.
      nimtha lúd hi cois nó il-láim, LU. 16^{a}5.


      mad _well_, ní mad bíadsam, ní mad ríadsam 236.

      máil _blunt_; _simple-minded_, _witless_, ingen m. 114.

      méile f. _lewdness_ 228; ben méile 223.

      marb-dil _dead chattel_, Laws. acc. pl. marbdili 105.

      med _a balance_, _scales_ 138.

      meirle f. _theft_ 141.

      mer-aichne _a mistake_ 229.

      meraige m. _a fool_, _fop_ 103.

      mí-airle _evil counsel_ 243; tossach míarli malartcha, LL.
      345^{b}37.

      midlachas m. _cowardice_ 197.

      mí-gairm n. _an evil cry_, nom. du. dá m. 124.

      miscne, miscena (n. pl.) _hatreds_ 179, 248.

      mí-thocad m. _misfortune_, _ill-luck_, gen. míthocaid 124;
      dat. míthocod 109.

      mblecht (mblicht) _in milk_ 146.

      móaigim _I increase_, verb-n. gen. móaigthe 146.

      muilleóir m. _a miller_, gen. muilleórach 234.

      muimme f. _a nurse_, n. pl. muime 246, 247, muimmecha 130.

      muin _neck_, _back_, in the phrase do m. 232 = de mhuin
      _because of_, _in consequence of_, Dinneen.


      nemed, m. _a privileged person_, gen. nemid filed 255.

      nem-idna f. _impurity_ 109 BM.

      nemthigur _I constitute_, neimthigedar 116-123, 202: Corm.
      s.v. níth: rofogluim sium in tréide nemthigius filid, Megn.
      Finn 19.

      neóit _churlishness_, _niggardliness_ 144.

      ness (1) .i. aurnise criad _a clay furnace_, H. 3, 18, 73b;
      gen. fri derc a neis, Corm. 33, 2; (2) _the wooden mould or
      block in which the furnace of moist, soft clay, was
      formed_;[128] bói crann ina láim .i. neas a ainm [et] is
      uime dogníther an urnise criad, Corm. 32 s. v. nescoit; (3)
      .i. mála cré _a bag of (moulding) clay_ H. 1, 15.

      [128] I owe this explanation to Dr. P.W. Joyce.

      nóill _an oath_ 165 (náill N); n. pl. nóill, ib.


      ochán _an urging_, _egging on_ 112. Cf. achain, Boroma 122.

      ochtrach (later otrach) f. _a dunghill_, ML 129^{c}2; dat.
      for ochtraig 117 (otrach N).

      óc-thigern m. _a franklin_ 71.

      óil f. _a cheek_, gen. óile 116.

      oirce _a lap-dog_ 241.

      ordan _dignity_, gen. ordain 246, 254. With Triad 246,
      compare the following extract from H. 3, 18, p. 9_b_: Secht
      rann fichet (xx .i. MS) triasa (friasa MS) toet feab [et]
      ordan (ordain MS) do duine: tria gaireui, tria ainmnit, tria
      [.f]ostai, tria thói, tria f_or_sadi, tria fogluim, tri
      domestai, tri étsecht fírindi, tri chocad fri clóine, tri
      indarb_a_ anfis, tri thochur[i]ud fis, tri trebairei, tri
      coitsecht fri forrsaidi, tri frecmorc fíren, tri filidhecht
      téchtai, tri ailge auscuichthi, tri airmitin sen, tri denam
      sinsire, tri ermitin flatha, tri airmidin ecnai, tri
      honoi[r] fithidre, tri timorgain cuibsi _nó_ gnúisi, tri
      idhnai lámai, tri congain cuibsi, tri imrád bá[i]s, tria
      imrád _nó_ décsin i nDia na ndúla.


      paitt f. _a leather bottle_, p. meda, LL. 117^{a}50; LU.
      54^{b}22; gen. paitte 231; na paitte, LL. 117^{b}2; du. n.
      dá phait [.f]ína, LB. 129^{a}.

      plett (flett) f. _an edge_ 121; plet .i. nomen rinda dogníat
      cerda, H. 3, 18, p. 73: flét, O'R.

      prap-chaillte (literally 'sudden hardness') f.
      _closefistedness_ 212.


      ráth f. _security_, _surety_ 235; gen. rátha 139.

      ráthaiges m. _guarantorship_ 135, 248.

      rathmaire f. _bountifulness_ 211.

      reclés _an abbey-church_ 11.

      reithe m. _a ram_ 117, 168.

      rige _a stretching_, _extending_ 116.

      rigne (raigne) f. _stiffness_ 179: LL. 212^{b}15; rigne
      labartha, 345^{d}10.

      roimse _abundance_ 202.

      ronn _a chain_ 121.

      rop m. _a brute_, n. pl. ruip, 168, 169. With Triad 168
      compare the following extract from H. 3, 18, p. 8^{b}:
      Rofesar rupu tria fóindel caich laithiu dosliat fiachui
      dóine do cethrai .i. each cen cuibrich cech tráthai, cú cen
      cuibrech _nó_ cen lomain laithe, muiccai cen mucalaig
      ndorcha.

      ros-chullach m. _a stallion_ 114.

      ro-thé very hot, _scalding_ 70; Aisl. M.

      rucca f. _shame_ 143.

      ruire m. _a king_, gen. pl. ruirech 202.

      rúss _a blushing_ 143; O'Dav. 1336, 1343, rús .i. grúaid, ut
      dicitur: co nach romna rús richt. Rús dono imdergad [et]
      gach nderg, H. 3, 18, 73^c.


      sail _a beam_, _prop_, n. pl. sailge 101.

      saill f. _fat_, _bacon_ 170; gen. cia tiget na saille, LB.
      260^{b}20; n pl. saillti 184.

      sain-chor m. _a special contract_, gen. -chuir 151.

      salánach _dirty_, _filthy_, n. pl. salanaig 230.

      saltraim _I trample_, rosaltrus 104.

      sámtha _repose_ 189.

      sant f. _avarice_ 115.

      scenb _a startling_ (?) n. pl. scenb 106.

      scéo _and_ 223.

      scolóc _a young student_ 233.

      secnabbóite f. _vice-abbotship_ 46.

      seche _a hide_, _skin_ 230.

      ségainn _accomplished_; _an accomplished person_, n. pl.
      ségainni, 89 (ségaind M ségainn N); ní rabha i nEirinn uile
      budh griabhdha nó bud segaine inás, Three Fragm. 34.

      seim _a rivet_ 172.

      seol (seola) _child-bed_ 224.

      sírecht f. _a tabu_, .i. geis, O'Dav. 1482, who quotes triad
      253.

      sirite m. _a wild man_, _sprite_ 114.

      sit _hush_! 137; sit sit! Hib. Min. 78, 23.

      sleith f. _cohabiting with a woman without her knowledge_
      155; Aisl. M. O'Dav. 97.

      slissén _a chip_, _lath_ 169.

      snáth f. _a thread_, gen. snáithe 75.

      so-bés m. _good manners_ 84.

      sobraid _sober_ 251; sobraig, LL. 343^{d}3; sobraig cách co
      haltram, LL. 345^{d}45.

      sobraide f. _sobriety_ 187, 251.

      sochell _liberality_ 210; LL. 345^{b}39.

      sochlatu m. _good repute_, gen. sochlatad 211.

      sochoisc _docile_ 251; n. pl. -e, CZ. III. 451, 28.

      sochoisce f. _docility_ 194; tossach suthi s., LL.
      345^{b}23.

      so-delb f. _a fine figure_ 85.

      so-gnás f. _good breeding_ 210; gen. sognáise 208.

      soithnges m. _wellspokenness_ 208, 251.

      soitcedach _fortunate_ 239.

      somnath (^{x}so-múnad) _easily taught_, _docile_ 251. Cf.
      O'Dav. 1481.

      somnathe f. _docility_ 251.

      són _that_ 239.

      sotcad m. _good fortune_, gen. sotcaid 210.

      sotla f. _pride_ 247.

      so-thengtha _well-spoken_ 251.

      sproicept _a preaching_ 111 B. sproicepht M.

      sreb f. 'the stream of milk drawn from a cow's teats at each
      tug,' Dinneen; gen. sreibe, 75 L.

      sreb immais 112 note.

      srithid f. '_the passage of milk from the breast_.' O'R.:
      gen. srithide 75.

      sruithe f. _seniority_ 5.

      sta _hush!_ 137; Bodl. Corm. stata, Hib. Min. 78, 1.

      súarcus m. _mirth_ 210.

      suirge f. _a courting_, _wooing_, 247.

      suthaine f. _lastingness_, 182.

      tacra _a pleading_, t. fergach 173 = LL. 345^{d}23.

      tairisiu m. _trustfulness_ 204.

      tairismige f. _obduracy_ 209.

      tair-leimm n. _an alighting_, _a place of alighting_; geis
      dí tochim cen tairlim, LL. 201^{a}11: n. pl. tairleme, 32.

      taisec _restitution_, _restoration_ 157. Laws, Aisl. M.

      tal-chaire f. _self-will_, _obstinacy_ 131.

      tarcud _a proposing_ 72, 73; t. do drochmnái, Aisl. M. 73,
      26.

      tarsunn m. _a sauce_; tarsand, O'Mulc. 612: n. pl. tarsuinn
      184 (tarsunn L): torsnu, Aisl. M. 99, 7.

      tascor _a retinue_, t. ríg 71, t. ríg nó espuic, O'Dav.
      1501.

      1. téite f. _wantonness_ 18.

      2. téite _a fair_, _gathering_ 88.

      tenn (teinn, tinn) _sore_, _hurting_, cluiche t. 90. Cf.
      mían leisan laoch lúaiter linn | cluiche ó nách biad duine
      tinn _a game by which no one is hurt_, Bruss. MS. 2569, fo.
      65^a.

      tirdacht f. _boorishness_ 229.

      tlás f. _weariness_ 132, 133.

      togním. m. (?) 219.

      toicthiu (?) 131.

      toimtiu f. _opinion_ 136. Cf. mac toimten '_son of
      conjecture_,' O'Dav. 1596.

      tothucht _substance_ 85. BB. 19^{b}14.

      tradna _a corncrake_ 129.

      trecheng _a triad_. For O.-Ir. trethenc, Wb. 29^{c}5 (Thes.
      I. 691).

      trichem _a fit of coughing_; sen-t. 114. mod. tritheamh.

      trichtach _example_, _pattern_ (?) 27. is é did_iu_ in fer
      sin ropo trichtach do Chorinntib ara techtatis an indmus
      am_al_ ná techtatis, LB. 146^{a}32; ropo trichtach tra don
      eclais dílgedaig fo chosmailius ingen n-óg ná tabrat olc ar
      olc, acbt logud, _ib_.

      tromdatu m. _importunity_ 214.

      tromm m. _the elder-tree_ 129; gen. connud truimm, RC. VII.,
      298, 3.

      trú _a doomed person_, dat. robud do throich 83 = Aisl. M.
      71, 20.

      trumma f. _weightiness_, _self-importance_ 131.

      trusca f. _leprosy_ 133 N.; clam-trusca AU. 950.

      tuilféth _a frown_ 142.

      tuisledach _stumbling_, _offending_ 96 N.

      turtugud _a compelling_, _forcing_, _violating_ 155: is tar
      turtugud nDé [et] Patraic cach gell [et] cach aitire, Cáin
      Domn.; LU. 74^{a}19, 123^{a}17; turtugud breth, LL. 344^{b};
      turrtugad .i. timpud, H. 3, 18, 539^{b}; a turtad .i. per
      uim, O'Dav. 1151; turtad .i. coméicniugud, O'Mulc. H. 3, 18,
      74^{b}, 866.


      uais _hard_, _difficult_ 220, 235; coruice uais nó angbocht,
      .i. is é iu t-uais ní ná raibe aice féin, O'Dav. 112.








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRIADS OF IRELAND ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

