








Love Letters of Henry Eighth to Anne Boleyn




  The Love Letters of Henry Viii to Anne Boleyn

  With Notes

  John W. Luce & Company
  Boston: London



  COPYRIGHT, 1906, BY JOHN W. LUCE & COMPANY

  D. B. UPDIKE, THE MERRYMOUNT PRESS, BOSTON




Table of Contents


                                           Page

  Letter First                                i

  Letter Second                              iv

  Letter Third                                v

  Letter Fourth                             vii

  Letter Fifth                                x

  Letter Sixth                             xiii

  Letter Seventh                            xvi

  Letter Eighth [Anne Boleyn to Wolsey]   xviii

  Postscript [by Henry VIII]                 xx

  Letter Ninth                             xxii

  Letter Tenth                              xxv

  Letter Eleventh                        xxviii

  Letter Twelfth                            xxx

  Letter Thirteenth                       xxxiv

  Letter Fourteenth                      xxxvii

  Letter Fifteenth                        xxxix

  Letter Sixteenth                          xli

  Letter Seventeenth                      xliii

  Letter Eighteenth                         xlv

  Notes                                      li




Love Letters of Henry Eighth to Anne Boleyn




Letter First To Anne Boleyn


On turning over in my mind the contents of your last letters, I have put
myself into great agony, not knowing how to interpret them, whether to my
disadvantage, as you show in some places, or to my advantage, as I
understand them in some others, beseeching you earnestly to let me know
expressly your whole mind as to the love between us two. It is absolutely
necessary for me to obtain this answer, having been for above a whole year
stricken with the dart of love, and not yet sure whether I shall fail of
finding a place in your heart and affection, which last point has
prevented me for some time past from calling you my mistress; because, if
you only love me with an ordinary love, that name is not suitable for you,
because it denotes a singular love, which is far from common. But if you
please to do the office of a true loyal mistress and friend, and to give
up yourself body and heart to me, who will be, and have been, your most
loyal servant, (if your rigour does not forbid me) I promise you that not
only the name shall be given you, but also that I will take you for my
only mistress, casting off all others besides you out of my thoughts and
affections, and serve you only. I beseech you to give an entire answer to
this my rude letter, that I may know on what and how far I may depend. And
if it does not please you to answer me in writing, appoint some place
where I may have it by word of mouth, and I will go thither with all my
heart. No more, for fear of tiring you. Written by the hand of him who
would willingly remain yours,

H. R.




Letter Second To Anne Boleyn


Though it is not fitting for a gentleman to take his lady in the place of
a servant, yet, complying with your desire, I willingly grant it you, if
thereby you can find yourself less uncomfortable in the place chosen by
yourself, than you have been in that which I gave you, thanking you
cordially that you are pleased still to have some remembrance of me. 6. n.
A. 1 de A. o. na. v. e. z.

HENRY R.




Letter Third To Anne Boleyn


Although, my Mistress, it has not pleased you to remember the promise you
made me when I was last with you--that is, to hear good news from you, and
to have an answer to my last letter; yet it seems to me that it belongs to
a true servant (seeing that otherwise he can know nothing) to inquire the
health of his mistress, and to acquit myself of the duty of a true
servant, I send you this letter, beseeching you to apprise me of your
welfare, which I pray to God may continue as long as I desire mine own.
And to cause you yet oftener to remember me, I send you, by the bearer of
this, a buck killed late last night by my own hand, hoping that when you
eat of it you may think of the hunter; and thus, for want of room, I must
end my letter, written by the hand of your servant, who very often wishes
for you instead of your brother.

H. R.




Letter Fourth To Anne Boleyn


_MY MISTRESS & FRIEND_, my heart and I surrender ourselves into your
hands, beseeching you to hold us commended to your favour, and that by
absence your affection to us may not be lessened: for it were a great pity
to increase our pain, of which absence produces enough and more than I
could ever have thought could be felt, reminding us of a point in
astronomy which is this: the longer the days are, the more distant is the
sun, and nevertheless the hotter; so is it with our love, for by absence
we are kept a distance from one another, and yet it retains its fervour,
at least on my side; I hope the like on yours, assuring you that on my
part the pain of absence is already too great for me; and when I think of
the increase of that which I am forced to suffer, it would be almost
intolerable, but for the firm hope I have of your unchangeable affection
for me: and to remind you of this sometimes, and seeing that I cannot be
personally present with you, I now send you the nearest thing I can to
that, namely, my picture set in a bracelet, with the whole of the device,
which you already know, wishing myself in their place, if it should please
you. This is from the hand of your loyal servant and friend,

H. R.




Letter Fifth To Anne Boleyn


For a present so beautiful that nothing could be more so (considering the
whole of it), I thank you most cordially, not only on account of the fine
diamond and the ship in which the solitary damsel is tossed about, but
chiefly for the fine interpretation and the too humble submission which
your goodness hath used towards me in this case; for I think it would be
very difficult for me to find an occasion to deserve it, if I were not
assisted by your great humanity and favour, which I have always sought to
seek, and will seek to preserve by all the kindness in my power, in which
my hope has placed its unchangeable intention, which says, _Aut illic, aut
nullibi_.

The demonstrations of your affection are such, the beautiful mottoes of
the letter so cordially expressed, that they oblige me for ever to honour,
love, and serve you sincerely, beseeching you to continue in the same firm
and constant purpose, assuring you that, on my part, I will surpass it
rather than make it reciprocal, if loyalty of heart and a desire to please
you can accomplish this.

I beg, also, if at any time before this I have in any way offended you,
that you would give me the same absolution that you ask, assuring you,
that henceforward my heart shall be dedicated to you alone. I wish my
person was so too. God can do it, if He pleases, to whom I pray every day
for that end, hoping that at length my prayers will be heard. I wish the
time may be short, but I shall think it long till we see one another.

Written by the hand of that secretary, who in heart, body, and will, is,

Your loyal and most assured Servant,

H. sultre A.B. ne cherse R.




Letter Sixth To Anne Boleyn


_TO MY MISTRESS._ Because the time seems very long since I heard
concerning your health and you, the great affection I have for you has
induced me to send you this bearer, to be better informed of your health
and pleasure, and because, since my parting from you, I have been told
that the opinion in which I left you is totally changed, and that you
would not come to court either with your mother, if you could, or in any
other manner; which report, if true, I cannot sufficiently marvel at,
because I am sure that I have since never done any thing to offend you,
and it seems a very poor return for the great love which I bear you to
keep me at a distance both from the speech and the person of the woman
that I esteem most in the world: and if you love me with as much affection
as I hope you do, I am sure that the distance of our two persons would be
a little irksome to you, though this does not belong so much to the
mistress as to the servant.

Consider well, my mistress, that absence from you grieves me sorely,
hoping that it is not your will that it should be so; but if I knew for
certain that you voluntarily desired it, I could do no other than mourn
my ill-fortune, and by degrees abate my great folly. And so, for lack of
time, I make an end of this rude letter, beseeching you to give credence
to this bearer in all that he will tell you from me.

Written by the hand of your entire Servant,

H. R.




Letter Seventh To Anne Boleyn


_DARLING_, these shall be only to advertise you that this bearer and his
fellow be despatched with as many things to compass our matter, and to
bring it to pass as our wits could imagine or devise; which brought to
pass, as I trust, by their diligence, it shall be shortly, you and I shall
have our desired end, which should be more to my heart's ease, and more
quietness to my mind, than any other thing in the world; as, with God's
grace, shortly I trust shall be proved, but not so soon as I would it
were; yet I will ensure you that there shall be no time lost that may be
won, and further can not be done; for _ultra posse non est esse_. Keep him
not too long with you, but desire him, for your sake, to make the more
speed; for the sooner we shall have word from him, the sooner shall our
matter come to pass. And thus upon trust of your short repair to London, I
make an end of my letter, my own sweet heart.

Written with the hand of him which desireth as much to be yours as you do
to have him.

H. R.




Letter Eighth Anne Boleyn to Wolsey


_MY LORD_, in my most humblest wise that my heart can think, I desire you
to pardon me that I am so bold to trouble you with my simple and rude
writing, esteeming it to proceed from her that is much desirous to know
that your grace does well, as I perceive by this bearer that you do, the
which I pray God long to continue, as I am most bound to pray; for I do
know the great pains and troubles that you have taken for me both day and
night is never likely to be recompensed on my part, but alonely in loving
you, next unto the king's grace, above all creatures living. And I do not
doubt but the daily proofs of my deeds shall manifestly declare and affirm
my writing to be true, and I do trust you do think the same.

My lord, I do assure you, I do long to hear from you news of the legate;
for I do hope, as they come from you, they shall be very good; and I am
sure you desire it as much as I, and more, an it were possible; as I know
it is not: and thus remaining in a steadfast hope, I make an end of my
letter.

Written with the hand of her that is most bound to be

Your humble Servant,

ANNE BOLEYN.




Postscript by Henry viii


The writer of this letter would not cease, till she had caused me likewise
to set my hand, desiring you, though it be short, to take it in good part.
I ensure you that there is neither of us but greatly desireth to see you,
and are joyous to hear that you have escaped this plague so well, trusting
the fury thereof to be passed, especially with them that keepeth good
diet, as I trust you do. The not hearing of the legate's arrival in France
causeth us somewhat to muse; notwithstanding, we trust, by your diligence
and vigilancy (with the assistance of Almighty God), shortly to be eased
out of that trouble. No more to you at this time, but that I pray God send
you as good health and prosperity as the writer would.

By your loving Sovereign and Friend,

H. R.




Letter Ninth To Anne Boleyn


There came to me suddenly in the night the most afflicting news that could
have arrived. The first, to hear of the sickness of my mistress, whom I
esteem more than all the world, and whose health I desire as I do my own,
so that I would gladly bear half your illness to make you well. The
second, from the fear that I have of being still longer harassed by my
enemy, Absence, much longer, who has hitherto given me all possible
uneasiness, and as far as I can judge is determined to spite me more
because I pray God to rid me of this troublesome tormentor. The third,
because the physician in whom I have most confidence, is absent at the
very time when he might do me the greatest pleasure; for I should hope, by
him and his means, to obtain one of my chief joys on earth--that is the
care of my mistress--yet for want of him I send you my second, and hope
that he will soon make you well. I shall then love him more than ever. I
beseech you to be guided by his advice in your illness. In so doing I hope
soon to see you again, which will be to me a greater comfort than all the
precious jewels in the world.

Written by that secretary, who is, and for ever will be, your loyal and
most assured Servant,

H. (A B) R.




Letter Tenth To Anne Boleyn


The uneasiness my doubts about your health gave me, disturbed and alarmed
me exceedingly, and I should not have had any quiet without hearing
certain tidings. But now, since you have as yet felt nothing, I hope, and
am assured that it will spare you, as I hope it is doing with us. For when
we were at Walton, two ushers, two valets de chambres and your brother,
master-treasurer, fell ill, but are now quite well; and since we have
returned to our house at Hunsdon, we have been perfectly well, and have
not, at present, one sick person, God be praised; and I think, if you
would retire from Surrey, as we did, you would escape all danger. There is
another thing that may comfort you, which is, that, in truth in this
distemper few or no women have been taken ill, and what is more, no person
of our court, and few elsewhere, have died of it. For which reason I beg
you, my entirely beloved, not to frighten yourself nor be too uneasy at
our absence; for wherever I am, I am yours, and yet we must sometimes
submit to our misfortunes, for whoever will struggle against fate is
generally but so much the farther from gaining his end: wherefore comfort
yourself, and take courage and avoid the pestilence as much as you can,
for I hope shortly to make you sing, _la renvoyé_. No more at present,
from lack of time, but that I wish you in my arms, that I might a little
dispel your unreasonable thoughts.

Written by the hand of him who is and alway will be yours,

Im- H. R. -mutable.




Letter Eleventh To Anne Boleyn


The cause of my writing at this time, good sweetheart, is only to
understand of your good health and prosperity; whereof to know I would be
as glad as in manner mine own, praying God that (an it be His pleasure) to
send us shortly together, for I promise you I long for it. How be it, I
trust it shall not be long to; and seeing my darling is absent, I can do
no less than to send her some flesh, representing my name, which is hart
flesh for Henry, prognosticating that hereafter, God willing, you may
enjoy some of mine, which He pleased, I would were now.

As touching your sister's matter, I have caused Walter Welze to write to
my lord my mind therein, whereby I trust that Eve shall not have power to
deceive Adam; for surely, whatsoever is said, it cannot so stand with his
honour but that he must needs take her, his natural daughter, now in her
extreme necessity.

No more to you at this time, mine own darling, but that with a wish I
would we were together an evening.

With the hand of yours,

H. R.




Letter Twelfth To Anne Boleyn


Since your last letters, mine own darling, Walter Welshe, Master Browne,
Thos. Care, Grion of Brearton, and John Coke, the apothecary, be fallen of
the sweat in this house, and, thanked be God, all well recovered, so that
as yet the plague is not fully ceased here, but I trust shortly it shall.
By the mercy of God, the rest of us yet be well, and I trust shall pass
it, either not to have it, or, at the least, as easily as the rest have
done.

As touching the matter of Wilton, my lord cardinal hath had the nuns
before him, and examined them, Mr. Bell being present; which hath
certified me that, for a truth, she had confessed herself (which we would
have had abbess) to have had two children by two sundry priests; and,
further, since hath been kept by a servant of the Lord Broke that was, and
that not long ago. Wherefore I would not, for all the gold in the world,
clog your conscience nor mine to make her ruler of a house which is of so
ungodly demeanour; nor, I trust, you would not that neither for brother
nor sister, I should so destain mine honour or conscience. And, as
touching the prioress, or Dame Eleanor's eldest sister, though there is
not any evident case proved against them, and that the prioress is so old
that for many years she could not be as she was named; yet
notwithstanding, to do you pleasure, I have done that neither of them
shall have it, but that some other good and well-disposed woman shall have
it, whereby the house shall be the better reformed (whereof I ensure you
it had much need), and God much the better served.

As touching your abode at Hever, do therein as best shall like you, for
you best know what air doth best with you; but I would it were come
thereto (if it pleased God), that neither of us need care for that, for I
ensure you I think it long. Suche is fallen sick of the sweat, and
therefore I send you this bearer, because I think you long to hear
tidings from us, as we do likewise from you.

Written with the hand _de votre seul_,

H. R.




Letter Thirteenth To Anne Boleyn


The approach of the time for which I have so long waited rejoices me so
much, that it seems almost to have come already. However, the entire
accomplishment cannot be till the two persons meet, which meeting is more
desired by me than anything in this world; for what joy can be greater
upon earth than to have the company of her who is dearest to me, knowing
likewise that she does the same on her part, the thought of which gives me
the greatest pleasure.

Judge what an effect the presence of that person must have on me, whose
absence has grieved my heart more than either words or writing can
express, and which nothing can cure, but that begging you, my mistress, to
tell your father from me, that I desire him to hasten the time appointed
by two days, that he may be at court before the old term, or, at farthest,
on the day prefixed; for otherwise I shall think he will not do the
lover's turn, as he said he would, nor answer my expectation.

No more at present for lack of time, hoping shortly that by word of mouth
I shall tell you the rest of the sufferings endured by me from your
absence.

Written by the hand of the secretary, who wishes himself at this moment
privately with you, and who is, and always will be,

Your loyal and most assured Servant,

H. no other A B seek R.




Letter Fourteenth To Anne Boleyn


_DARLING_, I heartily recommend me to you, ascertaining you that I am not
a little perplexed with such things as your brother shall on my part
declare unto you, to whom I pray you give full credence, for it were too
long to write. In my last letters I writ to you that I trusted shortly to
see you, which is better known at London than with any that is about me,
whereof I not a little marvel; but lack of discreet handling must needs be
the cause thereof. No more to you at this time, but that I trust shortly
our meetings shall not depend upon other men's light handlings, but upon
our own.

Written with the hand of him that longeth to be yours.

H. R.




Letter Fifteenth To Anne Boleyn


_MINE own SWEETHEART_, this shall be to advertise you of the great
elengeness that I find here since your departing; for, I ensure you
methinketh the time longer since your departing now last, than I was wont
to do a whole fortnight. I think your kindness and my fervency of love
causeth it; for, otherwise, I would not have thought it possible that for
so little a while it should have grieved me. But now that I am coming
towards you, methinketh my pains be half removed; and also I am right
well comforted in so much that my book maketh substantially for my
matter; in looking whereof I have spent above four hours this day, which
causeth me now to write the shorter letter to you at this time, because of
some pain in my head; wishing myself (especially an evening) in my
sweetheart's arms, whose pretty dukkys I trust shortly to kiss.

Written by the hand of him that was, is, and shall be yours by his own
will,

H. R.




Letter Sixteenth To Anne Boleyn


_DARLING_, Though I have scant leisure, yet, remembering my promise, I
thought it convenient to certify you briefly in what case our affairs
stand. As touching a lodging for you, we have got one by my lord
cardinal's means, the like whereof could not have been found hereabouts
for all causes, as this bearer shall more show you. As touching our other
affairs, I assure you there can be no more done, nor more diligence used,
nor all manner of dangers better both foreseen and provided for, so that
I trust it shall be hereafter to both our comforts, the specialities
whereof were both too long to be written, and hardly by messenger to be
declared. Wherefore, till you repair hither, I keep something in store,
trusting it shall not be long to; for I have caused my lord, your father,
to make his provisions with speed; and thus for lack of time, darling, I
make an end of my letter, written with the hand of him which I would were
yours.

H. R.




Letter Seventeenth To Anne Boleyn


The reasonable request of your last letter, with the pleasure also that I
take to know them true, causeth me to send you these news. The legate
which we most desire arrived at Paris on Sunday or Monday last past, so
that I trust by the next Monday to hear of his arrival at Calais: and then
I trust within a while after to enjoy that which I have so long longed
for, to God's pleasure and our both comforts.

No more to you at this present, mine own darling, for lack of time, but
that I would you were in mine arms, or I in yours, for I think it long
since I kissed you.

Written after the killing of a hart, at eleven of the clock, minding, with
God's grace, to-morrow, mightily timely, to kill another, by the hand
which, I trust, shortly shall be yours.

HENRY R.




Letter Eighteenth To Anne Boleyn


To inform you what joy it is to me to understand of your conformableness
with reason, and of the suppressing of your inutile and vain thoughts with
the bridle of reason. I assure you all the good in this world could not
counterpoise for my satisfaction the knowledge and certainty thereof,
wherefore, good sweetheart, continue the same, not only in this, but in
all your doings hereafter; for thereby shall come, both to you and me, the
greatest quietness that may be in this world.

The cause why the bearer stays so long, is the business I have had to
dress up gear for you; and which I trust, ere long to cause you occupy:
then I trust to occupy yours, which shall be recompense enough to me for
all my pains and labour.

The unfeigned sickness of this well-willing legate doth somewhat retard
his access to your person; but I trust verily, when God shall send him
health, he will with diligence recompense his demur. For I know well where
he hath said (touching the saying and bruit that he is thought imperial)
that it shall be well known in this matter that he is not imperial; and
thus, for lack of time, sweetheart, farewell.

Written with the hand which fain would be yours, and so is the heart.

R. H.



Finis





Notes




Love Letters of Henry viii to Anne Boleyn

By J. O. Halliwell Phillips


The letters of Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn, perhaps the most remarkable
documents of the kind known to exist, were published at Oxford in 1720 by
Hearne, in a volume entitled _Roberti de Avesbury Historia de mirabilibus
gestis Edwardi III_, and inserted in the third volume of the Harleian
Miscellany, 1745. These two editions differ considerably from each other,
and still more so from the transcripts here given, which are taken from
the edition printed at Paris by M. Meon, who held a situation in the
Manuscript Department of the Bibliothèque de Roi. The fifth and
thirteenth, however, which are not comprehended in the Vatican collection,
are supplied from Hearne's work. Of the seventeen letters of which the
series consists, eight are written in English and nine in French.

They appear to have been written after Anne Boleyn had been sent away from
court, in consequence of reports injurious to her reputation, which had
begun to be publicly circulated. Her removal indeed was so abrupt that she
had resolved never to return. The king soon repented his harshness, and
strove to persuade her to come back; but it was a long time, and not
without great trouble, before he could induce her to comply. Her
retirement did not take place before the month of May, 1528; this is
proved by a letter from Fox, Bishop of Hereford, to Gardiner, Bishop of
Winchester, dated the 4th of May, in that year, in which the writer, who
had just returned from Rome, whither he had been sent to negotiate the
king's divorce, gives an account of his landing at Sandwich on the 2nd,
of his arrival on the same night at Greenwich, where the king then was,
and of the order he received from him to go to the apartments of Anne
Boleyn, which were in the Tiltyard, and inform her how anxious he had been
to hasten the arrival of the legate, and how much he was rejoiced by it.
This letter, formerly in the collection of Harley, Earl of Oxford, is now
at Rome.

It must have been very soon afterwards that Anne Boleyn left the court. In
fact, in the first letter (4 of this series) the king excuses himself for
being under the necessity of parting from her. In the second (6) he
complains of the dislike which she shows to return to court; but in
neither of them does he allude to the pestilential disease which in that
year committed such ravages in England. In the third (10), however, he
does advert to it as a disorder which has prevailed for some time, and on
which he makes some observations.

Between this letter, probably written in the month of July, and the sixth
(17), in which the king speaks of the arrival of the legate in Paris, and
which must have been written about the end of September, there are two
letters (1 and 5) certainly written within a few days of each other. In
the second of these two, _viz._, the fifth of this series, the king
expresses his extreme satisfaction which he has received from the lady's
answer to his request. In the effusion of his gratitude, he pays a visit
to his mistress, and both address a letter (8) to Cardinal Wolsey, in
which Henry manifests his astonishment at not having yet heard of the
arrival of Campeggio, the legate, in Paris. The date of this letter may
thus be fixed in the month of September.

The fourth (1), apparently written in August, is the most interesting of
the whole collection, inasmuch as it fixes the period of the commencement
of the king's affection for Anne Boleyn. He complains of "having been
above a whole year struck with the dart of love," and that he is not yet
certain whether he shall succeed in finding a place in the heart and
affections of her whom he loves.

The last letter (18), which makes mention of the illness of the legate as
the cause of the delay in the affair of the divorce, shows that this
correspondence ended in May, 1529, at which time the court of legates was
open for the final decision of that point.

Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas Boleyn, subsequently created Earl of
Wiltshire, after passing many years at the court of Claude, queen of
Francis I of France, returned to England about the end of the year 1525,
at the age of eighteen. Here she was soon appointed maid of honour to
Queen Katherine, and attracted the particular attentions of Henry VIII,
who was then engaged in soliciting a divorce from the Pope. The marked
preference shown by the king for Anne Boleyn raised so much jealousy and
slander that it was thought advisable by her family to remove the new
favourite from the court; and it was during this retirement at Hever, a
seat of her father's in Kent, that these letters were addressed to her by
her royal lover. It was no doubt to render them the more agreeable that he
wrote some of them in French. They breathe a fondness and an ardour which
could scarcely leave room to doubt the sincerity of his love.

¶

We have reprinted Mr. Halliwell Phillips to call attention to the change
in order in this edition. A very little study of the letters themselves
showed that the old order was impossible. The first six fall into a group
by themselves, the 6th being the first to which we gave a nearly
approximate date (July, 1527), before Anne's return to court. Henry's
passion must date therefore from 1526. The 7th is fixed by references in
other correspondence to February, 1528, and the 8th to June before she
left the court. The 9th, 10th and 11th relate to the sweating sickness
(end of June, order fixed by incidental references), and the 12th is after
July 5th; the 13th and 14th are before her return. The reference to his
book in No. 15 fixes the date as August, and No. 16 is fixed for August
20th, by Wolsey's finding a lodging for Anne. No. 17 is fixed for
September (16th?) by Campeggio's arrival at Paris (September 14, 1528),
and No. 18 by his illness as towards the end of October. The scheme had
been partly worked out when the editor observed that Mr. Brewer had
already arranged them in his Calendar of State Papers, and to him
therefore this order is due.

The old arrangement was 4, 6, 10, 1, 5, 17, 16, 2, 11, 3, 13, 9, 12, 7,
14, 15, 18, 8.

_Page_ x. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written July, 1527. "Aut illic, aut
nullibi." Either there, or nowhere.

The signature means "H. seeks no other (heart). R."

xiii. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ This letter was written in July, 1527.

xvi. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written February, 1528. "Ultra posse non
est esse." One can't do more than the possible.

xviii. _Anne Boleyn to Cardinal Wolsey._ MS. _Cott. Vitellius_, B. xii. f.
4. Written June 11, 1528. Printed by Ellis as from Katherine of Arragon.
There is another letter from Anne to Wolsey, thanking him for a present.
It is very similar to this, and is found in MS. _Cott. Otho._ c. x. f. 218
(printed in _Burnet_, i, 104, and in _Ellis_, Original Letters, vol. i).

xxii. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written June 16, 1528.

xxv. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ This letter was written June 20. "It."
The sweating sickness. This is the 1528 epidemic.

"Your brother." George Boleyn, afterwards Viscount Rochford, executed 1536
on a charge of incest.

xxviii. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written about June 22, 1528. "Welze"
is the same person as "Welshe" on p. xxx.

xxx. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written July 6 (?), 1528. "Suche" is
probably Zouch.

"Destain." Stain.

xxxiv. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written July 20, 1528.

xxxvii. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written July 21, 1528.

xxxix. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written August, 1528. "Elengeness."
Loneliness, misery.

"My book." On the unlawfulness of his marriage with Katherine.

xli. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written August 20, 1528.

xliii. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written September 16, 1528. Campeggio
actually arrived at Calais on Monday, September 14.

xlv. _Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn._ Written at the end of October, 1528.




Transcriber's Note:

The original text contains decorative illustrations that are not
represented in this text file.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LOVE LETTERS OF HENRY VIII TO ANNE BOLEYN; WITH NOTES ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

