Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Superscripted characters are marked by a ^carat.

3. Corrections to minor spelling, punctuation, or other errors in the
original text appear in a detailed list at the end of this e-text.

4. Notations of inconsistencies in the original text, specifically the
Appendix, Footnotes and Index, which have been retained, appear at the
end of this e-text.

5. In the chapter "NOTES ON CHAPTERS", Footnotes without anchor points
have been marked with a question mark, (ex: ?[5-3]).




  _The Planters of Colonial Virginia_




  _The_ PLANTERS OF COLONIAL VIRGINIA

       By THOMAS J. WERTENBAKER


            [Illustration]


             _New York_
         RUSSELL & RUSSELL
               1959


COPYRIGHT 1922 BY PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS

COPYRIGHT 1958, 1959 BY THOMAS J. WERTENBAKER

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER 59-11228

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




PREFACE


America since the days of Captain John Smith has been the land of hope
for multitudes in Europe. In many an humble home, perhaps in some
English village, or an Ulster farm, or in the Rhine valley, one might
find a family assembled for the reading of a letter from son, or
brother, or friend, who had made the great venture of going to the New
World. "Land is abundant here and cheap," the letter would state. "Wages
are high, food is plentiful, farmers live better than lords. If one will
work only five days a week one can live grandly."

In pamphlets intended to encourage immigration the opportunities for
advancement were set forth in glowing colors. In Virginia alone, it was
stated, in 1649, there were "of kine, oxen, bulls, calves, twenty
thousand, large and good." When the traveller Welby came to America he
was surprised to "see no misery, no disgusting army of paupers, not even
beggars;" while Henry B. Fearson noted that laborers were "more erect in
their posture, less careworn in their countenances" than those of
Europe.

In Virginia, as in other colonies, it was the cheapness of land and the
dearness of labor which gave the newcomer his chance to rise. The rich
man might possess many thousands of acres, but they would profit him
nothing unless he could find the labor to put them under cultivation.
Indentured workers met his needs in part, but they were expensive, hard
to acquire, and served for only four years. If he hired freemen he
would have to pay wages which in England would have seemed fantastic.

Thus the so-called servants who had completed their terms and men who
had come over as freemen found it easy to earn enough to buy small
plantations of their own. That thousands did so is shown by the Rent
Roll which is published as an appendix to this book. One has only to
glance at it to see that the large plantations are vastly outnumbered by
the small farms of the yeomen. It proves that Virginia at the beginning
of the eighteenth century was not the land of huge estates, worked by
servants and slaves, but of a numerous, prosperous middle class.

Owning plantations of from fifty to five hundred acres, cultivating
their fields of tobacco, their patches of Indian corn and wheat, their
vegetable gardens and orchards with their own labor or the labor of
their sons, the yeomen enjoyed a sense of independence and dignity. It
was their votes which determined the character of the Assembly, it was
they who resisted most strongly all assaults upon the liberties of the
people.

As the small farmer, after the day's work was over, sat before his
cottage smoking his long clay pipe, he could reflect that for him the
country had fulfilled its promise. The land around him was his own; his
tobacco brought in enough for him to purchase clothes, farm implements,
and household goods.

But he frowned as he thought of the slave ship which had come into the
nearby river, and landed a group of Negroes who were all bought by his
wealthy neighbors. If Virginia were flooded with slaves, would it not
cheapen production and lower the price of tobacco? Could he and his
sons, when they hoed their fields with their own hands, compete with
slave labor?

The event fully justified these fears. The yeoman class in Virginia was
doomed. In the face of the oncoming tide they had three alternatives--to
save enough money to buy a slave or two, to leave the country, or to
sink into poverty.

It was the acquiring of a few slaves by the small planter which saved
the middle class. Before the end of the colonial period a full fifty per
cent. of the slaveholders had from one to five only. Seventy-five per
cent. had less than ten. The small farmer, as he led his newly acquired
slaves from the auction block to his plantation may have regretted that
self-preservation had forced him to depend on their labor rather than
his own. But he could see all around him the fate of those who had no
slaves, as they became "poor white trash." And he must have looked on
with pity as a neighbor gathered up his meager belongings and, deserting
his little plantation, set out for the remote frontier.

It was one of the great crimes of history, this undermining of the
yeoman class by the importation of slaves. The wrong done to the Negro
himself has been universally condemned; the wrong done the white man has
attracted less attention. It effectively deprived him of his American
birthright--the high return for his labor. It transformed Virginia and
the South from a land of hard working, self-respecting, independent
yeomen, to a land of slaves and slaveholders.

  _Princeton, New Jersey_              THOMAS J. WERTENBAKER
     _August, 1957_




  CONTENTS


  CHAPTER    I: ENGLAND IN THE NEW WORLD               7

  CHAPTER   II: THE INDIAN WEED                       21

  CHAPTER  III: THE VIRGINIA YEOMANRY                 38

  CHAPTER   IV: FREEMEN AND FREEDMEN                  60

  CHAPTER    V: THE RESTORATION PERIOD                84

  CHAPTER   VI: THE YEOMAN IN VIRGINIA HISTORY       101

  CHAPTER  VII: WORLD TRADE                          115

  CHAPTER VIII: BENEATH THE BLACK TIDE               134

  NOTES TO CHAPTERS                                  162

  APPENDIX                                           181

  INDEX                                              249




_CHAPTER I_

ENGLAND IN THE NEW WORLD


At the beginning of the Seventeenth century colonial expansion had
become for England an economic necessity. Because of the depletion of
her forests, which constituted perhaps the most important of her natural
resources, she could no longer look for prosperity from the old
industries that for centuries had been her mainstay. In the days when
the Norman conquerors first set foot upon English soil the virgin woods,
broken occasionally by fields and villages, had stretched in dense
formation from the Scottish border to Sussex and Devonshire. But with
the passage of five centuries a great change had been wrought. The
growing population, the expansion of agriculture, the increasing use of
wood for fuel, for shipbuilding, and for the construction of houses, had
by the end of the Tudor period so denuded the forests that they no
longer sufficed for the most pressing needs of the country.

Even at the present day it is universally recognized that a certain
proportion of wooded land is essential to the prosperity and
productivity of any country. And whenever this is lacking, not only do
the building, furniture, paper and other industries suffer, but the
rainfall proves insufficient, spring floods are frequent and the
fertility of the soil is impaired by washing. These misfortunes are
slight, however, compared with the disastrous results of the gradual
thinning out of the forests of Elizabethan England. The woods were
necessary for three all-important industries, the industries upon
which the prosperity and wealth of the nation were largely
dependent--shipbuilding, for which were needed timber, masts, pitch,
tar, resin; the manufacture of woolens, calling for a large supply of
potash; smelting of all kinds, since three hundred years ago wood and
not coal was the fuel used in the furnaces. It was with the deepest
apprehension, then, that thoughtful Englishmen watched the gradual
reduction of the forest areas, for it seemed to betoken for their
country a period of declining prosperity and economic decay. "When
therefore our mils of Iron and excesse of building have already turned
our greatest woods into pasture and champion within these few years,"
says a writer of this period, "neither the scattered forests of England,
nor the diminished groves of Ireland will supply the defect of our
navy."[1-1]

From this intolerable situation England sought relief through foreign
commerce. If she could no longer smelt her own iron, if she could not
produce ship-stores or burn her own wood ashes, these things might be
procured from countries where the forests were still extensive,
countries such as those bordering the Baltic--Germany, Poland, Russia,
Sweden. And so the vessels of the Muscovy Company in the second half of
the Sixteenth century passed through the Cattegat in large numbers to
make their appearance at Reval and Libau and Danzig, seeking there the
raw materials so vitally necessary to England. "Muscovia and Polina doe
yeerly receive many thousands for Pitch, Tarre, Sope Ashes, Rosen, Flax,
Cordage, Sturgeon, Masts, Yards, Wainscot, Firres, Glasse, and such
like," wrote Captain John Smith, "also Swethland for Iron and
Copper."[1-2]

But this solution of her problem was obviously unsatisfactory to
England. The northern voyage was long, dangerous and costly; the King of
Denmark, who controlled the entrance to the Baltic, had it within his
power at any moment to exclude the English traders; the Muscovy company
no longer enjoyed exemption from customs in Prussia, Denmark and Russia.
In case war should break out among the northern nations this trade might
for a time be cut off entirely, resulting in strangulation for England's
basic industries. "The merchant knoweth," said the author of _A True
Declaration_, "that through the troubles in Poland & Muscovy, (whose
eternall warres are like the Antipathy of the Dragon & Elephant) all
their traffique for Masts, Deales, Pitch, Tarre, Flax, Hempe, and
Cordage, are every day more and more indangered."[1-3] Moreover, the
trade was much impeded by the ice which for several months each year
choked some of the northern ports.

The most alarming aspect of this unfortunate situation was the effect of
the shortage of shipbuilding material upon the merchant marine. Situated
as it was upon an island, England enjoyed communication with the nations
of the world only by means of the ocean pathways. Whatever goods came to
her doors, whatever goods of her own manufacture she sent to foreign
markets, could be transported only by sea. It was a matter of vital
import to her, then, to build up and maintain a fleet of merchant
vessels second to none. But this was obviously difficult if not
impossible when "the furniture of shipping" such as "Masts, Cordage,
Pitch, Tar, Rossen" were not produced in quantity by England itself, and
could be had "only by the favor of forraigne potency."[1-4] Already, it
was stated, the decay of shipping was manifest, while large numbers of
able mariners were forced to seek employment in other countries. "You
know how many men for want of imploiment, betake themselves to Tunis,
Spaine and Florence," declared one observer, "and to serve in courses
not warrantable, which would better beseeme our own walles and borders
to bee spread with such branches, that their native countrey and not
forreine Princes might reape their fruit, as being both exquisite
Navigators, and resolute men for service, as any the world affords."[1-5]

It must be remembered that the merchant vessel three hundred years ago
constituted an important part of the nation's sea defence. The fleet
which met the mighty Spanish Armada in the Channel and inflicted upon it
so decisive a defeat, was made up in large part of volunteer ships from
every English port. And the Britisher knew full well that the merchant
marine constituted the "wooden walls" of his country, knew that its
decay would leave England almost defenseless. At the moment when one
able writer was pointing out that "the Realme of England is an Island
impossible to be otherwise fortified than by stronge shippes," another
was complaining that there were scarce two vessels of 100 tons belonging
to the whole city of Bristol, and few or none along the Severn from
Gloucester to Land's End on one side, and to Milford Haven on the
other.[1-6]

For this intolerable situation there could be but one remedy--England
must secure colonial possessions to supply her with the products for
which her forests were no longer sufficient. Her bold navigators had
already crossed the Atlantic, returning with alluring stories of the
limitless resources of the New World, of mighty forests spreading in
unbroken array for hundreds of miles along the coast and back into the
interior as far as the eye could see.[1-7] Why, it was asked, should
Englishmen be forced to make the hazardous journey to the Baltic in
order to procure from other nations what they might easily have for
themselves by taking possession of some of the limitless unoccupied
areas of America? It was folly to remain in economic bondage while the
road to independence stretched so invitingly before them.

Long before the Goodspeed, the Discovery and the Sarah Constant turned
their prows into the waters of the James, able English writers were
urging upon the nation the absolute necessity for colonial expansion. In
1584 the farseeing Hakluyt pointed out that the recent voyage of Sir
Humphrey Gilbert had proved that "pitche, tarr, rosen, sope ashes" could
be produced in America in great plenty, "yea, as it is thought, ynoughe
to serve the whole realme."[1-8] Captain Christopher Carleill had the
previous year made an effort to persuade the Muscovy Company to divert
its energies toward America. Why remain under the power of the King of
Denmark, he asked, or other princes who "command our shippes at their
pleasure," when all the products of the Baltic regions were to be had
from unoccupied territories which so easily could be placed under the
English flag?

It has often been taken for granted that the statesmen and merchants of
three centuries ago pursued always a mistaken and shortsighted economic
policy. John Fiske assures us that even at the close of the Eighteenth
century the barbarous superstitions of the Middle Ages concerning trade
between nations still flourished with scarcely diminished vitality. Yet
it requires but a cursory study of the theories and arguments of the
Elizabethan economists to realize that they were men of ability and
vision, that they knew what was needed and how to procure it, that they
were nearer right than many have supposed. In fact, they acted upon
sound economic principles a century and a half before Adam Smith
formulated and expounded them.

These men realized keenly that England's safety demanded a larger
measure of economic independence and they pointed out what seemed to be
the only available means of securing it. Since her forests upon which
her prosperity in the past had been so largely based, were nearing the
point of exhaustion, she must expand to embrace new lands where the
virgin growth of trees stood untouched. If this is barbarous, then the
recent efforts of Italy to gain an independent coal supply, of Great
Britain to get control of various oil fields, of the United States to
build up a dye industry, are all likewise barbarous. In fact the world
today in matters of economic policy has by no means gotten away from the
conceptions of the men whose able writings cleared the way for the
beginning of the British colonial empire.

But it must not be supposed that England in this matter was concerned
only for her supply of naval stores, potash and pig iron. There were
other products, not so vital it is true, but still important, which she
was forced to seek abroad. From the south of Europe came salt, sugar,
wine, silk, fruits; from the Far East saltpetre and dyes, together with
spices for making palatable the winter's stock of food; from Holland
came fish, from France wine and silk. And as in the Baltic, so elsewhere
the merchants of London and Bristol and Plymouth found their activities
resented and their efforts blocked and thwarted.

All commerce with the dominions of the King of Spain was carried on with
the greatest difficulty. "Our necessitie of oiles and colours for our
clothinge trade being so greate," pointed out Hakluyt, "he may arreste
almoste the one halfe of our navye, our traficque and recourse beinge so
greate in his dominions." The rich trade with the Far East was seriously
hampered by the Turks, through whose territories it had to pass, and
often a heavy tribute was laid upon it by the Sultan and his minions.
Even after the merchants had succeeded in lading their vessels in the
eastern Mediterranean with goods from the Orient, they still had to run
the gauntlet of the hostile Powers who infested that sea. If they
escaped the Knights of Malta, they might be captured by the corsairs of
Algeria or Tripoli.

The trade with France had also declined greatly during the closing years
of the Sixteenth century. Not only had the religious wars proved a
tremendous obstacle, but the government at Paris discriminated against
the woolens from England by means of custom duties, while the French
workmen were themselves manufacturing cloth of excellent quality in
larger amounts than had hitherto been thought possible. In the Low
Countries the long and bitter struggle of the people against the bloody
bands of Alva had wrought such destruction and had so ruined industry
that all foreign commerce had greatly declined.[1-9]

There can be no surprise, then, that many English economists felt that a
crisis had been reached, that nothing save the immediate establishment
of colonies would prevent disaster. With the woolen industry declining,
with the shipbuilding centres almost idle, with able mariners deserting
the service, with the foreign market gradually closing to English wares,
with the country overrun with idle and starving laborers, with some of
her chief natural resources nearly exhausted and the trade by which her
needs were replenished in constant danger, England turned to America as
her hope for salvation. Upon securing a foothold in the New World,
hitherto monopolized by Spain and Portugal, depended Albion's future
greatness and prosperity.

It is this which gave to the London Company its national character, and
made its efforts to establish a colony across the Atlantic a crusade, a
movement in which every Englishman was vitally concerned. The great
lords and wealthy merchants who comprised the Company knew well enough
that there was little hope of immediate returns upon the money they
subscribed so liberally. They expected to receive their reward in
another way, in the revival of English industrial life and the
restoration of English economic independence. It is a singular
perversion of history, an inaccurate interpretation of men and events,
which for so many years beclouded our conception of the beginning of the
British colonial empire. The settlement at Jamestown was not the product
of a selfish, private venture, but the fruition of long years of thought
and endeavor, long years of pleading with the English public, of the
conscious and deliberate efforts of the nation to expand to the New
World, to break the bonds of economic dependence and to restore to
England the place in the world which rightfully was hers.

In addition to, but closely associated with, the economic causes of
Anglo-Saxon expansion was the realization in England of the need for
prompt action in putting a limit to the growing domains of the King of
Spain. In the century which had elapsed since Columbus opened a new
world to the peoples of Europe, this monarch had seized the richest part
of the great prize, and was still reaching forward to the north and to
the south. Unless England took advantage of the present opportunity, the
vast American continents might be closed to her forever. Anglo-Saxon
civilization in that case might well remain permanently cooped up in the
little island that had seen its inception, while the Spanish language
and Spanish institutions expanded to embrace the garden spots of the
world.[1-10]

There were still other motives for this great movement. The English felt
the prime necessity of discovering and controlling a new route to the
East, they wished to expand the influence of the Anglican church and
convert the Indians, they hoped to seize and fortify strategic points in
America which would aid them in their struggles with the Spaniards. But
these things, important as they were, paled beside the pressing
necessity of national expansion, of rehabilitating English industrial
life, restoring the merchant marine and securing economic independence.

Thus, when Captain Newport returned in 1607 to report that the colony of
Virginia had been safely launched, many Englishmen were aroused to a
high pitch of hope and expectation. Now at last a province had been
secured which could supply the raw materials which England so greatly
needed. The active supporters of the undertaking were lavish in their
promises. Virginia would yield better and cheaper timber for shipping
than Prussia or Poland, she would furnish potash in abundance, and since
wood could there be had for the cutting, her copper and iron ore could
be smelted on the spot. Wine could be made there, as excellent as that
of the Canaries, they boasted, while it was hoped soon to manufacture
silk rivalling in fineness that of Persia or of Turkey. The waters of
the colony were full of "Sturgion, Caviare and new land fish of the
best," her fields could produce hemp for cordage and flax for linen. As
for pitch, tar, turpentine and boards, there was a certainty of a rich
return.[1-11] In February 1608, the Council of Virginia wrote to the
corporation of Plymouth: "The staple and certain Comodities we have are
Soap-ashes, pitch, tar, dyes of sundry sorts and rich values, timber for
all uses, fishing for sturgeon and divers other sorts ... making of
Glass and Iron, and no improbable hope of richer mines."[1-12]

And no sooner had the infant colony been established than the Company
turned with enthusiasm to the production of these highly desired
commodities. A number of foreigners, Dutchmen and Poles skilled in the
manufacture of ship-stores, were sent over to make a start with pitch,
tar, turpentine and potash. They were to act as instructors, also, and
it was expected that within a few years the Virginia forests would be
filled with workers in these trades. Unfortunately their efforts met
with ill success, and save for a few small samples of pitch and tar
which were sent to England, nothing of value was produced.

For this failure the reason is apparent. All the able economists and
statesmen who had predicted that the colony would become an industrial
center had overlooked one vitally important factor--the lack of cheap
labor. No matter how rich in natural resources, Virginia could not hope
to compete with the long-established industries of Europe and Asia,
because she lacked the abundant population requisite to success. It had
been imagined by Hakluyt and others that the colony could avail herself
of the surplus population of England, could drain off the upper stratum
of the idle and unemployed. What more feasible than to set these men to
work in the forests of the New World to produce the raw materials the
want of which was responsible for unemployment in England itself!

But the voyage across the Atlantic was so long and costly, that it
proved impossible to transport in any reasonable length of time enough
workers to Virginia to supply her needs. And the few thousand that came
over in the early years of the Seventeenth century were in such great
demand that they could secure wages several times higher than those in
vogue throughout Europe. Thus the London Company, from the very outset,
found itself face to face with a difficulty which it could never
surmount. Virginia could not compete with the ship-stores of the Baltic
nations because her labor, when indeed it was found possible to secure
labor at all, was far more expensive than that of Poland or Sweden or
Russia. It mattered not that the Company sent over indentured servants,
bound by their contracts to work for a certain number of years; the
effect was the same. The cost of transportation swallowed up the profits
from the servant's labor, when that labor was expended upon industries
which had to face the competition of the cheap workers of the Old World.

It speaks well for the acumen of Captain John Smith that he seems to
have been the first to grasp clearly this truth. He wrote that the
workingmen had made a beginning of "Pitch and Tarre, Glass, Sope-ashes
and Clapboard," but that little had been accomplished. "If you rightly
consider what an infinite toyle it is in Russia and Swetland, where the
woods are proper for naught else, and though there be the helpe both of
man and beast in those ancient Common-wealths, which many a hundred
years have used it, yet thousands of those poor people can scarce get
necessaries to live ... you must not expect from us any such
matter."[1-13]

The attempt to produce iron in Virginia was pursued even more
vigorously, but with equally poor success. The early settlers, eager to
assure the Company that the venture they had entered upon would soon
yield a rich return, spoke enthusiastically of the numerous indications
of the presence of iron ore. In 1609 Captain Newport brought with him to
England a supply of ore from which sixteen or seventeen tons of metal
were extracted of a quality equal or superior to that obtained from any
European country. The iron was sold to the East India Company at the
rate of £4 a ton.[1-14] Immediately plans were launched for taking
advantage of what seemed to be a splendid opportunity. In the course of
the first three years machinery for smelting and manufacturing iron was
sent over and men were set to work to operate it. But the difficulties
proved too great and ere long the attempt had to be abandoned.

The Company had no idea of relinquishing permanently its quest for
staple commodities, however, and soon a new and far more ambitious
project was set on foot for extracting the ore. The spot selected was at
Falling Creek, in the present county of Chesterfield, a few miles below
the rapids of the James river. George Sandys had noted with satisfaction
some years before that the place was in every respect suited for iron
smelting, for in close proximity to the ore was wood in abundance,
stones for the construction of the furnace and deep water for
transportation. To him it seemed that nature itself had selected the
site and endowed it with every facility which the enterprise could
require.[1-15] Here the London Company spent from £4,000 to £5,000 in a
supreme effort to make their colony answer in some degree the
expectations which had been placed in it. A Captain Blewit, with no less
than 80 men, was sent over to construct the works, upon which, they
declared, were fixed the eyes of "God, Angels and men." But Blewit soon
succumbed to one of the deadly epidemics which yearly swept over the
little colony, and a Mr. John Berkeley, accompanied by 20 experienced
workers, came over to take his place.

At first things seem to have gone well with this ambitious venture. Soon
the Virginia forests were resounding to the whir of the axe and the
crash of falling trees, to the exclamations of scores of busy men as
they extracted the ore, built their furnace and began the work of
smelting. Operations had progressed so far that it was confidently
predicted that soon large quantities of pig iron would be leaving the
James for England, when an unexpected disaster put an abrupt end to the
enterprise. In the terrible massacre of 1622, when the implacable
Opechancanough attempted at one stroke to rid the country of its white
invaders, the little industrial settlement at Falling Creek was
completely destroyed. The furnace was ruined, the machinery thrown into
the river, the workmen butchered. This project, which had absorbed so
much of the attention and resources of the Company, is said to have
yielded only a shovel, a pair of tongs and one bar of iron.[1-16]

The history of the attempts to establish glass works in Virginia is also
a story of wasted energy and money, of final failure. The Dutch and
Polish workers who came in 1608 set up a furnace at Jamestown,[1-17] but
nothing more is heard of them, and it is clear that they met with no
success. Nor did Captain William Norton, who arrived in 1621 with a
number of skilled Italian glass workers fare any better.[1-18] In 1623
George Sandys wrote: "Capt. Norton dyed with all save one of his
servants, the Italians fell extremely sick yet recovered; but I conceave
they would gladly make the work to appear unfeasable, that they might by
that means be dismissed for England. The fier hath now been for six
weeks in ye furnace and yet nothing effected. They claim that the sand
will not run." Shortly after this the workmen brought matters to an end
by cracking the furnace with a crowbar.[1-19]

Thus ended in complete failure the efforts of England to reap what she
considered the legitimate fruits of this great enterprise. The day of
which her farseeing publicists had dreamed had arrived; she had at last
challenged the right of Spain to all North America, her sons were
actually settled on the banks of the James, a beginning had been made in
the work of building a colonial empire. But the hope which had so fired
the mind of Hakluyt, the hope of attaining through Virginia British
economic independence, was destined never to be fulfilled. However
lavishly nature had endowed the colony with natural resources, however
dense her forests, however rich her mines, however wide and deep her
waterways, she could not become an industrial community. Fate had
decreed for her another destiny. But England was reluctant to accept the
inevitable in this matter. Long years after Sir Edwin Sandys and his
fellow workers of the London Company had passed to their rest, we find
the royal ministers urging upon the colony the necessity of producing
pig iron and silk and potash, and promising every possible encouragement
in the work. But the causes which operated to bring failure in 1610 or
1620 prevented success in 1660 and 1680. Virginia had not the abundant
supply of labor essential to the development of an industrial community
and for many decades, perhaps for centuries, could not hope to attain
it. Her future lay in the discovery and exploitation of one staple
commodity for which she was so preëminently adapted that she could, even
with her costly labor, meet the competition of other lands. The future
history of Virginia was to be built up around the Indian plant tobacco.




_CHAPTER II_

THE INDIAN WEED


History is baffling in its complexity. The human mind instinctively
strives for simplicity, endeavors to reproduce all things to set rules,
to discover the basic principles upon which all action is based. And in
various lines of research much success has attended these efforts. We
know the laws underlying the movements of the planets, of various
chemical reactions, of plant and animal life. It is inevitable, then,
that attempts should be made to accomplish similar results in history,
to master the vast multitude of facts which crowd its pages, many of
them seemingly unrelated, and show that after all they obey certain
fundamental laws. Despite the vaunted freedom of the human will, it is
maintained, mankind like the planets or the chemical agents, cannot
escape the operation of definite forces to which it is subjected. And if
these forces are studied and understood, to some extent at least, the
course of future events may be predicted.

Thus it may be accepted as practically established that in any country
and with any people a condition of continued disorder and anarchy must
be succeeded by one of despotism. History records, we believe, no
exception to this rule, while there are many instances which tend to
confirm it. The absolute rule of the Caesars followed the anarchy of the
later Roman republic, the Oliverian Protectorate succeeded the British
civil wars, the first French Empire the Reign of Terror, the Bolshevik
despotism the collapse of the old regime in Russia. Such will always be
the case, we are told, because mankind turns instinctively to any form
of government in quest of protection from anarchy, and the easiest form
of government to establish and operate is despotism.

Not content with generalizations of this kind, however, certain
historians have undertaken to reduce all human action to some one great
fundamental principle. The Freudian view emphasizes the influence of
sex; Buckle maintains that the effect of climate is all-powerful. In
recent years many students, while not agreeing that the solution of the
problem is quite so simple, yet believe that underlying all social
development will be found economic forces of one kind or another, that
in commerce and industry and agriculture lies the key to every event of
moment in the history of mankind. Often these forces have been obscured
and misunderstood, but close study will always reveal them. It is folly
to waste time, they say, as writers have so long done, in setting forth
the adventures of this great man or that, in dwelling upon the details
of political struggles or recounting the horrors of war. All these are
but surface indications of the deeper movements underneath, movements in
every case brought about by economic developments.

But this interpretation of history is by no means universally accepted.
While admitting readily that the conditions surrounding the production
and exchange of useful commodities have affected profoundly the course
of events, many historians deny that they give the key to every
important movement. We must study also the progress of human thought, of
religion, of politics, or our conception of history will be warped and
imperfect. How is it possible to explain the French religious wars of
the Sixteenth century by the theory of economic causes? In what way does
it account for the rebellion of Virginia and North Carolina and Maryland
against the British government in 1775? How can one deny that the
assassination of Abraham Lincoln affected profoundly the course of
American history?

These efforts to simplify the meaning of human events have often led to
error, have stressed certain events too strongly, have minimized others.
The complexity of history is self-evident; we must for the present at
least content ourselves with complex interpretations of it. If there be
any great underlying principles which explain all, they have yet to be
discovered.

Thus it would be folly in the study of colonial Virginia to blind
ourselves to the importance of various non-economic factors, the love of
freedom which the settlers brought with them from England, their
affection for the mother country, the influence of the Anglican church.
Yet it is obvious that we cannot understand the colony, its social
structure, its history, its development unless we have a clear insight
into the economic forces which operated upon it. These Englishmen,
finding themselves in a new country, surrounded by conditions
fundamentally different from those to which they had been accustomed,
worked out a new and unique society, were themselves moulded into
something different.

And in colonial Virginia history there is a key, which though it may not
explain all, opens the door to much that is fundamental. This key is
tobacco. The old saying that the story of Virginia is but the story of
tobacco is by no means a gross exaggeration. It was this Indian plant,
so despised by many of the best and ablest men of the time, which
determined the character of the life of the colony and shaped its
destinies for two and a half centuries. Tobacco was the chief factor in
bringing final and complete failure to the attempts to produce useful
raw materials, it was largely instrumental in moulding the social
classes and the political structure of the colony, it was almost
entirely responsible for the system of labor, it even exerted a powerful
influence upon religion and morals. In a word, one can understand almost
nothing of Virginia, its infancy, its development, its days of
misfortune, its era of prosperity, its peculiar civilization, the nature
of its relations to England, unless one knows the history of tobacco.

As though they had a prophetic vision of its future importance, the
Virginia Indians revered the plant. To them it was an especial gift
direct from the Great Spirit, and as such was endowed with unusual
properties for doing good. When the fields of maize were dried and
parched for lack of rain they powdered the tobacco and cast it to the
winds that the evil genii might be propitiated; their priests on great
occasions fed it to the sacrificial fires; when the usual catch of fish
failed it was scattered over the water.[2-1] Smoking was considered a
token of friendship and peace. When the white men first visited the
native villages they soon found that to reject the proffered pipe was to
offend their savage hosts and incur their hostility.

It was John Rolfe, celebrated as the husband of Pocahontas, who first
experimented with the native leaf. This gentleman was himself fond of
smoking, but he found the Virginia tobacco as it came from the hands of
the savages, decidedly inferior to that of the West Indies. The leaf
itself was small, and although the flavor was weak it was biting to the
tongue.[2-2] Rolfe's efforts proved entirely successful. In 1614, two
years after his first attempt, he had obtained a product which Ralph
Hamor declared to be as "strong, sweet and pleasant as any under the
sun."[2-3]

Thus, early in its history, Virginia had found a commodity for which she
was preëminently suited, in the production of which she could compete
successfully with any country in the world. And for her tobacco she had
a ready market. During the reign of Queen Elizabeth the habit of smoking
had spread rapidly among the upper classes of English, until at the end
of the sixteenth century, it was almost universal. When James I
ascended the throne, although feeling a strong aversion to tobacco, he
was forced to take up its use in order not to appear conspicuous among
his courtiers, for the dictates of custom seem to have been as strong
three hundred years ago as at present.[2-4] At the time that Rolfe was
making his experiments England was spending yearly for the Spanish
product many thousands of pounds.

It is not surprising, then, that the colonists turned eagerly to tobacco
culture. The news that Rolfe's little crop had been pronounced in
England to be of excellent quality spread rapidly from settlement to
settlement, bringing with it new hope and determination. Immediately
tobacco absorbed the thoughts of all, became the one topic of
conversation, and every available patch of land was seized upon for its
cultivation. The fortified areas within the palisades were crowded with
tobacco plants, while even the streets of Jamestown were utilized by the
eager planters.[2-5] In 1617 the George set sail for England laden with
20,000 pounds of Virginia leaf, the first of the vast fleet of tobacco
ships which for centuries were to pass through the capes of the
Chesapeake bound for Europe.[2-6] By 1627, the tobacco exports amounted
to no less than half a million pounds.[2-7]

The London Company, together with the host of patriotic Englishmen who
had placed such great hopes in the colony, were much disappointed at
this unexpected turn of events. They had sought in the New World those
"solid commodities" which they realized were fundamental to the
prosperity of their country, commodities upon which English industrial
life was founded. And they had found only the Indian weed--tobacco. This
plant not only contributed nothing to the wealth of the kingdom, it was
felt, but was positively injurious to those who indulged in its use.
Surely, declared one writer, men "grow mad and crazed in the brain in
that they would adventure to suck the smoke of a weed." James I thought
there could be no baser and more harmful corruption, while Charles I
expressed himself with equal emphasis. So late as 1631 the latter
protested against the growing use of tobacco, which he termed "an evil
habit of late tymes."[2-8]

Yet England soon learned to welcome the colonial tobacco as far better
than no product at all. Hitherto the leaf in use had been raised in the
Spanish colonies, and England's annual tobacco bill was becoming larger
and larger. It seemed calamitous that British industry should be drained
of good and useful commodities in exchange for a plant the consumption
of which was harmful rather than beneficial. It was at least some
satisfaction to know, then, that England could substitute for the
Spanish leaf the growth of their own colonies. Apparently it was only
later, however, that there came a full realization of the opportunity
afforded for enriching England and building up her merchant marine by
exporting tobacco to foreign countries. For the present they accepted
this one product of their experiment in colonial expansion, reluctantly
and with keen disappointment, as the best that could be obtained.

Yet it was obvious to the London Company that tobacco held out the only
prospect, not only of securing a profit from their venture, but of
bringing to Virginia some measure of prosperity. The first consignment
of leaf which came from the colony sold for no less than 5s. 3d. a
pound, a price which promised a rich return to the planters on the James
and their backers in England.[2-9] And they much preferred to have a
prosperous colony, even when prosperity was founded on tobacco, than a
weak, impoverished settlement, which would be a drain upon their
personal resources and of no value to the nation. Thus they accepted the
inevitable, gave what encouragement they could to the new product, and
sought to use it as a means for building up the British empire in
America. When once England had established herself firmly in the New
World, it would be time enough to return to the attempt to secure from
the colony ship-stores, potash, iron and silk.

With the overthrow of the Company, however, the Crown made repeated
efforts to direct the energies of Virginia away from the all-absorbing
cultivation of tobacco. In 1636 Charles I wrote to the Governor and
Council bidding them moderate the excessive quantities of the plant laid
out each year and to endeavor to produce some other staple
commodities.[2-10] "The King cannot but take notice," he reiterated the
next year, "how little that colony hath advanced in Staple commodities
fit for their own subsistence and clothing," and he warned the planters
to emulate the Barbados and Caribee Islands, where a beginning had been
made in cotton, wool and other useful things.[2-11] But the colonists
paid no heed to these repeated warnings. The King's commands were no
more effective in establishing new industries than had been the first
attempts of the Company. Virginia was not prepared to compete with the
workers of Europe in their own chosen fields, and persisted, had to
persist, in the production of the one commodity for which she possessed
unsurpassed natural advantages.

It is remarkable how universally the plant was cultivated by all classes
of Virginians throughout the colonial period. It was difficult to find
skilled artisans in any line of work, since those who had pursued in
England the various trades usually deserted them, when they landed in
the colony, in order to turn to the raising of tobacco. And the few who
continued to pursue their old vocations usually rented or purchased a
small tract of land and devoted a part of their time to its cultivation.
Blacksmiths, carpenters, shipwrights, coopers all raised their little
tobacco crop and sold it to the British merchants,[2-12] while even the
poor minister sought to make ends meet by planting his glebe with
Orinoco or Sweetscented. The Governor himself was not free from the
all-prevailing custom, and frequently was the possessor of a farm where
his servants and slaves, like those of other gentlemen in the colony,
were kept busy tending the tobacco crop.

It is doubtful whether the members of the London Company, even Sir Edwin
Sandys himself, ever attempted to visualize the social structure which
would develop in the Virginia they were planning. If so, they
unquestionably pictured a state of affairs very different from that
which the future held in store. They took it for granted that Virginia
would to a large extent be a duplicate of England. In the forests of the
New World would grow up towns and villages, centers of industry and
centers of trade. The population would be divided into various
classes--well-to-do proprietors boasting of the title of gentleman;
professional men, lawyers, physicians, ministers; skilled artisans of
all kinds; day laborers.

We catch a glimpse of the Virginia of their minds from a Broadside
issued in 1610, appealing for volunteers for service in the
colony.[2-13] We can see the shipwrights at work in the busy yards of
thriving ports; the smelters caring for their iron and copper furnaces;
the "minerall-men" digging out the ore; saltmakers evaporating the
brackish waters for their useful product; vine-dressers tending their
abundant crops of grapes and coopers turning out the hogsheads in which
to store the wine which came from the presses; bricklayers and
carpenters fashioning substantial houses; fishermen bringing in the
plentiful yield of the day and dressers preparing the fish for foreign
shipment; joiners, smiths, gardeners, bakers, gun-founders,
ploughwrights, brewers, sawyers, fowlers, each plying his trade in the
New Brittania.

But how different was the reality. Virginia became, not an industrial,
but a distinctly agricultural community. For more than a century it
could boast not a single town worthy of the name.[2-14] It was but a
series of plantations, not large in extent, but stretching out for miles
along the banks of the rivers and creeks, all devoted to the raising of
tobacco. The population of the colony was but the aggregate of the
population of the plantation--the owner, the wage earners, the
indentured servant, a few slaves. Virginia in the Seventeenth century,
despite the design of its founders, developed a life of its own, a life
not only unlike that of England, but unique and distinct.

Immigration, like everything else in the colony, was shaped by the needs
of tobacco. For its successful production the plant does not require
skilled labor or intensive cultivation. The barbarous natives of Africa,
who later in the century were imported in such large numbers, eventually
proved quite adequate to the task. But it does require the service of
many hands. For decades after Rolfe's discovery had opened a new vista
of prosperity for Virginia, fertile land was so cheap that a person even
of moderate means might readily purchase an extensive plantation,[2-15]
but it would be of little service to him unless he could find hands for
clearing away the forests, breaking the soil, tending and curing the
plants.

Of the three requirements of production--natural resources, capital and
labor--the fertile soil furnished the first in abundance, the second
could readily be secured, but the last remained for a full century the
one great problem of the planters. From the days of Sir George Yeardley
to those of Nicholson and Andros there was a persistent and eager demand
for workers. Of this there can be no better evidence than the remarkably
high wages which prevailed in the colony, especially in the years prior
to the Restoration. In fact, it is probable that the laborer received
for his services four or five times the amount he could earn in
England. Even during the time of the London Company we find George
Sandys writing to a friend in London to procure indentured servants for
the colony as the wages demanded were intolerable. A day's work brought,
in addition to food, a pound of tobacco valued at one shilling, while in
England the unskilled worker considered himself fortunate if he could
earn so much in a week.[2-16]

In his efforts to solve this acute problem the planter found little hope
in the aborigines. The Spaniards, it is true, had made use of the
Indians to till their fields or work in the gold and silver mines, but
the Pamunkey and the Powhatan were cast in a different mold from the
Aztec and the Peruvian. To hunt them out of their native lairs and bind
them to arduous and ignominious servitude was hardly to be thought of.
Their spirit was too proud to be thus broken, the safe refuge of the
woods too near at hand. One might as well have attempted to hitch lions
and tigers to the plough shaft, as to place these wild children of the
forest at the handles. At times it proved practicable to make use of
Indian children for servants, and there are numerous instances on record
in which they are found in the homes of the planters.[2-17] But this, of
course, could be of little service in solving the pressing labor
problem, in clearing new ground or tilling the idle fields. The Virginia
landowner was forced to turn elsewhere for his helpers.

In 1619 a Dutch privateer put into the James river and disembarked
twenty Africans who were sold to the settlers as slaves. This event, so
full of evil portent for the future of Virginia, might well have
afforded a natural and satisfactory solution of the labor problem.
Slaves had long been used in the Spanish colonies, proving quite
competent to do the work of tending the tobacco plants, and bringing
handsome returns to their masters. But it was impossible at this time
for England to supply her plantations with this type of labor. The
slave trade was in the hands of the Dutch, who had fortified themselves
on the African coast and jealously excluded other nations. Thus while
the demand for negro slaves remained active in the colony, they
increased in numbers very slowly. The muster of 1624-25 shows only
22.[2-18] During the following half century there was a small influx of
negroes, but their numbers were still too small to affect seriously the
economic life of the colony.[2-19]

The settlers were thus forced to look to England itself to supply them
with hands for their tobacco fields. They knew that in the mother
country were many thousands of indigent persons who would welcome an
opportunity to better their lot by migrating to the New World. And the
English statesmen, feeling that there was need for blood letting,
welcomed an opportunity to divert the surplus population to the new
colony in America.[2-20] The decline in English foreign trade and the
stagnation of home industry had brought unemployment and suffering to
every class of workers. Wages were so low that the most industrious
could not maintain themselves in comfort, while to provide against want
in case of sickness or old age was hardly to be thought of. Every
parish, every town swarmed with persons stricken with abject poverty. In
some parts of the country no less than 30 per cent of the population
were dependent in part upon charity for their daily bread, while many
were driven into vagabondage and crime, becoming an element of danger
rather than of strength to the nation.[2-21] It seemed to the planters
that the mother country constituted an abundant reservoir of labor, a
reservoir already overflowing and capable of supplying indefinitely
their every need.

The only drawback was the long and expensive voyage across the Atlantic.
The fare, even for the poorest and most crowded accommodations, was no
less than six pounds sterling, a sum far beyond the means of the
thriftiest laborer.[2-22] Obviously some scheme had to be evolved to
overcome this difficulty before Virginia could make use of English
labor. And so the planters turned to the simple expedient of advancing
the passage money to the immigrant and of placing him under strict legal
bonds to work it out after reaching the colony.

This system, around which the economic life of Virginia centered for a
full century, proved satisfactory to all concerned. The credit advanced
to the immigrant made it possible for him to earn his ocean fare, not in
England where labor was cheap, but in America where it was dear. In
other words, he was enabled without delay to enjoy the full benefits of
selling his services in the best market. The necessity for placing him
under a stringent contract or indenture is evident. Had this not been
done the immigrant, upon finding himself in Virginia, might have refused
to carry out his part of the bargain. But the indenture was in no sense
a mark of servitude or slavery. It simply made it obligatory for the
newcomer, under pain of severe penalties, to work out his passage money,
and until that was accomplished to surrender a part of the personal
liberty so dear to every Englishman.

It is erroneous to suppose that most of the servants were degenerates or
criminals. It is true that the English Government from time to time
sought to lessen the expense of providing for convicted felons by
sending some of them to the colonies, among them on rare occasions a few
decidedly objectionable characters. More than once the Virginians
protested vigorously against this policy as dangerous to the peace and
prosperity of the colony.[2-23] By far the larger part of these penal
immigrants, however, were but harmless paupers, driven perhaps to theft
or some other petty offense by cold and hunger. Often they were
sentenced to deportation by merciful judges in order that they might
not feel the full weight of the harsh laws of that day.[2-24]

And of the small number of real criminals who came in, few indeed made
any lasting imprint upon the social fabric of the colony. Many served
for life and so had no opportunity of marrying and rearing families to
perpetuate their degenerate traits. Those who escaped fled from the
confines of settled Virginia to the mountains or to the backwoods of
North Carolina. Many others succumbed to the epidemics which proved so
deadly to the newcomers from England. In fact the criminal servant was
but a passing incident in the life and development of England's greatest
and most promising colony.[2-25]

An appreciable proportion of the so-called criminal laborers were no
more than political prisoners taken in the rebellions of the Seventeenth
century. These men frequently represented the sturdiest and most
patriotic elements in the kingdom and were a source of strength rather
than of weakness to the colony. When Drogheda was captured by Cromwell's
stern Puritan troops in 1649, some of the unfortunate rebels escaped the
firing squad only to be sent to America to serve in the sugar or tobacco
fields. Just how many of these Irishmen fell to the share of Virginia it
is impossible to say, but the number rises well into the hundreds, and
the patent books of the period are full of headrights of undoubted Irish
origin.[2-26]

When Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 it became the turn of
the Puritans to suffer, and many non-conformists and former Oliverian
soldiers were sent to Virginia. In fact so many old Commonwealth men
were serving in the tobacco fields in 1663 that they felt strong enough
to plot, not only for their own freedom, but for the overthrow of the
colonial government.[2-27] In 1678, after the suppression of the
Scottish Covenanters by the Highland Host, a new batch of prisoners were
sent to the plantations.[2-28] Seven years later many of Monmouth's
followers taken at Sedgemour, who were fortunate enough to escape the
fury of Jeffreys and Kirk, were forced to work in the plantations.

But the bulk of the servants were neither criminals nor political
prisoners, but poor persons seeking to better their condition in the
land of promise across the Atlantic. They constituted the vanguard of
that vast stream of immigrants which for three centuries Europe has
poured upon our shores. The indentured servant differed in no essential
from the poor Ulsterite or German who followed him in the Eighteenth
century, or the Irishman, the Italian or the Slav in the Nineteenth.
Like them he found too severe the struggle for existence at home, like
them he sought to reach a land where labor, the only commodity he had to
sell, would bring the highest return. The fact that his passage was paid
for him and that he was bound by contract to work it out after reaching
America, in no wise differentiates him from the newcomers of later days.
In 1671 Sir William Berkeley reported to the Board of Trade that the
colony contained "6,000 Christian servants for a short tyme," who had
come with the "hope of bettering their condition in a Growing
Country."[2-29]

Virginia is fortunate in having preserved a record of this, the first
great migration to the English colonies, which in some respects is
remarkably complete. In fact, the names of fully three-fourths of all
the persons who came to the colony, whether as freemen or servants
during the first century of its existence, are on record at the Land
Office at Richmond, and at all times available to the student of
history. In the early days of the settlement a law was passed designed
to stimulate immigration, by which the Government pledged itself to
grant fifty acres of land to any person who would pay the passage from
Europe to Virginia of a new settler. Thus if one brought over ten
indentured servants he would be entitled to 500 acres of land, if he
brought 100, he could demand 5,000 acres. But the headright, as it was
called, was not restricted to servants; if one came over as a freeman,
paying his own passage, he was entitled to the fifty acres. Should he
bring also his family, he could demand an additional fifty acres for his
wife and fifty for each child or other member of the household.[2-30]

When the Government issued a grant for land under this law, the planter
was required to record with the clerk of the county court the names of
all persons for whose transportation the claim was made. Some of these
lists have been lost, especially for the period from 1655 to 1666, but
most of them remain, constituting an inexhaustible storehouse of
information concerning the colony and the people who came to its
shores.[2-31] How the papers escaped destruction during the fire which
did so much damage in the Secretary's office at the time of Andros, it
is impossible to say. The explanation is to be found perhaps in the fact
that copies of the records were kept, not only at Williamsburg, but in
the several counties, so that in case of loss by fire new entries could
be made.

Immigration to Virginia continued in unabated volume throughout the
Seventeenth century. The needs of the tobacco plantations were
unceasing, and year after year the surplus population of England poured
across the Atlantic in response. An examination of the list of
headrights shows that the annual influx was between 1500 and 2000. Even
during the Civil War and Commonwealth periods this average seems to have
been maintained with surprising consistency. Apparently the only limit
which could be set upon it was the available space on board the merchant
fleet which each year left England for the Chesapeake bay. Thus in the
year ending May 1635 we find that 2000 landed in the colony,[2-32] while
in 1674 and again in 1682 the same average was maintained.[2-33] At
times the numbers dropped to 1200 or 1300, but this was the exception
rather than the rule. All in all, considerably more than 100,000 persons
migrated to the colony in the years that elapsed between the first
settlement at Jamestown and the end of the century.[2-34]

This great movement, which far surpassed in magnitude any other English
migration of the century, fixed for all time the character of the white
population of tidewater Virginia. The vast bulk of the settlers were
English. An examination of the headright lists shows here and there an
Irish or a Scotch name, and on very rare occasions one of French or
Italian origin, but in normal periods fully 95 per cent were
unmistakably Anglo-Saxon. In fact, such names as Dixon, Bennett,
Anderson, Adams, Greene, Brooke, Brown, Cooper, Gibson, Hall, Harris,
King, Jackson, Long, Martin, Miller, Newton, Philips, Richards, Turner,
White, appear with monotonous repetition. Except in the years 1655 and
1656, after the Drogheda tragedy when one sees such names as O'Lanny,
O'Leaby, O'Mally, and Machoone, or in 1679 when there was a sprinkling
of Scottish names, the entire list is distinctly English.

It must not be supposed that immigration to Virginia in the Seventeenth
century was restricted to indentured servants. Some of the settlers were
freemen, paying their own passage and establishing themselves as
proprietors immediately after arriving in the colony. But the conditions
which attracted them were the same as those which brought over the
servants. In both cases it was tobacco, the rich returns which it
promised and the urgent need it had of labor, which impelled them to
leave their homes in England to seek their fortunes in the strange land
beyond the seas.

Having seen the character of the immigration to Virginia, it remains to
determine what was the fate of the settler after he reached the colony,
what rôle lay before him in its social and economic life. Would he
remain permanently in the status of a servant, entering into a new
agreement with his master after the expiration of the old? Would he
eventually become a day laborer, working for wages upon the estates of
the wealthy? Would he become a tenant? Could he hope to become a
freeholder, making of Virginia, like Rome in the early days of the
republic, the land of the small proprietor?




_CHAPTER III_

THE VIRGINIA YEOMANRY


The system of indentured labor differed vitally from negro slavery. The
servant usually was bound to his master for a limited period only, and
at the expiration of four or five years was a free man, to go where he
would and pursue what employment seemed most lucrative. And of
tremendous importance to the future of Virginia was the fact that he was
of the same race and blood as the rest of the population. There was no
inherent reason why he might not take up land, marry and become a part
of the social structure of the colony.

When races of marked physical differences are placed side by side in the
same territory, assimilation of one or the other becomes difficult, and
an age long repugnance and conflict is apt to result. Perhaps the
greatest crime against the southern colonies was not the introduction of
slavery, but the introduction of negroes. It was inevitable that
eventually slavery would be abolished. But the negro race in America
cannot be abolished, it cannot be shipped back to Africa, it cannot well
be absorbed into the white population. Today California is struggling to
avoid a like problem by excluding the Japanese, while Canada, Australia
and New Zealand are closing their doors to Orientals of all kinds.

Thus Virginia, during its century of white immigration, was storing up
no perplexing difficulties for the future, was developing slowly but
surely into an industrious, democratic, Anglo-Saxon community. Not until
the black flood of slaves was turned loose upon her, strangling her
peasantry and revolutionizing her industrial and social life, was her
future put in pawn. The white servants, so far as they remained in the
colony, became bone of her bone, flesh of her flesh, promised her a
homogeneous race, a sound economic and political development.

When the alien newcomer to the United States sees from the deck of his
steamer the Statue of Liberty and the ragged sky line of lower
Manhattan, he feels that the goal of his ambition has been reached, that
the land of opportunity lies before him. But to the indentured settler
of the Seventeenth century, his arrival in the James or the York was but
the beginning of his struggles. Before he could grasp the riches of the
New World, he must pay the price of his passage, must work out through
arduous years the indenture to which he had affixed his signature.

And these years were filled not only with toil, perhaps with hardship,
but with the greatest peril. He might account himself fortunate indeed
if during the first twelve months he escaped the so-called Virginia
sickness. Tidewater Virginia for the English settlers was a pest-ridden
place. The low and marshy ground, the swarming mosquitoes, the hot sun,
the unwholesome drinking water combined to produce an unending epidemic
of dysentery and malaria. And at frequent intervals, especially in the
early years, yellow fever, scurvy and plague swept over the infant
colony, leaving behind a ghastly train of suffering and death.[3-1] At
one time the mortality among the settlers upon the James ran as high as
75 per cent and for a while it seemed that this attempt of the British
nation to secure a foothold upon the American continent must end in
failure.[3-2]

But as the years wore on better conditions prevailed. Governor Berkeley
testified in 1671, "there is not oft seasoned hands (as we term them)
that die now, whereas heretofore not one of five escaped the first
year."[3-3] This improvement was brought about by the use of Peruvian
bark, a clearer understanding of sanitary matters and the selection of
more healthful sites for plantations. At the time when Sir William wrote
it is probable that 80 per cent or more of the indentured servants
survived the dangers of the tobacco fields, completed their terms of
service and, if they remained in the colony, became freedmen with the
full rights of Englishmen and Virginians.

In the period from 1660 to 1725 there was, as we shall see, an exodus of
poor whites from Virginia. This, however, was chiefly the result of the
influx of slaves which marked the end of the century, and it is safe to
assume that prior to the Restoration there was no extensive movement
from Virginia to other colonies. The servant, upon attaining his
freedom, usually remained in the colony and sought to establish himself
there.

Although it is impossible to determine accurately the average length of
service required by the indentures, there is reason to believe that it
did not exceed five years. In cases of controversy between masters and
servants who had come in without written contracts as to when their
terms should expire, it was at first required by law that the period be
fixed at five years if the age was in excess of twenty-one.[3-4] In
1654, however, a new act was passed by the Assembly, making it necessary
for those who had no indentures, if over sixteen to serve six years, if
less than sixteen until the twenty-fourth year had been reached.[3-5]
This was found to work to the disadvantage of the colony by discouraging
immigration, and in 1662 the law was changed so that in all doubtful
cases the legal term should be five years for persons over sixteen.[3-6]
Since the Assembly, which was so largely made up of persons who
themselves held servants, would certainly not fix the legal term for a
period shorter than that normally provided for in the indentures, we
may assume that usually the servant secured his freedom within four or
five years after his arrival in the colony.

Thus it is evident that the bulk of the population could not have been,
as is so often supposed, made up of large landed proprietors with their
servants and slaves. Such a conception takes no account of the annual
translation of hundreds of men and women from bondsmen into freedmen.
The short duration of the average term of service, together with the
fact that the servants were usually still young when freed, made it
inevitable that in time the freedmen would outnumber those in service.
The size of the annual immigration could in no wise alter this
situation, for the greater the influx of servants, the greater would be
the resulting graduation into the class of freedmen.

The average number of headrights, as we have seen, was probably not less
than 1750 a year. If it is assumed that 1500 of these were servants,
five per cent of whom served for life and 20 per cent died before the
expiration of their terms, no less than 1125 would remain to become
freedmen. While the number of those under indenture remained practically
stationary, the size of the freedman class grew larger with the passing
of the years.

Placing the average term at five years, then, and the average mortality
at twenty per cent, there would be in service at any given time some
6,000 men and women. In fact, Sir William Berkeley, in his famous report
of 1671, estimated the number of servants in the colony at this
figure.[3-7] On the other hand an annual accession of 1125 to the class
of freedmen would in five years amount to 5,625, in ten years to 11,250,
in fifteen to 16,875, in twenty to 22,500. At the end of half a century
no less than 56,250 persons would have emerged from servitude to become
free citizens. Although there is every reason to believe that these
figures are substantially correct,[3-8] their accuracy or lack of
accuracy in no way affect the principle involved. From its very nature
it was impossible that the system of indentured servants should long
remain the chief factor in the industrial life of the colony or supply
most of the labor.

It is true, of course, that the number of those completing their terms
of indenture is not an absolute gauge, at any given date, of the size of
the freedman class. To determine this it would be necessary to know the
average span of life of the freedman, a thing certainly not worked out
at the time and impossible of accomplishment now. We may assume,
however, that it was relatively long. The newcomer who had lived through
the first terrible year in the tobacco fields had been thoroughly
tested, "seasoned" as the planters called it, and was reasonably certain
of reaching a mature age. Moreover, the servants were almost universally
of very tender years. Seldom indeed would a dealer accept one over
twenty-eight, and the average seems to have been between seventeen and
twenty-three. The reasons for this are obvious. Not only were young men
and women more adaptable to changed conditions, more capable of
resisting the Virginia climate, stronger and more vigorous, but they
proved more tractable and entered upon the adventure more eagerly.[3-9]
These conclusions are fully borne out by an examination of the lists of
servants given in Hotten's _Emigrants to America_. Of the first 159
servants here entered whose ages are attached, the average is
twenty-three years.[3-10] And as many of these persons were brought over
as skilled artisans to take part in the industrial life which the
Company had planned for the colony, it is probable that they were much
older than the average servant of later days who came as an agricultural
laborer. There is every reason to believe, then, that the average
servant was still in his prime when he completed his term, perhaps not
more than twenty-six or twenty-seven, with many years of usefulness and
vigor before him.

It must also be remembered that the freedman, by a display of energy and
capability, might acquire property, marry and rear a family. While the
number of indentured servants was strictly limited to those who were
brought in from the outside, the class of poor freemen might and did
enjoy a natural increase within itself. Thus it was inevitable that with
the passing of the years the servants were more and more outnumbered by
the growing group of freemen. In 1649, when the population was but
15,000,[3-11] 6,000 servants might well have performed most of the
manual labor of the tobacco fields, but in 1670, when the inhabitants
numbered 40,000,[3-12] or in 1697 when they were 70,000,[3-13] they
would form a comparatively small proportion of the people, so small in
fact that most of the work of necessity had to be done by freemen. In
other words the picture so often presented, even by historians of
established reputation, of a Seventeenth century Virginia in which the
land was divided into large plantations owned by rich proprietors and
tilled chiefly by indentured servants is entirely erroneous. Such a
state of affairs was made impossible by the very nature of the system of
indentures itself.

It becomes a matter of prime interest, then, to determine what became of
the mass of freedmen, what rôle they played in the social and economic
life of the colony. Because the servant who had completed his term was
free to follow his own bent, we have no right to assume that he sought
at once to establish himself as an independent proprietor. He might seek
service with the large planters as a hired laborer, he might become a
tenant. In either case the population would have been divided into two
classes--the wealthy landowner and those who served him.

We know that at all periods of Virginia history there were a certain
number of persons employed as wage earners. The colonial laws and the
county records contain many references to them. Payment of wages was not
unusual even under the Company, and we are told by George Sandys that
hired laborers received one pound of tobacco a day in addition to their
food.[3-14] In later years we have from time to time references to wage
rates, and in some cases copies of contracts entered into between
employer and wage earner. But such cases are comparatively rare, and it
is evident that the use of hired labor throughout the colonial period
was the exception rather than the rule. In fact it would seem that few
save servants newly freed and lacking in the funds necessary for
purchasing and equipping little farms of their own ever sought
employment upon the large plantations. And even in such cases the
contracts were for comparatively short periods, since it often required
but a year or two of labor for the freedman to save enough from his
wages to make a beginning as an independent proprietor.

When once established, there was no reason, in the days prior to the
introduction of slavery, why he should not hold his own in competition
with his wealthy neighbor. In the production of tobacco the large
plantation, so long as it was cultivated only by expensive white labor,
offered no marked advantage over the small. With the cost of land very
low, with the means of earning the purchase price so readily in hand,
with the conditions for an independent career all so favorable, it was
not to be expected that the freedman should content himself permanently
with the status of a hired laborer.

Nor was there any reason why he should become a tenant. Had all the
fertile land been preëmpted, as was the case on the banks of the Hudson,
the poor man might have been compelled to lease the soil upon which he
expended his efforts or do without entirely. But such was not the case.
It is true that at the end of the Seventeenth century certain wealthy
men got possession of large tracts of unsettled land, but their monopoly
was so far from complete that they gladly sold off their holdings in
little parcels to the first purchasers who presented themselves.
Apparently they made no attempts to establish themselves in a position
similar to that of the great landlords of England.

The records afford ample evidence that the leasing of property was by no
means unknown in colonial Virginia, but the custom was comparatively
rare. Hugh Jones, writing in 1721, declared that the tenant farmers
constituted but a small fraction of the population, a fact which he
explained by the unusual facilities for acquiring property in fee
simple.[3-15] It would have been folly for the tobacco planter to expend
his labor upon another man's property, perhaps erecting barns and fences
and otherwise improving it, when he could for so small an outlay secure
land of his own.

Thus we are led to the conclusion that the average Virginia plantation
must have been comparatively small in extent. The development of large
estates was narrowly limited by the various factors which made it
impossible to secure an adequate labor supply--the restrictions upon the
slave trade, the insufficient number of indentured servants and the
shortness of their terms, the unwillingness of freedmen and others to
work for wages. On the other hand, it would be expected that the
servants upon securing their freedom would purchase land of their own,
and cover all tidewater Virginia with little farms.

Turning to the various records of the time that deal with the
distribution of land--deeds, wills, transfers, tax lists,
inventories--we find that these conclusions are fully borne out. All
reveal the fact that the average plantation, especially in the
Seventeenth century, so far from vieing with the vast estates in
existence in certain parts of America, was but a few hundred acres in
extent.

The land transfers of Surry county afford an interesting illustration.
In thirty-four instances mentioned during the years from 1684 to 1686,
for which the exact number of acres is given, the largest is 500 acres,
the smallest twenty. The aggregate of all land which changed hands is
6,355 acres, or an average of 187 for each sale. There are eleven
transfers of 100 acres or less, twenty-three transfers of 200 or less
and only four of more than 300 acres.[3-16] One can find in this no
evidence of the fabled barons of colonial Virginia, but only of a well
established class of small proprietors.

The York county books for the years from 1696 to 1701 tell the same
story. Here we find recorded forty-one transfers and leases. Twenty-two
are for 100 acres or less, 33 for 200 acres or less, and four, one for
1,400, one for 1,210, one for 600 and one for 550, are more than 300
acres in extent. The aggregate is 8,153 acres and the average 199.[3-17]

In the Rappahannock county records from 1680 to 1688 of fifteen land
transfers taken at random from the books, the largest is 400 while the
average is 168 acres.[3-18] Of the forty-eight transfers mentioned in
the Essex county books for the years from 1692 to 1695, the largest is
600 acres and the smallest 50. Twenty are for 100 acres or less, 31 for
200 or less and only four for over 300.[3-19]

That conditions not fundamentally different prevailed in the early days
of the colony is shown by the census taken of the landowners in 1626. Of
the holdings listed no less than 25 were for 50 acres or less, 73 for
100 and most of the others for less than 300 acres. The total number of
proprietors listed is 224 and the total acreage 34,472, giving an
average for each plantation of 154 acres.[3-20]

It has been assumed by certain writers that the land grants preserved
in the Registrar's Office in Richmond tend to contradict this evidence.
Although the average patent is by no means large, it is much more
extensive than the typical land transfer. In 1638 this average was 423
acres, in 1640 it was 405, in 1642 it was 559, in 1645 it was 333, in
1648 it was 412, in 1650 it was 675. During the entire period from 1634
to 1650 inclusive the size of the average land grant was 446 acres. From
1650 to 1655 the average was 591 acres, from 1655 to 1666 six hundred
and seventy-one, from 1666 to 1679 eight hundred and ninety acres, from
1679 to 1689 six hundred and seven acres, from 1689 to 1695 six hundred
and one acres, from 1695 to 1700 six hundred and eighty-eight
acres.[3-21] In the course of the entire second half of the Seventeenth
century the average size of the patent was 674 acres.

Yet these facts have little direct bearing upon the extent of the
plantations themselves. The system of granting land, as we have seen,
was not based upon the individual needs of the planters, but upon the
number of headrights presented to the Government. Obviously it was the
question of the most economical method of transporting immigrants which
would determine the average size of the grant. If it proved best to
bring in servants in small groups, distributed among vessels devoted
chiefly to merchandise, the patents would be small; if they came in on
immigrant vessels, in numbers ranging from 50 to 200, the patents would
be large.

Apparently both methods were in vogue. There are grants recorded varying
in size from 50 acres to 10,000 acres.[3-22] Beyond doubt many
merchants, finding that their vessels on the western voyage were not
fully laden, from time to time took on a few indentured servants. If
they furnished accommodation for from ten to twenty immigrants, they
could demand, in addition to the sale of the indentures, 500 to 1,000
acres of land. It was a frequent practice, also, for planters in
Virginia to send orders to their agents in England to procure and ship
one or more servants as need for them arose.[3-23] "Your brother George
hath moved you in his letters to send him over some servants the next
year," wrote Richard Kemp to Robert Read in 1639.[3-24] Undoubtedly in
cases of this kind the servants usually sailed in small parties upon the
regular merchant vessels.

On the other hand it would appear that large numbers of persons arrived
on strictly immigrant vessels, in which they made the chief if not the
only cargo. Some of the best known men in the colony were dealers in
servants and reaped from the business very large profits. Of these
perhaps the best known in the earlier period was William Claiborne,
celebrated for his dispute with the Maryland proprietors over the
possession of Kent Island. Peter Ashton was another extensive dealer in
servants, at one time receiving 2,550 acres for his headrights, at
another 2,000. Isaac Allerton, Lewis Burwell, Giles Brent, Joseph
Bridger and many others of like prominence are upon the patent rolls for
large grants. The most inveterate dealer in servants, however, was
Robert Beverley. This well known planter, so famous for his part in
Bacon's Rebellion and in the political contests which grew out of it, is
credited with patents aggregating 25,000 or 30,000 acres.[3-25]

Often partnerships were formed for the importation of servants, in which
cases the patents were made out jointly. Among the more interesting are
patents to Robert Beverley and Henry Hartwell, to Thomas Butt and Thomas
Milner, to William Bassett and James Austin, to Thomas Blunt and Richard
Washington. When associations of three or more persons were formed for
the importation of servants, a not infrequent occurrence, the number of
headrights is unusually large and the grants patented in consequence
extensive. Thus Edmund Bibbie and others are credited with 3,350 acres,
Robert Ambrose and others with 6,000, George Archer and others with
4,000.[3-26]

It is clear, then, that the size of the average patent in the
Seventeenth century is not an indication of the extent of the average
plantation. If economic conditions were such as to encourage large
holdings, extensive farms would appear regardless of the original
patents, for the small proprietors would be driven to the wall by their
more wealthy rivals and forced to sell out to them. On the other hand,
if the large planters found it difficult to secure adequate labor they
would of necessity have to break up their estates and dispose of them to
the small freeholders. That the latter development and not the former
actually took place in Virginia during the Seventeenth century a careful
examination of the country records makes most apparent.

Over and over again in the records of various land transfers it is
stated that the property in question had belonged originally to a more
extensive tract, the patent for which was granted under the headright
law. A typical case is that of John Dicks who purchased for 8,500 pounds
of tobacco, "all the remaining part of 900 acres gotten by the
transporting of 19 persons."[3-27] Similarly we find John Johnson in
1653 selling to Robert Roberts half of 900 acres which he had received
by patent.[3-28] In 1693 John Brushood sold to James Grey 200 acres, a
part of 5,100 acres originally granted to Mr. Henry Awbrey.[3-29] Such
cases could be multiplied indefinitely.

Perhaps the most instructive instance left us of this development is the
break up of a tract of land known as Button's Ridge, in Essex country.
This property, comprising 3,650 acres, was granted to Thomas Button in
the year 1666.[3-30] The original patentee transferred the entire tract
to his brother Robert Button, who in turn sold it to John Baker. The
latter, finding no doubt that he could not put under cultivation so
much land, cut it up into small parcels and sold it off to various
planters. Of these transactions we have, most fortunately, a fairly
complete record. To Captain William Moseley he sold 200 acres, to John
Garnet 600, to Robert Foster 200, to William Smither 200, to William
Howlett 200, to Anthony Samuell 300, to William Williams 200. It is
probable that he sold also a small holding to Henry Creighton, for we
find the latter, in 1695, transferring to William Moseley 100 acres,
formerly a part of Button's Ridge.[3-31]

Important as are these gleanings from the county records, we have at our
disposal even better and more conclusive evidence that colonial Virginia
was divided, not into baronial estates of vast proportions, but into a
large number of comparatively small farms. Governor Nicholson's rent
roll, which is published as an appendix to this volume, for the early
years of the Eighteenth century at least, places the matter beyond
doubt. Here we have before us an official inventory of all Virginia save
the Northern Neck, giving the name of every proprietor and the number of
acres in his possession.

It will be remembered that in the Crown colonies there was a perpetual
obligation imposed upon all land when first granted known as the
quit-rent. In Virginia this duty amounted to one shilling for every
fifty acres, payable in tobacco at the rate of a penny per pound.[3-32]
Despite the fact that some 27 per cent of the returns was consumed by
the cost of collection, and that there were frequent frauds in disposing
of the tobacco, the revenue derived from this source was of considerable
importance.[3-33] The amount collected in 1705 was £1,841. 1. 6-3/4.
When James Blair, the Virginia Commissary of the Bishop of London,
petitioned William and Mary for a fund from the accumulated quit-rents
for his proposed college at Williamsburg, some of the British
governmental officials objected strenuously. "This sum is perhaps the
only ready cash in all the plantations," it was declared, "which happens
to be by good husbandry and is a stock for answering any emergency that
may happen in Virginia."[3-34]

Throughout the entire Seventeenth century, however, the Governors had
experienced great difficulty in collecting this tax. Over and over again
they reported in their letters to the Board of Trade that there were
large arrears of quit-rents which it was impossible to make the
landowners pay.[3-35] The reason for this was obvious enough. In each
county the tax collector was the sheriff. Although this officer was
appointed by the Governor, he usually had a wholesome respect for the
larger proprietors and in consequence was wary of giving offense by
holding them to too strict an account of their estates.[3-36] At times
the sheriffs themselves were the sufferers by this state of affairs, for
they were held responsible for the rents upon all land patented in their
counties, for which returns had not been made.

Although the Governors from time to time made rather feeble attempts to
remedy the prevailing laxness in this matter, nothing of importance was
accomplished before the first administration of Francis Nicholson. The
chief executive himself had much need of the good will of the richer
inhabitants, and he was not over forward in forcing them to bring in
accurate returns. Nicholson, however, who prided himself on his
executive ability and who was bent on breaking the power of the clique
which centered around the Council of State, exerted himself to the
utmost to secure full payment for every acre.

So early as 1690 we find him issuing orders to the sheriffs for the
drawing up of an accurate rent roll, through an examination of the
patent lists and the records of land transfers.[3-37] May 15, 1691, he
took up the matter again, warning the sheriffs that he expected more
accurate returns than they had yet made.[3-38] With the appointment of
Sir Edmund Andros as Governor, however, interest in the quit-rents
lapsed, and not until his removal and the reappointment of Nicholson was
the attempt resumed.

In July, 1699, Nicholson wrote the Commissioners of Trade and
Plantations that he was doing his best to improve the quit-rents and
that the auditor had been ordered to draw up a scheme for securing a
more exact list of land holdings.[3-39] But for a while the matter still
hung fire. The leading men in the Government were ready enough in making
suggestions, but they were extensive landholders themselves and
apparently rendered no real assistance. "I have considered those papers
given me by your Excellency relating to a perfect rent roll," the
auditor, William Byrd I wrote Nicholson, Oct. 21, 1703, "notwithstanding
I have, according to your repeated directions used my utmost diligence
in giving charge to sheriffs and taking their oaths to rolls, I am
sensible there is still very great abuse therein."[3-40]

Despite these discouragements Nicholson persisted and in 1704 succeeded
in obtaining the first really accurate rent roll of the colony. These
lists have long been missing, and perhaps were destroyed in one of the
several fires which have wrought so much havoc with the records of
colonial Virginia, but a true copy was made by the clerk, William
Robertson, and sent to the Board of Trade. Fortunately the British
Government has been more careful of its priceless historical manuscripts
than has Virginia, and this copy today reposes in the Public Record
Office in London, a veritable treasure trove of information concerning
economic and social conditions in the colony.[3-41]

Even a cursory examination of the rent roll is sufficient to dispel the
old belief that Virginia at this time was the land of the large
proprietor. As one glances down the list of plantations he is struck by
the number of little holdings, the complete absence of huge estates, the
comparative scarcity even of those that for a newly settled country
might be termed extensive. Here and there, especially in the frontier
counties is listed a tract of four or five or even ten thousand acres,
but such cases are very rare. In Middlesex county there is but one
plantation of more than 2,500 acres, in Charles City county the largest
holding is 3,130, in Nansemond 2,300, in Norfolk county 3,200, in
Princess Anne 3,100, in Elizabeth City county 2,140, in York 2,750, in
Essex 3,200.

On the other hand the rolls reveal the existence of thousands of little
proprietors, whose holdings of from 50 to 500 acres embraced the larger
part of the cultivated soil of the colony. Thus we find that in
Nansemond, of 376 farms 26 were of 50 acres or less, 66 were between 50
and 100 acres, 110 between 100 and 200 acres, 88 between 200 and 400
acres, 78 between 400 and 1,000 acres, and only eight over 1,000 acres.
In Middlesex county out of 122 holdings eleven were of 50 acres or less,
33 between 50 and 100 acres, 32 between 100 and 200 acres, 25 between
200 and 500 acres, 19 between 500 and 2,500 acres, one of 4,000 acres
and one of 5,200 acres. Of the 94 plantations in Charles City county 26
were of 100 acres or less, 21 between 100 and 200 acres, 25 between 200
and 500 acres, 19 between 500 and 2,500 acres and three more than 2,500
acres.[3-42]

Although the average size of the plantations varied considerably in
different counties it was everywhere comparatively small, far smaller
than the average land grant of the time, far smaller than has been
imagined by some of the closest students of the period. For Nansemond
the rolls reveal the average holding as 212 acres, for James City county
400, for York 298, for Warwick 308, for Elizabeth City county 255, for
Princess Anne 459, for Gloucester 395, for Middlesex 406, for Charles
City county 553.[3-43]

In the past few decades much has been written of the social life and
customs of the people of colonial Virginia. But except in the able works
of Dr. Philip Alexander Bruce little has been said concerning the small
planter class, the men who made up the vast bulk of the population, the
true Seventeenth century Virginians. We have long and detailed
descriptions of the residences of the small group of the well-to-do,
their libraries, their furniture, their table ware, their portraits,
their clothing, their amusements. The genealogy of the leading families
has been worked out with minute care, their histories recorded, some of
their leading members idealized by the writers of fiction. The mention
of colonial Virginia brings instantly to mind a picture of gay
cavaliers, of stately ladies, of baronial estates, of noble manors. And
the sturdy, independent class of small farmers who made up a full 90 per
cent of the freeholders at the time the rent roll was taken, have been
relegated into undeserved obscurity.

It is to be noted that the roll does not include the names of
proprietors residing in the Northern Neck, as the peninsula between the
Potomac and the Rappahannock is called. This territory, although
acknowledging the jurisdiction of the Government at Williamsburg in most
matters and sending representatives to the House of Burgesses, paid its
quit-rents, not to the Crown but to a proprietor. Nicholson, therefore,
was not concerned in their collection and took no steps to list its
landholders in his new roll. There is no reason to believe, however,
that conditions in that part of the colony were fundamentally different.

Nor can the accuracy of the rent roll be challenged. There existed
always the incentive to make false returns, of course, in order to
escape the payment of taxes, and not many sheriffs were so diligent as
the one in Henrico who unearthed 1,669 acres that had been
"concealed."[3-44] Yet it must be remembered that the Governor brought
to bear all the pressure at his disposal to make this particular roll
accurate, that the sheriffs were his appointees, that they could not
lightly defy him in so important a matter. And even though in isolated
cases they may have winked at false returns from men of wealth and rank,
from the mass of small proprietors they must have insisted upon reports
as accurate as the records or actual surveying could make them. No doubt
certain uncultivated tracts in the frontier counties were omitted, but
with these we are not immediately concerned. For conditions in the older
parts of the colony, where the slow evolution of economic factors had
been at work for a century, the roll presents unimpeachable evidence
that the bulk of the cultivated land was divided into small plantations.

But it still remains to prove that their owners were men of meagre
fortunes, men who tilled the soil with their own hands. After all a farm
of two or three hundred acres might give scope for large activities, the
employment of many servants and slaves, the acquisition of some degree
of wealth. Might it not be possible that though the acres of the planter
were limited, his estate after all corresponded somewhat with the
popular conception?

This leads us to a study of the distribution of servants and slaves
among the planters. At the outset we are faced with convincing evidence
that at the end of the Seventeenth century the average number for each
farm was very small. This is shown by a comparison of the number of
plantations listed in the rent roll of 1704 with the estimated number of
workers. In the counties for which the sheriffs made returns for
Governor Nicholson there were some 5,500 landholders. When to these is
added the proprietors of the Northern Neck the number must have
approximated 6,500. If at this time the servants numbered 4,000, as
seems probable,[3-45] and the slaves 6,000, together they would have
averaged but 1.5 workers for each plantation. A decade earlier, when the
use of slaves was still comparatively infrequent, the figure must have
been still lower.

Fortunately we have even more direct and detailed evidence. Throughout
almost all of Virginia colonial history one of the chief methods of
raising revenue for the Government was the direct poll tax. This levy
was laid, however, not only on every freeman over sixteen years of age,
but upon male servants over 14, female servants who worked in the
fields, and slaves above 16 of either sex, all of whom were officially
termed tithables.[3-46] The tax rolls in which these persons were
listed, some of which have been preserved among the county records,
throw much light upon social and economic conditions in the colony.

In one district of Surry county we find in the year 1675 that there were
75 taxpayers and only 126 tithables. In other words only 51 persons in
this district had this duty paid for them by others, whether parents,
guardians or masters. And of the taxpayers, forty-two were liable for
themselves alone, having no servants, slaves or dependent sons over 16;
fifteen were liable for one other person, eight for two others, and only
one, Lieutenant-Colonel Jordan, for so many as seven.[3-47]

In other districts the story is the same. In one there were forty
taxpayers, 75 tithables and 25 persons who paid for themselves alone; in
another 28 taxpayers, 62 tithables, fifteen who had no servants or
slaves; in a third 48 taxpayers, 83 tithables, 28 who paid only for
themselves, eleven who paid for two, five who paid for three; in a
fourth district 29 taxpayers, 63 tithables, fourteen who had no servants
or slaves; in a fifth 25 taxpayers, 45 tithables, 12 who paid only for
themselves.[3-48] Thus in Surry county in the year 1675 there were in
all 245 taxpayers and 434 tithables. In other words the men who paid
their own tax outnumbered all those whose tax was paid for them, whether
servants, slaves or relatives, at the ratio of about 4 to 3.

A study of the records of the same county ten years later leads to
almost identical results. At that time Surry seems to have been divided
into four districts. In the first there were 78 taxpayers, 132
tithables, 30 persons who paid only for themselves; in the second, 63
taxpayers, 133 tithables, 33 persons who paid for themselves alone; in
the third there were 38 taxpayers, 74 tithables and 22 persons paying
only for themselves; in the fourth 125 taxpayers, 201 tithables and 81
persons having no dependents to pay for. Thus there were 540 tithables
in all and 304 taxpayers. In the entire county there were about 122
persons who paid the poll tax for others. The largest holders of
servants or slaves were Mr. Robert Randall with seven, Lieutenant-Colonel
William Browne with nine, Mr. Robert Canfield with seven, Mr. Arthur
Allen with six, Mr. William Edwards with six, Mr. Francis Mason with
seven and Mr. Thomas Binns with eight.[3-49]

Here again is proof that the popular conception of the Virginia
plantation life of the Seventeenth century is erroneous. Instead of the
wealthy planter who surrounded himself with scores of servants and
slaves, investigation reveals hundreds of little farmers, many of them
trusting entirely to their own exertions for the cultivation of the
soil, others having but one or two servants, and a bare handful of
well-to-do men each having from five to ten, or in rare cases twenty or
thirty, servants and slaves.

A further confirmation of these conclusions is to be had by comparing
the number of plantations listed in the rent roll of 1704 with the
official returns of tithables for 1702.[3-50] Thus in Nansemond there
were 375 plantations and 1,030 tithables, Henrico with 162 plantations
had 863 tithables, Middlesex with 122 plantations had 814 tithables,
Gloucester with 381 plantations had 2,626, James City with 287
plantations had 1,193, York with 205 plantations had 1,180, Warwick with
122 plantations had 505, Elizabeth City with 116 plantations had 478,
Princess Anne with 215 plantations had 727, Surry with 273 plantations
had 739, Isle of Wight with 262 plantations had 896, Norfolk with 303
plantations had 693, New Kent with 497 plantations had 1,245, King
William with 217 plantations had 803, King and Queen with 403
plantations had 1,848, Essex with 376 plantations had 1,034, Accomac
with 392 plantations had 1,041, Northampton with 258 plantations had
693, Charles City and Prince George together with 420 plantations had
1,327.[3-51]

In Nansemond the average number of tithables as compared with the number
of plantations was 2.7, in Henrico 5.1, in Middlesex 6.7, in Gloucester
6.9, in James City 4.2, in York 5.7, in Warwick 4.1, in Elizabeth City
4, in Princess Anne 3.4, in Surry 2.7, in Isle of Wight 3.3, in Norfolk
2.3, in New Kent 2.5, in King William 3.7, in King and Queen 4.6, in
Essex 2.8, in Accomac 2.6, in Northampton 2.3, in Charles City and
Prince George combined 3.1. In all Virginia, with the exclusion of the
Northern Neck, there were 19,715 tithables and some 5,500 plantations,
an average of 3.6 tithables for each plantation. If we deduct from the
tithables all the male freeholders included in the rent roll, there
remains only some 14,700 persons south of the Rappahannock to make up
the list, not only of servants and slaves, but of professional men, wage
earners, artisans and dependent sons of landholders over 16 years of
age.

Another invaluable source of information concerning the distribution of
servants and slaves is provided by the numerous inventories, deeds, and
wills which have been preserved in the records. Thus in Surry during the
years from 1671 to 1686 we find listed the estates of fifty-nine
persons. Of these no less than fifty-two were apparently without
servants or slaves; two, William Rooking and Captain Robert Spencer, had
five each; one, Mr. William Chambers, had three; and four, Captain
William Corker, John Hoge, Mr. John Goring and Samuel Cornell, had one
each.[3-52]

In Elizabeth City of twenty-seven estates recorded during the years from
1684 to 1699 sixteen were without servants or slaves; of twenty-six
recorded in York during the period from 1694 to 1697 thirteen had no
servants or slaves; of twenty-three recorded in Henrico from 1677 to
1692 fourteen were without servants or slaves.[3-53] It is true that
these inventories and wills, since they would usually pertain to persons
of advanced age, perhaps do not furnish an absolutely accurate gauge of
the average number of servants held by each planter. On the other hand,
it is equally probable that a larger proportion of big estates than of
the small found their way into the records. At all events it is evident
that a goodly proportion of the landholders, perhaps sixty or sixty-five
per cent possessed no slaves or indentured servants, and trusted solely
to their own exertions for the cultivation of their plantations.

Thus vanishes the fabled picture of Seventeenth century Virginia. In its
place we see a colony filled with little farms a few hundred acres in
extent, owned and worked by a sturdy class of English farmers. Prior to
the slave invasion which marked the close of the Seventeenth century and
the opening of the Eighteenth, the most important factor in the life of
the Old Dominion was the white yeomanry.




_CHAPTER IV_

FREEMEN AND FREEDMEN


It is obvious that the small planter class had its origin partly in the
immigration of persons who paid their own passage, partly in the
graduation into freedmen of large numbers of indentured servants. But to
determine accurately the proportion of each is a matter of great
difficulty. Had all the records of Seventeenth century Virginia been
preserved, it would have been possible, by means of long and laborious
investigation, to arrive at strictly accurate conclusions. But with the
material in hand one has to be satisfied with an approximation of the
truth.

It must again be emphasized that the indentured servants were not
slaves, and that at the expiration of their terms there was no barrier,
legal, racial or social to their advancement. The Lords of Trade and
Plantations, in 1676, expressed their dissatisfaction at the word
"servitude" as applied to them, which they felt was a mark of bondage
and slavery, and thought it better "rather to use the word service,
since those servants are only apprentices for years."[4-1] "Malitious
tongues have impaired it (Virginia) much," Bullock declared in 1649,
"for it hath been a constant report among the ordinary sort of people
that all those servants who are sent to Virginia are sold into slavery,
whereas the truth is that the merchants who send servants and have no
plantations of their own doe not only transferre their time over to
others, but the servants serve no longer than the time they themselves
agreed for in England, and this is the ordinary course in England, and
no prejudice or hurt to the servant."[4-2]

The terms of indenture not only took for granted that the servant, upon
completing his contract, would establish himself as a proprietor, but
usually made it obligatory for the master to furnish him with the
equipment necessary for his new life. With rare exceptions he received a
quantity of grain sufficient to maintain him for one year; two suits,
one of Kersey, the other of cotton; a pair of canvas drawers; two
shirts; and one felt hat.[4-3] The historian Beverley states that to
this outfit was added a gun worth twenty shillings.[4-4] Another writer
tells us that the freedman received "a year's provision of corne, double
apparel" and a supply of tools.[4-5]

There existed in England a widespread impression that the servant, upon
securing his freedom, was entitled by law to fifty acres of land. This
appears to have been a mistake arising from a misapprehension of the
nature of the headright, which belonged not to the servant himself, but
to the person who paid for his transportation. In many cases the
indentures do not state the exact rewards to be received by the new
freedman, but only that they are to accord with "the custom of the
country," a very elastic term which could be construed by the master to
suit his own interest.[4-6] John Hammond, in his _Leah and Rachel_,
strongly advised the immigrant before affixing his signature to the
indenture to insist upon the inclusion of a clause specifically
providing for the payment of the fifty acres.[4-7] But the importance
which attaches to this matter lies as much in the servant's expectation
as in its fulfilment. Whether or not he received his little plantation,
he believed that he was to get a tract of land, a very extensive tract
it must have seemed to him, which would assure him a good living and
make it possible for him to rise out of the class to which he
belonged.[4-8]

In 1627 the Virginia General Court issued an order which is significant
of the attitude of the colony itself to the freedmen. "The Court, taking
into consideration that the next ensueing year there will be many
tenants and servants freed unto whom after their freedom there will be
no land due, whereby they may without some order taken to the contrary
settle and seat themselves ... have ordered that the Governor and
Council may give unto the said servants and tenants leases for terms of
years such quantities of land as shall be needful."[4-9] Thus, at this
period at least, not only was it expected in the colony that servants
would become land holders, but it was felt that for them not to do so
was a matter of such grave concern as to require the special attention
of the Government.

After all, however, the key to the situation must be sought in the
history of tobacco culture and the tobacco trade. Tobacco was the
universal crop of the colony and upon it every man depended for his
advancement and prosperity. If the market was good and the price high,
the planters flourished; if sales fell off and the price was low, they
suffered accordingly. It is evident, then, that the ability of the
freedman to secure a position of economic independence hinged upon the
profit to be derived from his little tobacco crop. It does not matter
whether he worked as a wage earner, tenant or freeholder, in the end the
result would be the same. If the returns from his labor greatly exceeded
his expenses, his savings would make it possible for him to establish
himself firmly in the class of the colonial yeomanry. On the other hand,
if he could wring from the soil no more than a bare subsistence, he
would remain always a poor laborer, or perhaps be forced to seek his
fortune in some other colony. Thus if we are to understand the status of
the freed servant and the hope which he could entertain of advancement,
it is necessary to turn our attention once more to economic conditions
in the colony. First, we must determine the amount of tobacco the
freedman could produce by his unassisted labor; second, the price he
received for it; third, how much he had to give the merchants in
exchange for their wares; and finally, the margin of profit left after
all expenses had been paid.

Despite a marked divergence of testimony regarding the amount of tobacco
one man could cultivate, we are able to determine this matter with some
degree of exactness. In 1627 the King, in outlining a plan to take into
his own hands the entire tobacco trade, proposed to limit the imports to
200 pounds for each master of a family and 125 for each servant.[4-10]
To this, however, the planters entered a vigorous protest, claiming that
the quantity was "not sufficient for their maintenance." They in turn
suggested that the King take a total of 500,000 pounds a year, which for
a population of 3,000 meant 167 pounds for each inhabitant, or perhaps
about 500 pounds for each actual laborer.[4-11] Again in 1634 it was
proposed that the Crown purchase yearly 600,000 pounds of Virginia
tobacco.[4-12] As the population of the colony at that date was about
5,000, this would have allowed only 120 pounds for each person, and once
more the planters protested vigorously.[4-13] It would seem that both of
these offers were based not so much upon the amount that one man could
raise as upon the quantity which could be sold in England at a certain
price. In fact it is probable that even so early as 1628 the average
output of one freedman was not less than 1,000 pounds. It is interesting
to note that in 1640, soon after Governor Francis Wyatt's arrival from
England, it was found that the excessive crop of the previous year had
so clogged the market that upon the advice of the merchants the
Government was "forced to a strict way of destroying the bad and halfe
the goode."[4-14]

The author of _A New Description of Virginia_, published in 1649, claims
that one man could plant from 1,600 to 2,000 pounds a year.[4-15] As the
pamphlet presents a somewhat optimistic picture of affairs in general in
the colony, this estimate must be taken with some reserve. More
trustworthy is the statement of Secretary Thomas Ludwell in 1667 that
1,200 pounds was "the medium of men's yearly crops."[4-16]

At all events, it is evident that the planter, even when entirely
dependent upon his own exertions, could produce a goodly crop. It is now
necessary to ascertain what he got for it. In the second and third
decades of the Seventeenth century the price of tobacco was very high.
The first cargo, consisting of 20,000 pounds consigned in the George,
sold for no less than £5,250, or 5s. 3d. a pound.[4-17] No wonder the
leaders of the London Company were pleased, believing that in the Indian
weed they had discovered a veritable gold mine! No wonder the settlers
deserted their pallisades and their villages to seek out the richest
soil and the spots best suited for tobacco culture! The man who could
produce 200 pounds of the plant, after all freight charges had been met,
could clear some £30 or £35, a very tidy sum indeed for those days. It
was the discovery that Virginia could produce tobacco of excellent
quality that accounts for the heavy migration in the years from 1618 to
1623. In fact, so rich were the returns that certain persons came to the
colony, not with the intention of making it their permanent residence,
but of enriching themselves "by a cropp of Tobacco," and then returning
to England to enjoy the proceeds.[4-18]

But this state of affairs was of necessity temporary. Very soon the
increasing size of the annual crop began to tell upon the price, and in
1623 Sir Nathaniel Rich declared that he had bought large quantities of
tobacco at two shillings a pound.[4-19] This gentleman felt that it
would be just to the planters were they to receive two shillings and
four pence for the best varieties, and sixteen pence for the "second
sort." In the same year Governor Wyatt and his Council, in a letter to
the Virginia Company, placed the valuation of tobacco at eighteen pence
a pound.[4-20] Three years later, however, the Governor wrote the Privy
Council advising the establishment in Virginia of a "magazine" or
entrepot, where the merchants should be compelled to take the tobacco at
three shillings a pound.[4-21] This proposal did not seem reasonable to
the King, and when Sir George Yeardley came over as Governor for the
second time he was instructed to see to it that "the merchant be not
constrained to take tobacco at 3. P. Pound in exchange for his wares,"
and to permit him to "make his own bargain."[4-22]

Apparently not discouraged by this rebuff, in 1628 the Governor, Council
and Burgesses petitioned the King, who once more was planning to take
the trade into his own hands, to grant them "for their tobacco delivered
in the colony three shillings and six pence per pound, and in England,
four shillings."[4-23] This valuation undoubtedly was far in advance of
the current prices, and King Charles, considering it unreasonable would
not come to terms with the planters. In fact, it appears that for some
years the price of tobacco had been declining rapidly. In May, 1630, Sir
John Harvey wrote the Privy Council that the merchants had bought the
last crop with their commodities at less than a penny per pound,[4-24]
and two years later, in a statement sent the Virginia Commissioners, he
claimed that the price still remained at that figure.[4-25]

It may be taken for granted, however, that this estimate was far below
the actual price. The planters showed a decided tendency to blow hot or
cold according to the purpose in view, and in these two particular
statements Sir John was pleading for better treatment from the
merchants. Yet it is reasonably certain that tobacco was at a low ebb in
the years from 1629 to 1633, and sold at a small fraction of the figures
of the preceding decade.[4-26] The Governor repeatedly wrote asking for
relief, while in the Assembly attempts were made to restore the market
by restricting the size of the annual crop.[4-27]

Yet things must have taken a favorable turn soon after, for in 1634 the
planters informed the King's Commissioners that they would not sell him
their tobacco at less than six pence in Virginia and fourteen pence
delivered in England.[4-28] Later the King wrote to the Governor and
Council that the rate had recently "doubly or trebly advanced."[4-29]
This is substantiated by the fact that the Commissioners, in 1638,
allowed the planters "4d. a pound clear of all charges," despite which
they complained that in an open market they could do better.[4-30]

In 1638 several prominent Virginians estimated that on an average during
the preceding eleven years they had received not more than two pence for
their tobacco, but here again it is probable that there was some
exaggeration.[4-31] In 1649 the author of _A New Description of
Virginia_ stated that tobacco sold in Virginia for three pence a
pound.[4-32] All in all it seems that prices in the early years of the
settlement varied from five shillings to a few pence, that a disastrous
slump occurred at the end of the third decade, followed by a rapid
recovery which brought the rate to about three pence, at which figure it
remained fairly constant for twenty-five years or more throughout the
Civil War and most of the Commonwealth periods.

The return which the Virginia farmer received from his one staple crop
was determined by a number of factors over which he himself had but
little control. Had he been permitted to seek his own market and drive
his own bargain free from the restraining hand of the British
Government, no doubt he would have secured a much better price. But from
the moment it became apparent that the Virginia tobacco rivalled in
flavor that of the Spanish colonies and could command as ready a sale
throughout Europe, the trade was subjected to various regulations and
restrictions which proved most vexatious to the colony and elicited
frequent and vigorous protests. Neither James nor Charles had any idea
of permitting free trade. In their prolonged struggle with the liberal
party both saw in tobacco a ready means of aiding the Exchequer, and so
of advancing toward the goal of financial independence. These monarchs
were by no means hostile to Virginia. In fact, both took great interest
in the tiny settlement upon the James, which they looked upon as the
beginning of the future British colonial empire. Yet they lent too
willing an ear to those who argued that tobacco might be made to yield a
goodly revenue to the Crown without injury to the planters.

The policy adopted by the early Stuart kings and adhered to with but
minor changes throughout the colonial period consisted of four essential
features. First, the tobacco raised in the plantations should be sent
only to England; second, upon entering the mother country it must pay a
duty to the Crown; third, Spanish tobacco should be excluded or its
importation strictly limited; lastly, the cultivation of the plant in
England itself was forbidden.

In the years when the colony was still weak and dependent upon the
mother country this program was not unfair. The prohibition of tobacco
growing in England, however unnecessary it would have been under
conditions of free trade, was felt by the planters to be a real
concession, while the restrictions upon foreign importations saved them
from dangerous competition at the very time when they were least able to
combat it. Nor were they seriously injured by the imposition of the
customs duties. The planters themselves imagined that the incidence of
this tax fell upon their own shoulders and that they were impoverished
to the full extent of the revenues derived from it. But in this they
were mistaken. The duty, in the last resort, was paid not by the
planters but by the British consumers. The colonists were affected
adversely only in so far as the enhanced price of tobacco in England
restricted the market.

On the other hand, the prohibition of foreign trade was a very real
grievance and elicited frequent protests from the planters. Dutch
merchants paid high prices for the Virginia tobacco and offered their
manufactured goods in return at figures far below those of the British
traders. The Virginians could not understand why they should not take
advantage of this opportunity. "I humbly desire to be informed from your
honors," wrote Governor Harvey to the Virginia Commissioners in 1632,
"whether there be any obstacle why we may not have the same freedome of
his Majesties other subjects to seek our best market."[4-33]

But Harvey was attacking what already had become a fixed policy of the
Crown, a policy which was to remain the cornerstone of the British
colonial system for centuries. The Government had, therefore, not the
slightest intention of yielding, and from time to time issued strict
orders that all colonial tobacco, whether of Virginia or the West
Indies, be brought only to England or to English colonies. When Sir
William Berkeley was appointed Governor in 1642 he was instructed to
"bee verry careful that no ships or other vessels whatsoever depart from
thence, freighted with tobacco or other commodities which that country
shall afford, before bond with sufficient securities be taken to his
Majesty's use, to bring the same directly into his Majesty's Dominions
and not elsewhere."[4-34]

Despite the insistence of the British Government in this matter, there
is abundant evidence to show that the Virginians continued to indulge in
direct trade with the continent for many years after the overthrow of
the Company. In 1632 Governor Harvey wrote that "our intrudinge
neighbours, the Dutch, doe allow us eighteen peance p. pound" for
tobacco, while a few months later we find him reporting the attempt of
John Constable and others "to defraud his Majesty of his duties by
unloading in the Netherlands."[4-35]

With the advent of the English Civil War and throughout the Commonwealth
period Virginia enjoyed a large degree of independence and found it
possible to trade with the Dutch almost with impunity. Even the strict
Berkeley seems to have felt it no disloyalty for the planters to seek
foreign markets for their staple while the mother country was torn by
the contending armies of King and Parliament. And so the merchantmen of
Flushing and Amsterdam pushed their prows into every river and creek in
Virginia and Maryland, taking off large quantities of tobacco and giving
in return the celebrated manufactured goods of their own country. At
Christmas 1648, if we may believe the testimony of the author of _A New
Description of Virginia_, there were trading in the colony ten ships
from London, two from Bristol, seven from New England and twelve from
Holland. In 1655 the statement was made that "there was usually found
intruding upon the plantation divers ships, surruptitiously carrying
away the growth thereof to foreign ports to the prejudice of this
Commonwealth."[4-36]

Thus in the years prior to the Restoration Virginia was never fully
subjected to the operation of the British colonial system. When the
price of tobacco in the London market fell lower and lower, the planters
might and often did find relief by defying the King's commands and
trading directly with the Dutch.[4-37] And this benefitted them doubly,
for not only did they strike a better bargain with the foreign traders,
but every cargo of tobacco diverted from England tended to relieve the
market there and restore prices. In fact there can be little doubt that
the frequent violations of the trade restrictions of this period alone
saved the colony from the poverty and distress of later days and made
possible the prosperity enjoyed by the planters.

It must be noted also that of the tobacco sent to England itself, a part
was reshipped to foreign countries. In 1610 a law was enacted for the
refunding of all import duties upon articles that were re-exported. This
drawback applied also to colonial products, but under Charles I an
exception was made in their case and the privilege withdrawn. In
consequence the importers made a vigorous protest in Parliament, and the
King, in 1631, modified his policy by ordering that of the nine pence
duty then in operation, six pence should be refunded when the tobacco
was shipped abroad. In 1632 the drawback was increased to seven pence
leaving the total duty paid by the merchants who traded through England
to foreign countries two pence a pound only.[4-38] Although this
constituted a most serious obstacle to trade and at times aroused the
merchants to bitter protest, it by no means completely blocked
re-exportation. So great were the natural qualifications of Virginia for
producing tobacco, that it was possible to purchase a cargo from the
planters on the James, proceed with it to London, pay there the two
pence a pound duty, reship it to the continent and sell it there at a
profit.[4-39] Although this trade was not extensive, it must have had an
important influence in maintaining prices and in bringing prosperity to
all classes in the colony.

Thus Virginia, contrary to the wishes of the mother country and in
defiance of her regulations, enjoyed for its staple product in the years
prior to 1660, a world market. Whether by direct trade or by
re-exportation from England a goodly share of the annual crop was
consumed in foreign countries, a share which had it been left in England
to clog the market, would have reacted disastrously upon all concerned.

It is apparent, then, that in the first half century of its existence
Virginia was the land of opportunity. The poor man who came to her
shores, whether under terms of indenture or as a freeman, found it quite
possible to establish himself as a person of some property and
consideration. We may imagine the case of the servant who had completed
his term and secured his freedom at any time during the third decade of
the Seventeenth century. As we have seen, it was an easy matter for him
to secure a small patch of land and the tools with which to cultivate
it. By his unassisted efforts, if he applied himself steadily to the
task, he could produce a good crop of tobacco, consisting perhaps of
some 400 pounds. This he could sell to the merchants for from two
shillings to six pence a pound, or a total of from £10 to £40.[4-40]

In the years from 1630 to 1640, when the price of tobacco seems to have
stabilized itself at from two to three pence, cases of such
extraordinary returns must have been of less frequent occurrence, but to
some extent lower prices were offset by larger crops. If our freedman in
1635 could raise 800 pounds of leaf and dispose of it for four pence,
his income would be £13.6.8; in 1649, by producing 1,000 pounds, he
could sell it at three pence for £12.10.0. In fact, it is not too much
to say that the average annual income from the labor of one able worker
at any time prior to 1660 was not less than £12. When we take into
consideration the fact that the planter produced his own food, and that
out of the proceeds of his tobacco crop he paid only his taxes and his
bills to the English importers, it is evident that he had a goodly
margin of profit to lay aside as working capital.

It must not be forgotten, however, that this margin was greatly reduced
by the high cost of clothing, farm implements and all other articles
brought from across the ocean. The long and dangerous voyage from London
to the Chesapeake made the freight rates excessive, while the merchants
did not scruple to drive a hard bargain whenever possible. The letters
of the Governors are filled with complaints against the exactions of
these men. "This year the Merchants have bought our tobacco with their
commodities at less than a penny the pounde," Harvey wrote in 1630, "and
have not shamed to make the planters pay twelve pounds Sterlinge the
tunn freight home."[4-41] Two years later he complained that a certain
Captain Tucker had just sailed leaving his stores well stocked with
goods, but with "instructions to his factors not to sell but at most
excessive rates."[4-42] In 1628, the Governor, Council and Burgesses, in
a petition to the King, declared that for years they had "groaned under
the oppression of unconscionable and cruel merchants by the excessive
rates of their commodities."[4-43] Six years later Governor Harvey
stated that all things which "come hither" are sold at "thrice the value
they cost in England."[4-44]

It is obvious, however, that after all expenses had been paid, a goodly
margin of profit was left, a margin perhaps averaging some three or four
pounds sterling. The provident and industrious immigrant, a few years
after the conclusion of his term, might well lay aside enough to make it
possible for him in turn to secure a servant from England. This
accomplished, he at once rose into the class of employers and his future
advance was limited only by his capabilities and his ambition.

We would naturally expect to find, then, that during these years a large
percentage of those who came to the colony under terms of indenture,
sooner or later acquired land, perhaps bought servants, and became
persons of some standing in the colony. Certainly the opportunity was
theirs. It will be interesting therefore to study the early records in
order to glean what evidence we may concerning this matter. If the
servants graduated in any appreciable numbers into the planter class,
the patents, wills, inventories, land transfers and muster rolls could
hardly fail to yield some evidence of the fact.

Turning first to the earliest period, we find that of the laborers who
were imported by the London Company to cultivate the public lands, a
fair proportion became proprietors and were regarded by later comers
with especial esteem as "ancient planters." At the termination of their
service they were granted 100 acres and when this was fully cultivated
received another tract of the same extent. To the apprentices bound out
to tenants even more liberal treatment was accorded, for they were
provided with a year's store of corn, a house, a cow, clothing, armor,
household utensils, farm tools and as much land as they could
till.[4-45]

The guiding hand of the Company was missed by the freedmen after the
revoking of the charter, for the Governors seem to have left them to
shift for themselves. Yet this fact did not prevent many from forging
ahead, acquiring land, and in some cases positions of trust in the
Government itself. In Hotten's _Immigrants_ is published a muster roll
for the year 1624 of all the settlers in Virginia, in which servants are
carefully distinguished from freemen.[4-46] By following, as well as the
imperfect records of the period permit, the after careers of the former,
it is possible to determine with a fair degree of accuracy to what
extent the small farmer class at this period was recruited from persons
coming to the colony under terms of indenture.

Of the forty-four Burgesses who sat in the Assembly of 1629, no less
than seven--John Harris, William Allen, William Popleton, Anthony
Pagett, Richard Townsend, Adam Thoroughgood and Lionell Rowlston--were
listed as servants in the muster of 1624.[4-47] Thus some sixteen per
cent of this important body, the Virginia House of Commons, at this time
was made up of men who five years previously had been working out their
passage money. Among the thirty-nine members of the House of 1632, six
appear as servants in the muster--Thomas Barnett, Adam Thoroughgood,
Lionell Rowlston, Thomas Crump, Roger Webster and Robert Scotchmon.
Whether there were other members who came over under terms of indenture
but secured their freedom before 1624, we have no means of determining.

The author of _Virginia's Cure_, published in 1662, asserted that the
Burgesses "were usual such as went over as servants thither; and though
by time, and industry, they may have obtained competent estates, yet by
reason of their poor and mean condition, were unskilful in judging of a
good estate, either of church or Commonwealth."[4-48] This statement is
a gross exaggeration both as to the composition of the Burgesses and
their abilities. Instances of the election of freedmen to the House,
fairly frequent in the early years of the colony, became rarer as the
century advanced and the field of selection widened. Yet in the Assembly
of 1652, of the thirty-five members, eight or nine appear on the patent
rolls as headrights brought over by others.[4-49] It is evident that
even so late as the middle of the century the door of opportunity was
still open to the freedmen.

In the absence of a complete census for the decades after 1624, it is
very difficult to determine what proportion of the servants listed in
the muster roll of that year subsequently became landowners. Some light
is thrown on the matter by a search through the patent books. Here are
found a surprisingly large number of persons who in 1624 were servants.
Among these are Anthony Jones, John Sparkes, John Cooke, Roger Delk,
John Trussell, William Woolritch, Pettyplace Cloyse, Edward Sparshott,
William Dawson, Richard Bell, Robert Browne, Nicholas Browne, John
Chandler, Lionell Rowlston, Thomas Savadge, Samuel Bennett, Daniel
Shurley, James Hatfield, Adam Thoroughgood, John Robinson, John Hill,
John Seaward, William Ramshaw, Samuel Weaver, John Upton, John Watson,
Thomas Crompe and John Russell.[4-50]

Of these persons several acquired a fair degree of wealth and became of
importance in the early life of the colony. It is interesting to note
also, that some were men of good condition in England, the case of Adam
Thoroughgood, whose brother Sir John Thoroughgood was at one time
secretary to the Earl of Pembroke, is notable in this respect. John
Hill, before coming to Virginia, had been a book binder in Oxford
university, and his father had been a fletcher.[4-51] The patents of
Thomas Crompe and John Russell state that fifty acres was due in each
case for the "personal adventure" of the patentee, but since they are
distinctly listed as servants in 1624 it seems probable that
subsequently each made a visit to England and put in claims for the
headright for the return voyage.[4-52]

Thus it is evident that a large proportion of the landholders during and
prior to 1635 had come to the colony under terms of indenture, either
under the Company or with private individuals. Perhaps it would not be
unfair to estimate this proportion at from thirty to forty per cent, but
it must be distinctly understood that the matter cannot be determined
with any degree of accuracy or finality. Some years later Governor
Berkeley in an address before the Assembly, stated that hundreds of
examples testified to the fact that no man in Virginia was denied the
opportunity to rise and to acquire both property and honor.[4-53]
Careful research tends to corroborate this assertion but it does not and
cannot show whether the bulk of the early planters came to the colony as
freemen or as indentured servants.

During the years from 1635 to 1660 the process of building up a class of
small farmers in large part from freedmen continued unabated. But the
difficulties of the investigator in studying this period are also very
great. Yet it is possible, by examining the names that appear in the
land patents and wills, and comparing them with the list of headrights,
to arrive at fairly satisfactory results. We find that of the 131
persons listed in the York county wills from 1646 to 1659 no less than
twenty-five appear as headrights for others. Of these the major part
became landowners, some of them men of influence in Virginia.[4-54] The
Rappahannock wills for the years from 1656 to 1664 show a like result.
Thirty-nine persons appear in the records, of whom seven came in as
headrights.[4-55]

There is always the possibility of error in identifying these persons
for the recurrence of such names as Smith, Jones, Turner, Davis, Hall,
the monotonous repetition of a few common given names, and the universal
omission of middle names add greatly to our difficulties. Moreover,
mistakes are apt to occur because of the transfer of headrights by sale.
The free immigrant to whom was due fifty acres for his "personal
adventure" might not care to settle on the frontier where alone
unpatented land could usually be found. At times he sold his right and
purchased a plantation in some one of the older and more advanced
counties. It is not conclusively proved, then, that a certain person
came as a servant merely because he is listed as a headright. On the
other hand, the fact that it was the custom to set forth such transfers
clearly in the patent itself, justifies the conclusion that in the cases
where no statement of the kind is made, the headright for which the land
was granted usually came in under terms of indenture.

In Volume III of the land patents are listed in the years from 1635 to
1653 patents to fifty-seven persons in James City county.[4-56] Of these
no less than thirty-one are found also as headrights belonging to
others, although a duplication of names in several cases makes
identification uncertain. One person only claimed the fifty acres for
having paid his own passage to Virginia. When all possible allowance is
made for transfers of rights it is obvious that at this time freedmen
were still entering freely into the class of landowners.

An examination of the James City county patents in Volume IV, covering
the years from 1653 to 1663, leads to similar results, for of the
eighty-five names which appear there, forty-five are listed as
headrights belonging to others. And although the tracts granted these
men were usually small in size, in certain cases they were far in excess
of the average plantation. Thus Edward Cole, who appears as a headright
in 1642, patented 900 acres in 1655;[4-57] Thomas Warburton patented
1,664 acres;[4-58] George Gilbert 1,000 acres; Francis Burwell 1,000 and
John Underwood 2,000 acres.[4-59] The number of years which elapsed
between the listing of the headrights and the granting of the patents
varied from two to twenty-eight. The average for the thirty-five cases
in which the dates are given is twelve years. As the claims for
headrights were often made long after the actual arrival of the servant,
it may be assumed that the average was even greater than this. Once
more, however, it must be remembered that these lists do not record
personal transfers of land, while it is quite certain that many
freedmen, instead of patenting unoccupied tracts, secured their little
farms by purchase. Some probably became proprietors in the very first
year of their freedom and set to work with hoe and plow to wrest their
living from the soil.

In the patent rolls the bulk of the headrights are alluded to simply as
"persons," leaving it undecided whether those included in the various
lists are freemen or servants. But occasionally the newcomers are
specifically described as "servants," in which case, of course, there
can be no doubt whatever as to their status. By selecting at random a
number of names from those so termed, avoiding for convenience sake all
Smiths, Joneses and others the frequent recurrence of whose names would
make identification difficult, it is possible to arrive at definite
conclusions by following, as best we can, their careers in after life.
With this in view we have made up the following list of servants: Henry
Arnetrading, George Archer, Silvester Atkins, Nicholas Atwell, Edward
Ames, John Aram, Robert Arnall, Peter Asheley, William Baldwin, Edward
Burt, Francis Baile, John Bauchees, John Bishop, John Blackstone,
Anthony Box, Michael Brichley, Peter Buck, William Burcher, John Causey,
Robert Chesheire, Thomas Chilcott, Thomas Clayton, Annanias Coplestone,
James Courtney, Thomas Cropp, Thomas Connagrave, John Day, John Dodman,
Jonathan Ellison, Edward Eastwood, James Fletcher, Thomas Foanes, John
Fouke, Francis Francklin, Armstrong Foster, Robert Fossett, John Farr,
Robert Garsell, George Gilbert, Henry Giles, Hector Godbear, Francis
Gray, Reginald Griffin, Thomas Halcock, Thomas Hand, Henry Hartwell,
Hugh Hayes, John Hedler, Richard Huett, John Hodgbins, John Holdin,
William Hankinson, John Hether, Lazarus Manning, Thomas Pattison, John
Pullapin, Sampson Robins, George Walton, Francis Withers, Robert Webstie
and Thomas Warden. A search through the patent rolls, wills, tithable
lists and other data found in the records of the period, has led to the
more or less positive identification of fifteen of these persons.

John Bishop, who was transported by Thomas Gray, became a man of
influence and means. He represented Charles City county in the House of
Burgesses in the sessions of 1644, 1652 and 1653, and was variously
known as Captain Bishop or Mr. Bishop.[4-60] Although he became a
landowner so early as 1638,[4-61] his family arrived from England only
in 1651. Francis Gray, brought to Virginia at the age of fifteen by
Joseph Johnson, also became prominent, securing a seat in the Assembly
and acquiring a fair estate. In 1653 he took up 750 acres in Charles
City county, while ten years later he is credited with 374 acres more in
Westmoreland.[4-62] His will was recorded in 1667.[4-63]

George Archer became an extensive landowner, patenting 250 acres in
1663, 550 acres in 1665, 784 acres in 1671 and 1,395 acres in
1673.[4-64] In 1691 he received, in conjunction with others, title to a
tract of 2,827 acres in Henrico.[4-65] John Holding patented in York
county 850 acres in 1649 and 389 acres in 1653.[4-66] William Baldwin,
who came in the Plaine Joan when he was twenty-four years of age,
received three grants of land, one for 600 acres in York county, one for
67 acres in Isle of Wight, and one, in conjunction with Richard
Lawrence, for 300 in Rappahannock.[4-67]

Thomas Pattison, transported by Francis Epes in 1635, took up in
Lancaster two tracts, one for 200 acres and one for 400.[4-68] He also
became part owner of two more tracts, one for 220 acres and the other
for 504.[4-69] John Dodman secured a patent for 350 acres in
Westmoreland in the year 1662.[4-70] Thomas Warden is mentioned as a
landowner in James City county in 1643.[4-71] George Gilbert,
transported in 1635 by Joseph Johnson, took up fifty acres in James City
county in 1643.[4-72] In 1663, in partnership with Richard Scruely, he
patented 1,000 acres in the same county north of the Chickahominy
river.[4-73] John Blackstone acquired two tracts, one for 100 acres and
the other for 151 acres,[4-74] while William Burcher received a grant
for 300 acres.[4-75]

Several of these men who came as servants to the Eastern Shore are found
in succeeding years among the yeomanry of Accomac and Northampton. Henry
Arnetrading, Armstrong Foster, William Burcher and Sampson Robins were
signers of the Northampton submission to the Commonwealth in 1652.[4-76]
Henry Arnetrading was the owner of 300 acres of land.[4-77] Armstrong
Foster was the official tobacco viewer for Hungers, a position entailing
no little responsibility.[4-78] Sampson Robins received a patent for a
tract of land in Northampton in 1655.[4-79] Thomas Clayton is listed
among the Northampton tithables of 1666.[4-80]

In the case of John Day some uncertainty arises. Apparently there were
two men of this name in the colony, one transported by John Slaughter,
and the other not only paying for his own passage, but for that of a
servant as well.[4-81] A John Day later secured 400 acres in Gloucester
county,[4-82] but whether it was the one who had come as a servant or
the one who had entered the colony as a freeman, apparently there is no
way of ascertaining.

All in all the story of these men tends to confirm the conclusions
hitherto arrived at. It must be remembered that the mortality among the
servants in the tobacco fields in the early days of the colony was
extremely heavy. It is not improbable that of our sixty-one servants,
twenty or more succumbed before the completion of their first year. That
of the remaining forty-one, fourteen or fifteen established themselves
as solid farmers, while several became men of influence in the colony,
is a striking proof that at this period many freedmen had the
opportunity to advance. Taking it for granted that the records of some
of the sixty-one have been lost, or that our research has failed to
reveal them, we once more come to the conclusion that a full thirty or
forty per cent of the landowners of the period from 1635 to 1666 came to
the colony under terms of indenture.

On the other hand, it is equally positive that the class of poor
planters was recruited in part from free immigrants, men who paid their
own passage across the ocean and at once established themselves as
freeholders. Of this too, the records furnish ample testimony. Thus in
1636 we find that Richard Young was granted 100 acres in Warwick "due
him for his personal adventure and for the transportation of his wife
Dorothy Young."[4-83] A year later Roger Symonds received 100 acres in
Charles City "due him for the transportation of his wife, Alice, and one
servant, Richard Key."[4-84] Similarly in May 1636, Thomas Wray was
allowed 50 acres for his "personal adventure." Such cases could be
multiplied indefinitely.[4-85]

A careful analysis of the patent rolls from 1623 to July 14, 1637,
published in the _Virginia Magazine of History and Biography_ for April,
1901, shows conclusively that the lists contain the names of many
persons who at no time were under terms of indenture. Of the 2,675 names
appearing in the records, the editor states that 336 are positively
known to have come over as freemen, many of them being heads of
families. "There are 245 persons whose names do not occur as headrights
and yet of whom it is not positively shown that they were freemen,
though the probability seems to be that by far the greater number were.
And there were 2,094 persons whose transportation charges were paid by
others. This last number includes some negroes, all those specifically
termed 'servants' and all others.... It would probably be a fair
estimate to say that of the names represented in the patents cited,
there were about 675 free men, women and children who came to Virginia
and about 2000 servants and slaves."[4-86] Similarly in the issue of the
magazine for January, 1902, the editor says that "for some years, about
this period, it is probable (from the best calculations which can be
made) that seventy-five per cent of the emigrants to Virginia were
indentured servants."[4-87]

There seems to be no reason to doubt the accuracy of these conclusions.
Certainly any study of immigration to Virginia in the Seventeenth
century is woefully incomplete if it fails to take into consideration
the very considerable proportion of free settlers. On the other hand,
it is probable that a similar study of the lists for a later date would
show a smaller percentage of freemen. However this may be, it is evident
that by far the larger part of the newcomers at all periods must have
been indentured servants intended for service in the tobacco fields. In
1638 Richard Kemp wrote Secretary Windebanke that "of hundreds which are
yearly transported, scarce any but are brought in as merchandise to make
sale of."[4-88]

Yet it must not be forgotten that any immigration of poor freemen,
however small, would have a very marked influence upon the formation of
the small farmer class. Of the host of servants a certain proportion
only, a proportion probably less than fifty per cent, could hope even in
the most favorable times to become freeholders. If they survived the
hardships and dangers of the service with their masters, it still
remained for them to acquire property and win for themselves a place in
the life of the colony. And to accomplish this they must display
determination, intelligence, industry and thrift, qualities by no means
universal among the classes in England from which the servants were
chiefly drawn. But for the free immigrant there need be no period of
probation. He might at once purchase his farm, erect his home, secure
all necessary tools and put out his crop of tobacco. And whereas the
servant usually found it possible to maintain a family only after many
years of hard work, perhaps not at all, the free settler often married
before leaving England and brought his wife and children with him.

In conclusion it may be said that in the first fifty years of the
colony's existence conditions were very favorable for the graduation of
the servant into the class of small freeholders, that the records amply
prove that many succeeded in doing so, but that at this period a fair
proportion of free immigrants also came to the colony. Before the
expiration of the Commonwealth period was formed from these two
sources, perhaps in not unequal proportions, a vigorous, intelligent,
independent yeomanry, comprising fully 90 percent of all the
landowners.




_CHAPTER V_

THE RESTORATION PERIOD


The people of Virginia hailed the Restoration with unaffected joy. Not
only did they anticipate that the termination of the long period of
civil war and unrest in England would react favorably upon their own
prosperity, but they felt that Sir William Berkeley's well known loyalty
and his action in proclaiming Charles II immediately after the execution
of his father, might assure them the King's especial favor now that he
at last had come into undisputed possession of his throne. They were
doomed to bitter disappointment, however, for the Restoration brought
them only hardship and suffering, discontent and rebellion.

No sooner had the royal Government been safely installed than it set to
work to perfect and to enforce the colonial policy which in principle
had been accepted from the first. The ties which united the colonies
with the mother country were strengthened, those which gave them a
common interest with foreign nations in so far as possible were snapped.
The British empire was to become a unit, closely knit by economic bonds
and presenting to all other nations a hostile front. With this in view
Parliament passed a series of Navigation Acts, under which the trade of
the colonies was regulated for many years to come.

It is necessary for us to enquire, therefore, into the effects of these
laws upon the tobacco trade, for tobacco, as we have seen, was the key
to the prosperity of the colony, and favorable economic conditions alone
could make it possible for the newcomer to establish himself as a member
of the Virginia yeomanry. If the strict enforcement of the Navigation
Acts should bring low prices for tobacco and wipe out the margin of
profit for the man who tilled the soil with his own hands, not only
would the small planter class not expand, but might actually decline in
numbers.

There were three main features of the colonial legislation of Parliament
during this period, all of them interrelated and all tending toward the
one great object of keeping the English plantations for the English. It
was provided that the chief colonial products such as tobacco and sugar
should be sent only to England or to English colonies, that the colonies
should with few exceptions import goods only from British territory,
that all products taken to or from any colony should be conveyed only in
English vessels manned by crews composed mainly of Englishmen.

In committing itself to this policy the royal Government felt that the
plantations would play a useful and necessary part in the great system
which was planned, and in so doing would find prosperity. It had been
the hope of the English people that their colonies would produce the
articles which were so badly needed by the mother country to revive her
waning industry and permit a greater measure of economic independence.
Although more than half a century had passed since the first foothold
had been gained upon the American continent, this expectation was as far
from realization as ever. The colonies, from Massachusetts to Barbados
were producing, not the articles which England especially needed, but
those for which they had the greatest natural aptitude, especially
tobacco and sugar. And these staples they sent, not to England alone,
but to various foreign countries as well.

In short the vision of a closely knit, self-sustaining empire, the
vision which had been in men's minds for many decades before the
founding of Jamestown, seemed to have proved delusive. The colonies
were developing interests and commercial connections hostile to those of
the mother country, were nourishing the manufactures and shipping of
foreign nations almost as much as those of England. And this the
Government at London would not tolerate. The colonial trade with
strangers must come to an end. If Virginia and Maryland produced more
tobacco than the English market could absorb, they could find ready
relief by turning their energies into other channels. Let them furnish
the old country with pig iron or potash or silk or ship-stores and they
would find ready and eager purchasers. So reasoned the English, and as
their views were backed by the mandates of Crown and Parliament, the
colonists were forced to submit. If they could fit themselves into the
system prescribed for them, all would be well and good; if they found
this impossible, they would have to suffer without hope of redress.

And suffer Virginia did for a full quarter of a century. The tobacco of
the Chesapeake bay colonies had long since reached the point where it
required a world market. If confined to England alone, only a fraction
of the output could be consumed and disaster was certain. It was well
enough for the Government to restrict the importation of Spanish leaf
and to prohibit the planting of tobacco in England, these regulations
could do no more than give the colonists undisputed possession of the
home market, and the home market was not enough. This point seems to
have been ignored by those writers who have contended that the strict
enforcement of the British colonial system in itself entailed no
hardship upon the tobacco colonies.

"It is obvious that any criticism of England's regulation of the
colonial tobacco trade, which is based on a laissez-faire social
philosophy," says George Lewis Beer, in _The Old Colonial System_, "is
equally applicable to the arrangement by means of which the tobacco
planter secured exclusive privileges in the home market."[5-1] Yet it is
certain that the tobacco growers of England could never have competed
with Maryland and Virginia had there been free trade. The prohibition of
planting in the old country was necessary only because of the tariff,
varying from 200 per cent in 1660 to 600 per cent in 1705, upon the
colonial product. And though the exclusion of Spanish tobacco was a more
real benefit, for the Spaniard produced varieties unknown in Virginia,
there is exaggeration here also. This is clearly shown by the fact that
at the end of the Seventeenth century England was sending millions of
pounds of her colonial tobacco to Spain itself.[5-2] The leaf was
brought from Virginia and Maryland, forced to pay a duty of about fifty
per cent, and re-exported to the Spanish ports, where it found a ready
sale. Had there been free exchange of commodities, the English colonies
would have sold to Spain more tobacco than the Spanish colonies to
England.

In truth the loss of the foreign market was a terrible disaster. In
framing the Navigation Acts it was not the intention of the Government
to stop entirely the flow of tobacco to the continent of Europe, but to
divert it from the old channels and make it pass through England. It was
therefore provided that in case the leaf was shipped out again to
foreign ports, all the duties, except one half of the Old Subsidy,
should be withdrawn.[5-7] The remaining half penny, however, amounted to
forty or fifty per cent of the original cost of the goods, and proved at
first an almost insuperable barrier to the European trade. Moreover, the
shortage of ships which resulted from the exclusion of the Dutch
merchants, the expense of putting in at the English ports, the long and
troublesome procedure of reshipping, all tended to discourage the
merchants and hamper re-exportation.

We may take for granted also that the resentment of Holland at the
Navigation Acts, which struck a telling blow at her maritime prestige,
played an important part in blocking foreign trade. The Dutch had been
the chief European distributors of the Virginia and Maryland tobacco,
and if they refused to take it, now that it could be secured only in
England, it would pile up uselessly in the London warehouses. They
understood well enough that the half penny a pound duty was a tribute
levied upon them by their most dangerous rival. It is not surprising
that instead of bowing to the new restrictions, they sought to free
their trade entirely from dependence on British tobacco, by fostering
the cultivation of the plant in their own country.

The colonists found an able defender in the merchant John Bland. In a
Remonstrance addressed to the King this man set forth with remarkable
clearness the evils which would result from the Navigation Acts, and
pleaded for their repeal. The Hollander was already beginning to plant
tobacco, he said, and would soon be able to supply all his needs at
home. "Will he, after accustomed to the tobacco of his own growth," he
asked, "ever regard that which is in Virginia? Will he ever afterwards
be induced to fetch it thence, when he finds his profit higher at home?
Will he ever buy that of us, when by passing so many hands, and so much
charge contracted thereon, is made so dear, that he can have it cheaper
in his own territories? (Surely no.) Therefore it clearly appears, that
being so, of necessity we must lose that Trade and Commerce."

"If the Hollanders must not trade to Virginia, how shall the Planters
dispose of their Tobacco? The English will not buy it, for what the
Hollander carried thence was a sort of tobacco not desired by any other
people, nor used by us in England but merely to transport for Holland.
Will it not then perish on the Planters hands?... Can it be believed
that from England more ships will be sent than are able to bring thence
what tobacco England will spent? If they do bring more, must they not
lose thereby both stock and Block, principle and charges? The tobacco
will not vend in England, the Hollanders will not fetch it from England;
what must become thereof?... Is not this a destruction to the commerce?
For if men lose their Estates, certainly trade cannot be
encreased."[5-8]

The enforcement of the trade laws was indirectly the cause of still
another misfortune to the colonies, for the two wars with Holland which
grew out of it reacted disastrously upon their trade. In fact, on each
occasion the small stream of tobacco which had trickled over the dam of
restrictions into foreign countries was for a time almost entirely cut
off. Not only did the tobacco exports to Holland itself come to an end,
but the Dutch war vessels played havoc with the trade between England
and other countries and even between England and her colonies.

The loss of their foreign exports was calamitous to the planters. Had
the demand for tobacco been more elastic, the consequences might not
have been so fatal, for declining prices would have stimulated
consumption and made it possible for England to absorb most of the
output. But the duty kept up the price and the result was a ruinous glut
in the English market. Tobacco sufficient for a continent poured into
the kingdom, where since the normal outlet was blocked by the half penny
a pound on re-exported leaf, it piled up uselessly.

The effect upon prices was immediate. The planters were forced to take
for their crops half of what they had formerly received and had reason
for rejoicing if they could dispose of it at all. In 1662 Governor
Berkeley and other leading citizens stated that the price of tobacco had
fallen so low that it would not "bear the charge of freight and customs,
answer the adventure, give encouragement to the traders and subsistence
to the inhabitants."[5-9] In 1666 Secretary Thomas Ludwell told Lord
Arlington that tobacco was "worth nothing."[5-10] Later in the same year
the planters complained that the price was so low that they were not
able to live by it.[5-11] "For the merchants, knowing both our
necessities and the unconsumable quantities of tobacco we had by us,"
they said, "gave us not the twentieth part of what they sold it for in
England."[5-12] Tobacco had so glutted the markets, it was declared, and
brought the planter so small a return, that he could "live but poorly
upon it." In fact, the merchants in 1666 had left the greater part of
the two preceding crops upon their hands.[5-13]

"Twelve hundred pounds of tobacco is the medium of men's crops," wrote
Secretary Ludwell to Lord John Berkeley in 1667, "and half a penny per
pound is certainly the full medium of the price given for it, which is
fifty shillings out of which when the taxes ... shall be deducted, is
very little to a poor man who hath perhaps a wife and children to cloath
and other necessities to buy. Truly so much too little that I can
attribute it to nothing but the great mercy of God ... that keeps them
from mutiny and confusion."[5-14] The following year he wrote in similar
vein. The market was glutted; a third of the planters' tobacco was left
on their hands; the rest sold for nothing.[5-15]

The Governor and Council declared that the merchant "allows not much
above a farthing a pound for that which the planter brings to his door.
And if there shall be any amongst us who shall be able to ship his
tobacco on his own account, it will be at such a rate as the tobacco
will never repay him, since they are inforced to pay from £12 to £17 per
ton freight, which usually was but at seven pounds."[5-16] "A large part
of the people are so desperately poor," wrote Berkeley in 1673, "that
they may reasonably be expected upon any small advantage of the enemy
to revolt to them in hopes of bettering their condition by sharing the
plunder of the colony with them."[5-17] That matters had not changed in
1681 is attested by the statement of the Council that the impossibility
of disposing of their tobacco without a heavy loss overwhelmed both
Virginia and Maryland, and brought upon them a "vast poverty and
infinite necessity."[5-18] "The low price of tobacco staggers the
imagination," Lord Culpeper wrote to Secretary Coventry, "and the
continuance of it will be the speedy and fatal ruin of this noble
Colony."[5-19]

These distressing conditions bore with telling weight upon the small
planters. The margin of profit which formerly had made it possible for
the freedman to advance rapidly was now wiped out entirely and the poor
man found it impossible to keep out of debt. In 1668 Secretary Ludwell
declared that no one could longer hope to better himself by planting
tobacco.[5-20] Eight years later Nathaniel Bacon, in justifying his
rebellion declared that the small farmers were deeply in debt and that
it was "not in the power of labor or industry" to extricate them.[5-21]
"The poverty of Virginia is such," said a certain John Good in 1676,
"that the major part of the inhabitants can scarce supply their wants
from hand to mouth, and many there are besides can hardly shift without
supply one year."[5-22] In 1673 the Governor and Council reported that
of the planters, "at least one third are single persons (whose labor
will hardly maintain them) or men much in debt," who might reasonably be
expected to revolt to the Dutch upon any small advantage gained by
them.[5-23] In 1680 they again reported that "the indigency of the
Inhabitants is such that they are in noe manner capacitated to support
themselves."[5-24] Three years later they wrote that "the people of
Virginia are generally, some few excepted, extremely poor, not being
able to provide against the pressing necessities of their
families."[5-25]

Despite this repeated and explicit testimony of the misery and poverty
of the colony during this period, which resulted from the stagnation of
the tobacco market after the passage of the Navigation Acts, the
surprising statement is made by Mr. George Lewis Beer, in _The Old
Colonial System_, that England's trade restrictions had nothing to do
with Bacon's Rebellion. "It has been at various times contended," he
says, "that the uprising was, in part at least, one against the laws of
trade and navigation. If there had existed in Virginia any widespread
and well defined feeling of antagonism to these laws, it would
unquestionably have found expression in the county grievances. Most of
these reports were drawn up in a number of articles, and in all there
were nearly two hundred of such separate subdivisions, yet only three of
this number refer in any way to these statutes. There is no valid reason
for assuming that the commercial system played any part whatsoever, or
was in any degree, an issue, in the upheaval of 1676."[5-26]

If by this statement it is meant that Bacon and his men did not rebel in
order to force the repeal of the Navigation Acts, or even that they did
not have the acts in mind at the time, there are many students of
Virginia history who will agree with it. But if Mr. Beer means that
these laws, with their baleful effect upon the prosperity of Virginia,
did not produce the conditions fundamental to the rising, he is
certainly wrong. The evidence is overwhelming.

Surely no one will deny that misery, poverty and nakedness are breeders
of sedition. Had it not been for the Navigation Acts there would not
have been so many desperate persons in Virginia ready at any excuse to
fly in the face of the Government. Bacon's men were just the type of
miserably poor freemen that Berkeley several years before had feared
would rebel. He himself, in his proclamation of Feb. 10, 1677, spoke of
them as "men of mean and desperate fortunes."[5-27] William Sherwood
called the rebels rude and indigent persons, alluding to them as "tag,
rag and bobtayle."[5-28] Over and over again they are described as the
multitude, the rabble, the skum.

Exception must be taken also to the statement that had there existed in
Virginia any well-defined feeling of antagonism to the Navigation Acts
it would have found expression in the county grievances. It should be
remembered that these reports had been called for by the commissioners
sent over by Charles II to investigate the troubles. The men who drew
them up occupied the position of defeated rebels, and the grievances
were primarily a list of excuses for their treason. They all stood
trembling for their property, if they had any, and for their miserable
lives. The memory of the fate of Drummond and Bland and Arnold and many
others of their fellow rebels was fresh in their minds. It is not
reasonable to suppose that they would tell the King that they had risen
in arms against his authority in order to secure the overthrow of laws
which his Majesty considered of such vital importance, laws which
concerned intimately the royal revenue. Such a declaration would not
have seconded successfully their plea for mercy. This is made amply
clear by the reception accorded one of the few complaints which did
actually touch the Navigation Acts. The commissioners report it to the
King as "an extravagant request for liberty to transport their tobacco
to any of his Majesty's plantations without paying the imposts, payable
by act of Parliament, etc. This head is wholly mutinous--to desire a
thing contrary to his Majesty's royal pleasure and benefit and also
against an act of Parliament."[5-29]

Despite the obviously ruinous effects of the Navigation Acts upon
Virginia, Mr. Beer makes the assertion that there was no very serious
and general opposition to them in Virginia. "Apart from the criticisms
of Bland and Berkeley," he says, "there was virtually no complaint
against the system of trade enjoined by the Navigation Acts. While the
Barbados Assembly and that colony's governors were vociferous in their
protests, the Virginia legislature remained strangely mute."[5-30]

This silence on the part of the Virginia Assembly can by no means be
interpreted as an indication that the people of the colony felt the
Navigation Acts to be equitable and not injurious to their interests. It
meant only that no Assembly under Sir William Berkeley would dare
protest against an act which had received the royal sanction. That would
have seemed the veriest treason to the fiery old loyalist. And the
Assembly was entirely under Sir William's control. The members of both
Houses were his creatures and his henchmen. Over and over again it is
testified that the Assembly did nothing more than register his
will.[5-31] If then it did not protest, it was because Sir William did
not wish it to protest.

But this does not prove that the planters were not angered and alarmed
at the stringent acts. That they considered them baleful is amply proved
by their continuous complaints of the economic ruin which had overtaken
the colony. The method they chose of combatting the trade laws, a method
apt to be far more effective than the angry protests of the Barbados
Assembly, was to send the Governor to England to use his influence at
Court to have the acts modified or repealed. And Berkeley did what he
could. While in England he wrote a paper called _A Discourse and View of
Virginia_, which he hoped would induce the Government to change its
policy in regard to the colonies. "Wee cannot but resent," he said,
"that 40,000 people should be impoverished to enrich little more than 40
merchants, who being the whole buyers of our tobacco, give us what they
please for it. And after it is here sell as they please, and indeed have
40,000 servants in us at cheaper rates, than other men have slaves, for
they find them meat and drink and clothes. We furnish ourselves and
their seamen with meat and drink, and all our sweat and labor as they
order us, will hardly procure us coarse clothes to keep us from the
extremities of heat and cold."[5-32] That Sir William was but the
mouthpiece of the colony in this protest there can be no doubt.

But his pleadings were in vain. England would not change the laws which
were the expression of her settled colonial policy. The planters must
adjust themselves to changed conditions no matter how bitter was the
experience. Sir William was told to go home to report to the Virginians
that they need not kick against the pricks, but that England would be
most pleased could they turn from the all-absorbing culture of tobacco
to the production of the raw materials she so greatly desired. And
Berkeley did return determined to exert every effort to lead the
colonists into new prosperity by inducing them to devote a part of their
energies to basic commodities. In fact he promised that in seven years
he would flood the British market with new Virginia goods.[5-33]

Although he set to work with his accustomed vigor to make good this
boast, he met with but scant success. Lack of efficient and skilled
labor, high wages, and not very favorable natural conditions, made it
impossible for him to compete with the long-established industries of
Europe. After a few years all attempts to make silk and potash and naval
stores were abandoned, and the planters continued to put their trust in
tobacco.

That Berkeley was never persuaded that the Navigation Acts were just or
beneficial is shown by his answer to the query of the Lords of Trade in
1671, when they asked him what impediments there were to the colony's
trade. "Mighty and destructive," he replied, "by that severe act of
Parliament which excludes us from having any commerce with any nation
in Europe but our own, so that we cannot add to our plantation any
commodity that grows out of it ... for it is not lawful for us to carry
a pipe-staff or a bushel of corn to any place in Europe out of the
King's dominions. If this were for his Majesty's service or the good of
his subjects we should not repine, whatever our sufferings are for it.
But on my soul it is the contrary of both."[5-35]

Nor is this the only direct testimony that the colonists were filled
with bitterness against the Navigation Acts. In 1673, during the war
with Holland, Sir John Knight declared that "the planters there do
generally desire a trade with the Dutch and all other nations, and speak
openly there that they are in the nature of slaves, so that the hearts
of the greatest part of them are taken away from his Majesty and
consequently his Majesty's best, greatest and richest plantation is in
danger, with the planters' consent, to fall into the enemy's hands, if
not timely prevented."[5-36] This is corroborated by the Council itself,
in an official letter to the King. "For in this very conjuncture had the
people had a distasteful Governor," they wrote, "they would have
hazarded the loss of this Country, and the rather because they doe
believe their Condicon would not be soe bad under the Dutch in Point of
Traffique as it is under the Merchants who now use them hardly, even to
extremity."[5-37]

It is evident, then, that throughout the entire reign of Charles II the
unhappy effects of the trade restrictions made of Virginia, which
formerly had been the land of opportunity for the poor man, a place of
suffering, poverty and discontent. The indentured servant who came over
after 1660 found conditions in the colony hardly more favorable for his
advancement than in England. The price of tobacco was now so low that it
was not possible for a man, by his unassisted efforts, to make a profit
by its cultivation. If Thomas Ludewell is correct in estimating the
return from the average crop at fifty shillings, the lot of the poor
man must have been hard indeed. Hungry he need not be, for food
continued to be abundant and easy to obtain, but of all that the
merchants gave him in return for his tobacco--clothing, farm implements,
household furnishings--he had to content himself with the scantiest
supply. And only too often his pressing needs brought him into hopeless
debt. As for imitating his predecessors of the earlier period in saving
money, purchasing land and servants and becoming a substantial citizen,
the task was well nigh impossible of accomplishment.

It would be expected, then, that even the most exhaustive investigation
could reveal but a few indentured servants, coming over after 1660, who
succeeded in establishing themselves in the Virginia yeomanry. And such,
indeed, is the case. Fortunately we have at hand for the period in
question the means of determining this matter with an exactness
impossible for the first half of the century. Nicholson's rent roll of
1704 supplies a complete list, with the exception of those in the
Northern Neck, of every landowner in Virginia. At the same time we have
in the Land Office at Richmond, the names of many thousands of persons
listed as headrights, constituting almost all the immigrants who came in
during the years from 1666 to the end of the century. Thus by comparing
the two lists and trying to identify on the rent roll the names found in
the patents, it is possible to fix the proportion of servants who won
for themselves at this time places among the landowning class.

Selecting the year 1672 as typical of the Restoration period, we find
that an examination of 672 of the names which are listed as headrights,
eleven only can be identified with any degree of certainty upon the rent
roll. Of 1116 names examined in the years from 1671 to 1674 inclusive,
only 26 are positively those of persons listed as landowners in 1704.
After making due allowance for the fact that uncertainty exists in a
number of other cases, and that some who prospered must have died in the
intervening years, it is safe to say that not more than five or six per
cent of the indentured servants of this period succeeded in establishing
themselves as independent planters.

These conclusions are borne out by the slowness with which the
population increased during the years following the passage of the
Navigation Acts. In the Commonwealth period the colony had advanced by
leaps and bounds, and the inhabitants, estimated at 15,000 in
1649,[5-38] were placed by Berkeley thirteen years later at
40,000.[5-39] Under the system which existed during these years, when
the colonists enjoyed a comparatively free trade, the population had
tripled. But after 1660, while the Virginia tobacco was dumped upon the
restricted English market and prices fell lower and lower, no such rapid
growth is noted. In 1671, nine years after his first estimate, Governor
Berkeley still placed the population at 40,000.[5-40] And even if we
accept the statement of the Virginia agents sent to England to secure a
charter for the colony that in 1675 the number of inhabitants was
50,000, it is evident that some pernicious influence was at work to
retard the development of England's most important American
province.[5-41] A drop in the rate of increase from 200 per cent during
the thirteen years prior to 1662, to 25 per cent in the thirteen years
following, is a clear index to the startling change brought about in the
colony by the British trade regulations.

These figures are the more significant in that there was no appreciable
slackening of the stream of servants. It is probable that in the period
from 1662 to 1675, which marked this estimated increase of 10,000
persons, fully 20,000 immigrants had come to the colony.[5-42] The
patent rolls for 1674 alone give the names of 1931 headrights, and this
year is by no means exceptional. No wonder Edward Randolph was
surprised at the smallness of the population and wrote to the Board of
Trade that it should be investigated why Virginia had not grown more,
"considering what vast numbers of servants and others had been
transported thither."[5-43]

But Randolph failed to realize that it is not the volume of immigration
but the number of people a country will support which in the end
determines the size of the population. It was not enough to pour into
the colony tens of thousands of poor settlers; opportunity had also to
be afforded them for earning an adequate living. And this opportunity,
because of the enforcement of the Navigation Acts and the consequent
ruin of trade, they did not have in Virginia. Throughout the Restoration
period not more than forty or fifty thousand people could exist upon the
returns from the tobacco crop, and beyond that the population could
hardly rise. If more poured in, they must of necessity live in misery
and rags, or migrate to other colonies where more favorable conditions
existed.

We are not at present concerned with what become of this surplus
population, but only with the fact that the Navigation Acts brought to a
dead halt the process of moulding freedmen and other poor settlers into
a prosperous yeomanry. By the year 1660 this class seems to have reached
its highest development, and had a rent roll of land owners been drawn
up at that date it would doubtless have shown almost as many names as
that of 1704. In fact it is fortunate that in the bitter years from 1660
to 1685 it did not succumb entirely. With the price of tobacco so low
that no profit was to be derived from it, with his family in rags, the
small planter might well have sold his land to his more wealthy neighbor
and joined the newly freed servants in moving on to western Carolina or
to the northern colonies.

In fact it is an indication of the solid character of the Virginia
yeomanry that it survived to enter the Eighteenth century, that under
Andros and Nicholson as well as under Sir William Berkeley it was the
soundest element in the life of the colony. Had it not been for the
crowning misfortune of the introduction of great swarms of negro slaves,
sooner or later it would have come once more into its own, would have
carved out for itself a new prosperity, would have filled Virginia from
the Atlantic to the Alleghanies.




_CHAPTER VI_

THE YEOMAN IN VIRGINIA HISTORY


Perhaps it would have been impossible for the Virginia yeoman to survive
the dark days of the Restoration period had it not been for the fact
that in the matter of his food supply he was independent of England and
her vexatious trade restrictions. He might be in rags, but there was no
reason why he should ever feel the pangs of hunger. Seldom in any
climate, in any age has food existed in such extraordinary variety and
in such lavish abundance.

Almost every planter, even the poorest, was possessed of cattle. The
_Perfect Discription_ states that in 1649 there were in the colony "of
Kine, Oxen, Bulls, Calves, twenty thousand, large and good."[6-1]
Fifteen years later the number had increased to 100,000.[6-2] Many a
little farmer, too poor to afford the help of a servant or a slave, had
cattle more than sufficient for his every need. John Splitimber, a
planter of meagre means, died in 1677 owning eight cows and one
bull.[6-3] John Gray, whose entire personal estate was valued only at
9,340 pounds of tobacco, possessed at his death six cows, six calves,
two steers and one heifer.[6-4] The inventory of the goods of Richard
Avery, another poor planter, shows three steers, one heifer, three small
cattle and one calf.[6-5] The yeoman not only secured from these animals
a goodly supply of beef, but milk in abundance from which he made butter
and cheese. The steers he used as beasts of burden.

The meat which most frequently appeared upon the table of the poor man
was that of swine. The planter marked his hogs and turned them loose in
the woods to feed upon roots and acorns. On the other hand, sheep did
not multiply in the colony, for the woods were not suited for their
maintenance, and those areas which had been cleared of trees could more
profitably be utilized for agriculture than for pasture lands. Mutton
was a rare delicacy even with the well-to-do.[6-6]

Poultry were exceedingly numerous. At the time of the Company it was
stated that the planter who failed to breed one hundred a year was
considered a poor manager. The _Perfect Discription_ says that the
poultry--"Hens, Turkies, Ducks, Geece"--were without number.[6-7]
Moreover, the wild fowls of the inland waterways were so numerous that
even the least skilful of huntsmen could readily bring down enough for
the needs of his family, and the mallard, the goose, the canvasback
appeared regularly in season upon every table.[6-8]

The planter always devoted a part of his land to the production of the
grain which was needed for his personal requirements. "They yearly plow
and sow many hundred acres of Wheat," it was said, "as good and faire as
any in the world."[6-9] At the same time maize grew so readily and its
cultivation proved so cheap, that cornbread formed a part of the diet
not only of the planters themselves, but of their servants and slaves.

From his garden, an inevitable accompaniment of every plantation, the
farmer secured a large variety of vegetables--potatoes, asparagus,
carrots, turnips, onions, parsnips, besides such fruits as strawberries,
gooseberries, raspberries; from his orchard he had apples, pears,
quinces, apricots, peaches.[6-10] Honey was abundant, and there were few
householders who did not have hives under the eaves of their
outbuildings. One planter, a Mr. George Pelton, is said to have made a
profit of £30 from his bees.[6-11] There were also many wild swarms in
the woods, which yielded a delicious return to the colonial
bee-hunters.[6-12]

It is easy to understand, then, why there were no complaints of hunger
even in the days when poverty was almost universal. The Virginia yeoman
spread always an abundant table. "He that is lazy and will not work,"
said the author of _New Albion_, "needs not fear starving, but may live
as an Indian, sometimes Oysters, Cockles, Wilkes, Clams, Scollons two
moneths together; sometimes wilde Pease and Vetches, and Long Oates,
sometimes Tuckaho, Cuttenoman ground, Nuts, Marhonions, sometimes small
nuts, Filbirds, Wallnuts, Pokeberries, ten sorts of Berries, Egs of
Foul, small Fish in Coves at low water will teach him to live idly." "It
must needs follow then that diet cannot be scarce, since both rivers and
woods afford it, and that such plenty of Cattle and Hogs are every
where, which yield beef, veal, milk, butter, cheese and other made
dishes, porke, bacon and pigs, and that as sweet and savoury meat as the
world affords, these with the help of Orchards and Gardens, Oysters,
Fish, Fowle and Venison, certainly cannot but be sufficient for a good
diet and wholsom accommodation, considering how plentifully they are,
and how easie with industry to be had."[6-13]

But the little planter, with the advent of the Navigation Acts, often
suffered keenly from a lack of adequate clothing. Again and again the
letters of the period state that the poor man was reduced to rags, that
he could not protect his family from the winter's cold. There was some
manufacture of cloth in the home, but the planter usually trusted to the
foreign trader to bring him every article of clothing. He had neither
the implements nor the skill to supply his own needs. During the
Restoration period, and again at the time of the war of the Spanish
Succession, when the price of tobacco fell so very low, many families
succeeded in producing enough homespun to supply their most pressing
needs.[6-14] But with the return of better conditions they laid aside
the loom and the wheel, and resumed their purchase of English cloth.

In normal times the poor planter was comfortably clad. Edward Williams,
in _Virginia Richly Valued_, advised every new immigrant to bring a
monmouth cap, a waistcoat, a suit of canvas, with bands, shirts,
stockings and shoes.[6-15] The author of _New Albion_ thought that each
adventurer should provide himself with canvas or linen clothes, with
shoes and a hat.[6-16]

The houses of the small planters were small but comfortable. "Pleasant
in their building," says John Hammond, "which although for most part
they are but one story besides the loft, and built of wood, yet
contrived so delightfully that your ordinary houses in England are not
so handsome, for usually the rooms are large, daubed and whitelimed,
glazed and flowered, and if not glazed windows, shutters which are made
very pritty and convenient."[6-17] _The New Description of Virginia_,
published in 1649, says: "They have Lime in abundance for their houses,
store of bricks made, and House and Chimnies built of Brick, and some of
Wood high and fair, covered with Shingell for Tyle."[6-18]

In the days of the Company most of the houses seem to have been made of
logs, and Butler, in his _Virginia Unmasked_, declared that they were
the "worst in the world," and that the most wretched cottages in England
were superior to them.[6-19] But the period of which Butler wrote was
exceptional, and before long the growing prosperity of the colony made
possible a great improvement in the dwellings of the people. The rough
log cabin gave way to the little framed cottage with chimneys at each
end.

A residence erected in one of the parishes of the Eastern Shore in 1635
to serve as a parsonage may be accepted as typical of the better class
of houses in Virginia at this time. It was made of wood, was forty feet
wide, eighteen deep and had a chimney at each end. On either side was an
additional apartment, one used as a study, the other as a
buttery.[6-20] For the poor man this was far too pretentious, and he had
to content himself with a home perhaps thirty by twenty feet, containing
at times two or three apartments, at times only one.

But such as it was it gave him ample protection against the heat of
summer and the cold of winter. Fuel he never lacked. When the frosts of
December and January came upon him, he had only to repair to the nearest
forest, axe in hand, to supply himself with wood in abundance. In this
way, not only would he keep a roaring blaze in his open fireplace, but
would widen the space available for the next summer's tobacco crop.

The surroundings of the planter's residence were severely plain. In the
yard, which usually was uninclosed, towered a cluster of trees, a
survival of the primeval forest. Nearby was the garden, with its flowers
and vegetables, the dove-cote, the barn, the hen house, perhaps a milk
house or even a detached kitchen. In some cases wells were sunk, but the
use of natural springs was more common.[6-21]

Of the plantation itself, only a fraction was under cultivation at one
time. Tobacco was exceedingly exhausting to the soil, but the cheapness
of land led the planters to neglect the most ordinary precautions to
preserve its fertility. They sowed year after year upon the same spot,
until the diminishing yield warned them of approaching sterility, and
then would desert it to clear a new field. This system made it necessary
for them to provide for the future by securing farms far larger in
extent than was dictated by their immediate requirements. They had to
look forward to the day when their land would become useless, and if
they were provident, would purchase ten times more than they could
cultivate at any one time. Thomas Whitlock, in his will dated 1659,
says: "I give to my son Thomas Whitlock the land I live on, 600 acres,
when he is of the age 21, and during his minority to my wife. The land
not to be further made use of or by planting or seating than the first
deep branch that is commonly rid over, that my son may have some fresh
land when he attains to age."[6-22]

One may gain an idea of the condition of the very poorest class of
freemen by an examination of the inventory of the estate of Walter
Dorch, drawn up in 1684. This man possessed two pairs of woollen cards,
and one spinning wheel, valued at 100 pounds of tobacco, one chest at
eighty pounds, four old trays at twenty pounds, two runletts at forty
pounds, one pail and one skillet at sixty pounds, one bowl at two
pounds, one feather bed, two pillows and three old blankets at 120
pounds of tobacco, three glass bottles at twenty pounds, one couch frame
at forty pounds, one pair of pot-hooks at forty, 800 tenpenny nails at
forty-five, and one old table and one sifter at twenty pounds. In all
the estate was valued at 587 pounds of tobacco.[6-23]

John Gray, who died in 1685, left personal property worth 9,340 pounds
of tobacco, consisting in part of six cows and six calves, four
yearlings, two steers, one heifer, one barrel of corn, one bull, ten
hogs and one horse. He had no servants and no slaves.[6-24] In better
circumstances was Richard Avery, who seems to have been a tanner by
profession. The inventory of his estate, recorded in 1686, includes one
horse with bridle and saddle, a cart and a yoke of steers, eight head of
cattle, 25 hogs, 118 hides, various kinds of tools, lumber to the value
of 400 pounds of tobacco, four pieces of earthenware, four beds with
mattresses and covers, poultry to the value of 180 pounds of tobacco,
some wheat in the ground and a batch of wearing linen. The entire
personal estate was valued at 14,050 pounds of tobacco. It included no
servants or slaves.[6-25]

John Splitimber, who is entered as a headright to Thomas Harwood in
1635, is typical of the planter who rose from small beginnings to a
state of comparative prosperity. This man, at his death in 1677,
possessed eight cows, one bull, four yearlings, four mares, 35 hogs, two
horses, two bolsters, a pillow, two blankets, a mattress, two bedsteads,
two guns, fifty-six pounds of pewter, two rugs, a table, three chests,
one old couch, two iron pots, two kettles, two stilyards, shovel and
tongs, two smothering irons, two axes, a few carpenter's tools, a saddle
and bridle, four casks, clothing to the value of 1,100 pounds of
tobacco, a frying pan, a butter pat, a jar, a looking glass, two milk
pans, one table cloth, nine spoons, a churn, a bible. The appraisers
placed the total value at 18,277 pounds of tobacco.[6-26] The inventory
records no servants or slaves, but it is probable that Splitimber at
times made use of indentured labor, as in November 1648 and again in
1652, we find him taking up land due for the transportation of certain
persons to the colony.[6-27]

Of similar estate was Christopher Pearson, of York county. His personal
property included bedding valued at £7, linen at 18 shillings, pewter at
£1.18.0, brass at six shillings, wooden ware at £4.13.6 comprising three
chairs and one table, a couch, four old chests, a cask, two ten gallon
rundletts, a cheese press, a box of drawers, an old table, three pails,
a spinning wheel with cards, two sifting trays, a corn barrel, three
bedsteads, four sives, a funnel; iron ware valued at £2.12.0, including
three pots, two pot-rocks, a pestal, a frying pan, a looking glass;
three cows appraised at £6.5.0, a yearling at ten shillings, a colt at
two pounds sterling. The entire estate was valued at £25.19.6.[6-28]

It must not be imagined, however, that Virginia, even in the early years
of its settlement, contained no men of wealth or rank. Industry and
intelligence bore their inevitable fruit in the little colony, with the
result that here and there certain planters acquired an enviable
pre-eminence among their fellows. The _New Description_ mentions several
such cases. Captain Matthews "hath a fine house," it says, "and all
things answerable to it; he sowes yeerly store of Hempe and Flax, and
causes it to be spun; he keeps Weavers, and hath a Tanhouse, causes
Leather to be dressed, hath eight Shoemakers employed in their trade,
hath forty Negro servants, brings them up to Trades in his house. He
yeerly sowes abundance of Wheat, Barley, &c. The Wheat he selleth at
four shillings the bushell; kills store of Beeves, and sells them to
victuall the Ships when they come thither; hath abundance of Kine, a
brave Dairy, Swine great store, and Poltery; he married a Daughter of
Sir Thomas Hinton, and in a word, keeps a good house, lives bravely, and
a true lover of Virginia; he is worthy of much honor."[6-29]

This description is interesting because it shows not only the extent of
the holdings of certain planters at this early date, but that their
prosperity had the same foundation as that of the more numerous class of
wealthy men of the Eighteenth century. In both cases slavery and
plantation manufacture would seem to have been the open sesame to
success. It is notable that of the very limited number of men in
Virginia prior to 1700 who stand out above their fellows in the
readiness with which they acquired property, almost all gathered around
them a goodly number of negroes.

Among the prominent planters of the first half of the Seventeenth
century was George Menefie, famous for his orchard which abounded in
apple, pear and cherry trees, and for his garden which yielded all kinds
of fruits, vegetables, and flowers; Richard Bennett, a man of large
property who had in one year "out of his Orchard as many Apples as he
made 20 Butts of Excellent Cider"; Richard Kinsman, who for three or
four years in succession secured "forty or fifty Butts of Perry made out
of his Orchard, pure and good."[6-30]

In the second half of the century the class of the well-to-do, although
somewhat more numerous, was still restricted to a small group of
prominent families, many of them connected by marriage. Among the best
known men are Nathaniel Bacon, Sr., Thomas Ballard, Robert Severely,
Giles Brent, Joseph Bridger, William Byrd I, John Carter, John Custis I,
Dudley Digges, William Fitzhugh, Lewis Burwell, Philip Ludwell I,
William Moseley, Daniel Parke, Ralph Wormeley, Benjamin Harrison, Edward
Hill, Edmund Jennings and Matthew Page. But so few were their numbers
that the Governors more than once complained that they could not find
men for the Council of State qualified for that post by their wealth and
influence.

The depository of power for the Virginia yeomanry was the House of
Burgesses. This important body was elected by the votes of the
freeholders, and faithfully represented their interests. Here they would
bring their grievances, here express their wishes, here defend
themselves against injustice, here demand the enactment of legislation
favorable to their class. The hope of the people lay always in the
Burgesses, Bacon the rebel tells us, "as their Trusts, and Sanctuary to
fly to."[6-31] And though the commons usually elected to this body the
leading men of each county, men of education and wealth if such were to
be found, they held them to a strict accountability for their every
action.[6-32] Many of the best known members of the Council of State
served their apprenticeship in the Burgesses. But whatever the social
status of the Burgess, he felt always that he was the representative of
the poor planter, the defender of his interests, and seldom indeed did
he betray his trust.[6-33] This no doubt was with him in part a matter
of honor, but it also was the result of a consciousness that unless he
obeyed the behests of his constituency he would be defeated if he came
up for re-election.

The House of Burgesses, even in the days when the colony was but an
infant settlement stretching along the banks of the James, did not
hesitate to oppose the wishes of the King himself. In 1627 Charles I
sent instructions for an election of Burgesses that he might gain the
assent of the planters through their representatives to an offer which
he made to buy their tobacco.[6-34] Although the Assembly must have
realized that its very existence might depend upon its compliance with
the King's wishes, it refused to accept his proposal.[6-35] In 1634
Charles again made an offer for the tobacco, but again he encountered
stubborn opposition. The Secretary of the colony forwarded a report in
which he frankly told the British Government that in his opinion the
matter would never go through if it depended upon the yielding of the
Assembly.[6-36]

In 1635 the people again showed their independent spirit by ejecting Sir
John Harvey from the Government and sending him back to England. It is
true that the Council members took the lead in this bold step, but they
would hardly have gone to such lengths had they not been supported by
the mass of small planters.[6-37] In fact, one of the chief grievances
against the Governor was his refusal to send to the King a petition of
the Burgesses, which he considered offensive because they had made it "a
popular business, by subscribing a multitude of hands thereto." And some
days before the actual expulsion Dr. John Pott, Harvey's chief enemy,
was going from plantation to plantation, inciting the people to
resistance and securing their signatures to a paper demanding a redress
of grievances.[6-38]

The attitude of the small planters during the English civil war and
Commonwealth period is equally instructive. Certain writers have
maintained that the people of Virginia were a unit for the King, that
upon the execution of Charles I his son was proclaimed with the
unanimous consent of the planters, that the colony became a refuge for
English cavaliers, that it surrendered to Parliament only when
conquered by an armed expedition and that it restored Charles II as King
of Virginia even before he had regained his power in England.

All of this is either misleading or entirely false. It is true that the
Assembly proclaimed Charles II King in 1649 and passed laws making it
high treason for any person to uphold the legality of the dethronement
and execution of his father.[6-39] But this was largely the work of Sir
William Berkeley and the small group of well-to-do men who were
dependent upon him for their welfare. The very fact that it was felt
necessary to threaten with dire punishment all who spread abroad reports
"tending to a change of government," shows that there existed a fear
that such a change might be effected.[6-40] How many of the small
planters were at heart friendly to Parliament it is impossible to say,
but the number was large enough to cause Sir William Berkeley such
serious misgivings as to his own personal safety that he obtained from
the Assembly a guard of ten men to protect him from assassination.[6-41]

Nor can it be said that Virginia was forced into an unwilling submission
to Parliament. It is true that an expedition was sent to conquer the
colony, which entered the capes, sailed up to the forts at Jamestown and
there received the formal surrender of the colony.[6-42] But this
surrender was forced upon the Governor as much by the wishes of the
people as by the guns of the British fleet. In fact, the expedition had
been sent at the request of certain representatives of the Parliamentary
faction in Virginia, who made it clear to the Commonwealth leaders that
the colony was by no means unanimous for the King, and that it was held
to its allegiance only by the authority and firm will of the
Governor.[6-43] That the British Council of State expected to receive
active assistance from their friends in Virginia is evident, for they
gave directions for raising troops there and for appointing
officers.[6-44] And there can be no doubt that the imposing military
force which had been gathered to defend Jamestown was not called into
action chiefly because Berkeley became convinced that it could not be
relied upon to fight against the Commonwealth soldiers.

The new regime which was introduced with the articles of surrender made
of Virginia virtually a little republic. In England the long cherished
hope of the patriots for self-government was disappointed by the
usurpation of Oliver Cromwell. But the commons of Virginia reaped the
reward which was denied their brothers of the old country. For a period
of eight years all power resided in the House of Burgesses. This body,
so truly representative of the small planter class, elected the Governor
and specified his duties. If his administration proved unsatisfactory
they could remove him from office. The Burgesses also chose the members
of the Council. Even the appointing of officials was largely theirs,
although this function they usually felt it wise to delegate to the
Governor.[6-45] In fact, Virginia was governed during this period, the
happiest and most prosperous of its early history, by the small
proprietor class which constituted the bulk of the population.

Nor is it true that the people voluntarily surrendered this power by
acknowledging the authority of Charles II before the actual restoration
in England. After the death of Cromwell, when the affairs of the mother
country were in chaos and no man knew which faction would secure
possession of the government, the Virginia Assembly asked Sir William
Berkeley to act again as their chief executive. But it was specifically
stipulated that he was to hold his authority, not from Charles, but from
themselves alone.[6-46] In this step the people were doubtless actuated
by an apprehension that the monarchy might be restored, in which case it
would be much to their advantage to have as the chief executive of the
colony the former royal Governor; but they expressly stated that they
held themselves in readiness to acknowledge the authority of any
Government, whatever it might be, which succeeded in establishing itself
in England. So far was Sir William from considering himself a royal
Governor, that when the King actually regained his throne, he wrote with
no little apprehension, begging forgiveness for having accepted a
commission from any other source than himself.[6-47]

It was the small farmer class which suffered most from the despotic
methods of Berkeley during the Restoration period--the corrupting of the
House of Burgesses, the heavy taxes, the usurpation of power in local
government, the distribution of lucrative offices--and it was this class
which rose in insurrection in 1676. It is notable that in the course of
Bacon's Rebellion the great mass of the people turned against the
Governor, either approving passively of his expulsion, or actually
aiding his enemies. When Sir William appealed for volunteers in
Gloucester county while Bacon was upon the Pamunkey expedition, he could
hardly muster a man.[6-48] And the forces which eventually he gathered
around him seem to have included only a handful of leading citizens,
such men as Philip Ludwell, Nathaniel Bacon, Sr., Giles Brent and Robert
Beverley, together with a mass of indentured servants and others who had
been forced into service. It is this which explains the apparent
cowardice of the loyal forces, who almost invariably took to their heels
at the first approach of the rebels, for men will not risk their lives
for a cause in which their hearts are not enlisted.

And though the small farmers lost their desperate fight, though their
leaders died upon the scaffold, though the oppressive Navigation Acts
remained in force, though taxes were heavier than ever, though the
governors continued to encroach upon their liberties, they were by no
means crushed and they continued in their legislative halls the conflict
that had gone against them upon the field of battle. But the political
struggle too was severe. It was in the decade from 1678 to 1688 that the
Stuart monarchs made their second attempt to crush Anglo-Saxon liberty,
an attempt fully as dangerous for the colonies as for England. The
dissolving of the three Whig Parliaments, and the acceptance of a
pension from Louis XIV were followed not only by the execution of
liberal leaders and the withdrawal of town charters in the mother
country, but by a deliberate attempt to suppress popular government in
America. It was not a mere coincidence that the attack upon the
Massachusetts charter, the misrule of Nicholson in New York, the
oppressions of the proprietor in Maryland and the tyranny of Culpeper
and Effingham in Virginia occurred simultaneously. They were all part
and parcel of the policy of Charles II and James II.

These attempts met with failure in Virginia because of the stubborn
resistance they encountered from the small farmer class and their
representatives in the House of Burgesses. The annulling of statutes by
proclamation they denounced as illegal; they protested bitterly against
the appointment of their clerk by the Governor; they fought long to
retain their ancient judicial privileges; they defeated all attempts of
the King and his representatives in Virginia to deprive them of the
right to initiate legislation and to control taxation. And with the
Glorious Revolution of 1688-89, which put an end forever to Stuart
aggressions, they could feel that their efforts alone had preserved
liberty in Virginia, that they might now look forward to long years of
happiness and prosperity. The Virginia yeoman reckoned not with slavery,
however, and slavery was to prove, in part at least, his undoing.




_CHAPTER VII_

WORLD TRADE


In 1682 the depression which for nearly a quarter of a century had
gripped the tobacco trade, somewhat abruptly came to an end. "Our only
commodity, tobacco, having the last winter a pretty quick market, hath
encouraged ye planters," wrote Secretary Spencer to the Board of Trade
in May, 1683.[7-1] Apparently the tide had turned. From this time until
the beginning of the War of the Spanish Succession more than two decades
later we hear little complaint from Virginia, while there are excellent
reasons to suppose that the colony was experiencing a period of growth
and prosperity.

In truth the tobacco trade, upon which the planters staked their all,
now expanded with startling rapidity, and each year the merchants were
forced to add more bottoms to the fleet which sailed for England from
the Chesapeake. During the early years of the Restoration period tobacco
exports from Virginia and Maryland had made but little advance. In 1663
they amounted to 7,367,140 pounds, six years later they were 9,026,046
pounds.[7-2] In 1698, however, the output of Virginia and Maryland was
estimated by the merchant John Linton to be from 70,000 to 80,000
hogsheads.[7-4] Since the hogshead usually contained from 500 to 600
pounds, these figures mean that the planters were then raising from
35,000,000 to 48,000,000 pounds of tobacco. And this conclusion is
supported by the fact that the crop of 1699 is valued at £198,115, which
at a penny a pound would indicate about 47,000,000 pounds.[7-5] In fact,
the production of tobacco in the ten years from 1689 to 1699 seems to
have tripled, in the years from 1669 to 1699 to have quadrupled. In 1669
the planters considered themselves fortunate if their industry yielded
them a return of £30,000; at the end of the century they could count
with a fair degree of certainty upon six times that amount.

For Virginia this startling development was all-important. During the
darkest days of the Restoration period her share of the total returns
from the tobacco crop could hardly have exceeded £10,000; in 1699 it was
estimated at £100,000. Even if we accept the conservative statement that
the average number of hogsheads exported from Virginia in the last
decade of the century varied from 35,000 to 40,000,[7-6] the planters
still would have received £75,000 or £80,000. From dire poverty and
distress the colony, almost in the twinkling of an eye, found itself in
comparative ease and plenty.

Nor is the reason difficult to discover. It had never been the intention
of the British Government to destroy the foreign trade of the colonies,
the Navigation Acts having been designed only to force that trade
through English channels. The planters were still at liberty to send
their tobacco where they would, provided it went by way of England and
paid the duty of a half penny a pound. That these restrictions so nearly
put an end to shipments to the continent of Europe was an unfortunate
consequence which to some extent had been foreseen, but which for the
time being it was impossible to avoid.

It was undoubtedly the hope of the Government that the foreign market
would eventually be regained and that the colonial tobacco would flow
from the colonies into England and from England to all the countries of
Europe. Prior to 1660 Holland had been the distributing centre for the
tobacco of Virginia and Maryland; now England insisted upon taking this
rôle upon herself. But the authorities at London were hardly less
concerned than the planters themselves at the difficulties encountered
in effecting this change and the unfortunate glut in the home markets
which followed.

None the less they persisted in the policy they had adopted, even
clinging stubbornly to the half penny a pound re-export duty, and
trusting that in time they could succeed in conquering for their tobacco
the lost continental markets. In this they were bitterly opposed by the
Dutch with whom it became necessary to fight two wars within the short
space of seven years. Yet steadily, although at first slowly, they made
headway. In 1681 the commissioners of the customs refused the request
for a cessation of tobacco planting in the colonies, on the ground that
to lessen the crop would but stimulate production in foreign countries
and so restrict the sale abroad of the Virginia and Maryland leaf.[7-7]
This argument has been denounced by some as both specious and selfish,
yet it was fully justified by the situation then existing. After all,
the only hope for the planters lay in conquering the European market and
the way to do this was to flood England with tobacco until it overflowed
all artificial barriers and poured across the Channel. And eventually
this is just what happened. Since tobacco was piling up uselessly in the
warehouses and much of it could not be disposed of at any price, it was
inevitable that it should be dumped upon the other nations of Europe.
There is in this development a close parallel with the commercial policy
of Germany in the years prior to the world war, when no effort was
spared to produce a margin of all kinds of wares over the home needs,
which was to be exported at excessively low prices. This margin was a
weapon of conquest, a means of ousting the merchants of other nations
from this market or that. And when once this conquest had been effected,
the price could be raised again in order to assure a profit to the
German manufacturers.

It is improbable that the English economists of the Seventeenth century,
like those of modern Germany, had foreseen exactly what would happen,
but the results were none the less similar. When once the English leaf
had secured a strong hold upon the Baltic and upon France and Spain, it
was a matter of the greatest difficulty to oust it, especially as the
ever increasing influx of slaves made it possible for the planters to
meet the lower prices of foreign competitors and still clear a profit.
Thus it was that during the years from 1680 to 1708 the Chesapeake
tobacco succeeded in surmounting all the difficulties placed in its way
by the Navigation Acts, the necessity of the double voyage, the
re-export duty of a half penny a pound, and so gradually flooded the
continental market.

It is unfortunate that figures for re-exported tobacco during the
earlier years of the Restoration period are lacking. In 1688, however,
it is stated that the duty of a half penny a pound was yielding the
Crown an annual revenue of £15,000, which would indicate that about
7,200,000 pounds were leaving for foreign ports.[7-8] Ten years later,
if we may believe the testimony of John Linton, exports of tobacco
totalled 50,000 or 60,000 hogsheads, or from 25,000,000 to 30,000,000
pounds. Not more than a fourth of the colonial leaf, he tells us, was
consumed in England itself.[7-9] Once more Virginia and Maryland were
producing tobacco for all Europe, once more they enjoyed a world market.

This trade was extended from one end of the continent to the other.
Vessels laden with American tobacco found their way not only to the
ports of France and Holland and Spain, but even to the distant cities of
Sweden and Russia.[7-10] The Baltic trade alone amounted to from 5,000
to 10,000 hogsheads, and added from £10,000 to £24,000 to the income of
the planters. The chief Russian port of entry was Narva, which took
annually some 500 hogsheads, but large quantities were shipped also to
Riga and Raval.[7-11] The northern nations bought the cheaper varieties,
for no tobacco could be too strong for the hardy men of Sweden and
Russia.

The trade was of great importance to England, as the leaf, after it had
gone through the process of manufacture, sold for about six pence a
pound, yielding to the nation in all from £60,000 to £130,000.[7-12] As
the English were still largely dependent upon the Baltic for potash and
ship stores, this constituted a most welcome addition to the balance of
trade. To the colonies also it was vital, carrying off a large part of
the annual crop, and so tending to sustain prices.

France, too, proved a good customer for English tobacco, and in the
years prior to the War of the Spanish Succession took annually from
8,000 to 10,000 hogsheads, or from 4,000,000 to 6,000,000 pounds.[7-13]
Micajah Perry reported to the Lords of Trade that from 6,000 to 10,000
hogsheads went to France from London alone, while a very considerable
amount was sent also from other ports.[7-14]

Far more surprising is the fact that even Spain consumed millions of
pounds of English leaf. With her own colonies producing the best tobacco
in the world and in the face of its practical exclusion from the English
market, it is strange that the Government at Madrid should have
permitted this commerce to continue. The obvious course for the
Spaniards under the economic theories of the day would have been to
exclude English tobacco, both in order to protect their own planters and
to retaliate for the restrictions upon their product. Yet it is
estimated that from 6,000 to 10,000 hogsheads entered Spain each
year.[7-15] A pamphlet published in 1708 entitled _The Present State of
Tobacco Plantations in America_ stated that before the outbreak of the
war then raging, France and Spain together had taken annually about
20,000 hogsheads.[7-16]

The Dutch, too, despite their bitter rivalry with the British, found it
impossible to do without Virginia tobacco. Purchasing the finest bright
Orinoco, they mixed it with leaf of their own growth in the proportion
of one to four, and sold it to other European nations. In this way they
sought to retain their position as a distributing center for the trade
and to give employment to hundreds of poor workers. In all the Dutch
seem to have purchased from England about 5,000 hogsheads a year.[7-17]

The enhanced importance of the tobacco trade is reflected in a steady
increase of British exports to Virginia and Maryland. The planters, now
that they found it possible to market their leaf, laid out the proceeds
in the manufactured products of England. At the end of the Seventeenth
century the two colonies were importing goods to the value of £200,000
annually. In 1698, which was an exceptionally good year, their purchases
were no less than £310,133.[7-18]

In short the tobacco colonies had at last found their proper place in
the British colonial system. Both they and the mother country, after
long years of experimentation, years of misfortune and recrimination,
had reached a common ground upon which to stand. Although Maryland and
Virginia still fell short of the ideal set for the British colonies,
although they failed to furnish the raw stuffs so urgently needed by the
home industries, at least they yielded a product which added materially
to shipping, weighed heavily in the balance of trade and brought a
welcome revenue to the royal Exchequer.

The Crown reaped a rich return from tobacco, a return which grew not
only with the expansion of the trade, but by the imposition from time to
time of heavier duties. In the period from 1660 to 1685, when the tariff
remained at two pence a pound, the yield must have varied from £75,000
to £100,000. If we assume that the average consumption in England was
9,000,000 pounds and the average exports 3,000,000 the total revenue
would have been £81,250. In 1685, however, an additional duty of three
pence a pound was placed upon tobacco upon its arrival in England, all
of which was refunded when the product was re-exported. In 1688, when
the tobacco consumed in England was 8,328,800 pounds, the old and new
duties, amounting in all to five pence, must have yielded £173,515. When
to this is added £15,000 from the half penny a pound on the 7,200,000
pounds of leaf sent abroad, the total reaches £188,515.

In 1698 still another penny a pound was added to the tax, making a grand
total of six pence on colonial tobacco disposed of in England. This new
duty, together with the rapid increase in the foreign trade, enriched
the Exchequer by another £100,000. In 1699, if we assume that 12,000,000
pounds were consumed in England, the return would have been £300,000;
while half a penny a pound on 36,000,000 pounds of re-exported leaf,
would have brought the total to £375,000. That this figure was
approximately correct we have evidence in the statement of the author of
_The Present State of the Tobacco Plantations_, written in 1705, that
the revenue yielded by the tobacco of Virginia and Maryland amounted
annually to £400,000.[7-19] This sum constituted a very appreciable
proportion of the royal income, so appreciable in fact as to make the
tobacco trade a matter of vital importance in the eyes of the King's
ministers. They were charged at all times to avoid any contingency which
might lessen the imports and reduce the customs.

The increase in the tobacco trade stimulated industry, not only by
increasing exports to Virginia and Maryland, but also by creating a new
English industry. For most of the tobacco, before it was sent abroad,
was subjected to a process of manufacture, by which the leaf was cut and
rolled and otherwise prepared for the consumer. This industry gave
employment to hundreds of poor persons in England and required a
considerable outlay of capital.[7-20]

To British navigation the trade was vital. Each year scores of
merchantmen crossed to the Chesapeake and swarmed in every river and
creek, delivering their English goods to the planters and taking in
return the hogsheads of tobacco. In 1690 the tobacco fleet numbered
about 100 ships, aggregating 13,715 tons; in 1706 it counted no less
than 300 sails.[7-21] Nor must it be forgotten that re-exported tobacco
also added many a goodly merchantman to the navy and gave employment to
many a seaman. Altogether Virginia and Maryland constituted an
invaluable asset, an asset which ranked in importance secondly only to
the sugar plantations.

It would naturally be supposed that the fortunate turn of events which
restored to the tobacco colonies their European market would have
reacted favorably upon the small planters of Virginia, not only insuring
plenty to those already established, but adding new recruits from the
ranks of the indentured servants; that the process of making prosperous
freemen from the poor immigrants who flocked to the colony, the process
interrupted by the passage of the Navigation Acts, would have been
resumed now that these laws no longer prevented the flow of tobacco into
the continental countries.

Such was not the case, however. A comparison of the lists of immigrants
with the rent roll of 1704 shows that but an insignificant proportion of
the newcomers succeeded in establishing themselves as landowners. In
four lists examined for the year 1689, comprising 332 names, but seven
persons can be positively identified upon the rent roll. In 1690, eight
lists of 933 names, reveal but twenty-eight persons who were landowners
in 1704. Of 274 immigrants listed in 1691, six only appear on the Roll.
In 1695, seven lists comprising 711 names, show but ten who possessed
farms nine years later. Of 74 headrights appearing in 1696, but two are
listed on the roll; of 119 in 1697 only nine; of 169 in 1698 one only;
of 454 in 1699, only seven; of 223 in 1700 but six.[7-22] All in all not
more than five per cent. of the newcomers during this period prospered
and became independent planters. Apparently, then, the restored
prosperity of the colony was not shared by the poorer classes, the
increased market for tobacco did not better materially the chances of
the incoming flood of indentured servants.

The explanation of this state of affairs is found in the fact that
tobacco, despite its widened market, experienced no very pronounced rise
in price. The average return to the planters during the good years seems
to have been one penny a pound.[7-23] This, it is true, constituted an
advance over the worst days of the Restoration period, but it was far
from approaching the prices of the Civil war and Commonwealth periods.
For the poor freedman, it was not sufficient to provide for his support
and at the same time make it possible to accumulate a working capital.
He could not, as he had done a half century earlier, lay aside enough to
purchase a farm, stock it with cattle, hogs and poultry, perhaps even
secure a servant or two. Now, although no longer reduced to misery and
rags as in the years from 1660 to 1682, he could consider himself
fortunate if his labor sufficed to provide wholesome food and warm
clothing. How, it may be asked, could Virginia and Maryland produce the
vast crops now required by the foreign trade, if the price was still so
low? Prior to and just after Bacon's Rebellion the planters repeatedly
asserted that their labors only served to bring them into debt, that to
produce an extensive crop was the surest way for one to ruin himself.
Why was it that twenty years later, although prices were still far below
the old level, they could flood the markets of the world?

The answer can be summed up in one word--slavery. The first cargo of
negroes arrived in the colony in 1619 upon a Dutch privateer. Presumably
they were landed at Jamestown, and sold there to the planters.[7-24] The
vessel which won fame for itself by this ill-starred action, was sailing
under letters of marque from the Prince of Orange and had been scouring
the seas in search of Spanish prizes. Although the Dutch master could
have had no information that slaves were wanted in the colony, he seems
to have taken it for granted that he would not be forbidden to dispose
of his human freight.

The introduction of this handful of negroes--there were but twenty in
all--was not the real beginning of the slave system in the colonies. For
many years the institution which was to play so sinister a part in
American history did not flourish, and the slaves grew in numbers but
slowly. In the Muster Roll of Settlers in Virginia, taken in 1624, there
were listed only 22 negroes.[7-25] Sixteen years later the black
population probably did not exceed 150.[7-26] In 1649, when Virginia was
growing rapidly and the whites numbered 15,000, there were but 300
negroes in the colony.[7-27] A sporadic importation of slaves continued
during the Commonwealth period, but still the number was insignificant,
still the bulk of the labor in the tobacco fields was done by indentured
servants and poor freeholders.

In 1670 Governor Berkeley reported to the Board of Trade that out of a
total population of 40,000, but five per cent were slaves.[7-28] Eleven
years later the number of blacks was estimated at 3,000.[7-29] In 1635
twenty-six negroes were brought in, the largest purchaser being Charles
Harmar.[7-30] In 1636 the importations were but seven, in 1637 they
were 28, in 1638 thirty, in 1639 forty-six, in 1642 seven only, in 1643
eighteen, in 1649 seventeen.[7-31] But with the passage of the years
somewhat larger cargoes began to arrive. In 1662 Richard Lee claimed
among his headrights no less than 80 negroes, in 1665 the Scarboroughs
imported thirty-nine. In 1670, however, Berkeley declared that "not
above two or three ships of Negroes" had arrived in the province in the
previous seven years.[7-32]

It is evident, then, that during the larger part of the Seventeenth
century slavery played but an unimportant rôle in the economic and
social life of the colony. The planters were exceedingly anxious to make
use of slave labor, which they considered the foundation of the
prosperity of their rivals of the Spanish tobacco colonies, but slave
labor was most difficult to obtain. The trade had for many years been
chiefly in the hands of the Dutch, and these enterprising navigators
sold most of their negroes to the Spanish plantations. Ever since the
days of Henry VIII the English had made efforts to secure a share of
this profitable traffic, but with very meagre success.[7-33]

The Dutch had established trading stations along the African coast,
guarded by forts and war vessels. Any attempts of outsiders to intrude
upon the commerce was regarded by them as an act of open aggression to
be resisted by force of arms. To enter the trade with any hope of
success it became necessary for the English to organize a company rich
enough to furnish armed protection to their merchantmen. But no such
organization could be established during the Civil War and Commonwealth
periods, and it was not until 1660 that the African Company, under the
leadership of the Duke of York entered the field.[7-34]

This was but the beginning of the struggle, however. The Dutch resisted
strenuously, stirring up the native chieftains against the English,
seizing their vessels and breaking up their stations. Not until two wars
had been fought was England able to wring from the stubborn
Netherlanders an acknowledgment of her right to a share in the trade.
Even then the Virginians were not adequately supplied, for the sugar
islands were clamoring for slaves, and as they occupied so important a
place in the colonial system they were the first to be served.
Throughout the last quarter of the Seventeenth century negroes in fairly
large numbers began to arrive in the Chesapeake, but it was only in the
years from 1700 to 1720 that they actually accomplished the overthrow of
the old system of labor and laid the foundations of a new social
structure. Throughout the Seventeenth century the economic system of the
tobacco colonies depended upon the labor of the poor white man, whether
free or under terms of indenture; in the Eighteenth century it rested
chiefly upon the black shoulders of the African slave.

There could be no manner of doubt as to the desirability of the slaves
from an economic standpoint, apparently the only standpoint that
received serious consideration. The indentured servant could be held
usually for but a few years. Hardly had he reached his greatest
usefulness for his master than he demanded his freedom. Thus for the man
of large means to keep his fields always in cultivation it was necessary
constantly to renew his supply of laborers. If he required twenty hands,
he must import each year some five or six servants, or run the risk of
finding himself running behind. But the slave served for life. The
planter who had purchased a full supply of negroes could feel that his
labor problems were settled once and for all. Not only could he hold the
slaves themselves for life, but their children also became his property
and took their places in the tobacco fields as soon as they approached
maturity.

Thus in the end the slave was far cheaper. The price of a servant
depended largely upon the cost of his passage across the ocean. We find
that William Matthews, having three years and nine months to serve, was
rated in the inventory of his master, John Thomas, at £12.[7-35] A
servant of Robert Leightenhouse, having two years to serve, was put at
£9;[7-36] while on the other hand we find another listed in the estate
of Colonel Francis Epes, also having two years to serve, at only
£5.[7-37] A white lad under indenture for seven years to Mr. Ralph
Graves was valued at £10.[7-38] On the whole it would seem that the
price of a sturdy man servant varied from £2 to £4 for each year of his
service. On the other hand a vigorous slave could be had at from £18 to
£30. Assuming that he gave his master twenty-five years of service, the
cost for each year would be but one pound sterling. There could be no
doubt, then, that in the mere matter of cost he was much cheaper than
the indentured white man.

It is true that the negro was none too efficient as a laborer. Born in
savagery, unacquainted with the English tongue, knowing little of
agriculture, it was a matter of some difficulty for him to accustom
himself to his task in the tobacco fields. Yet when his lesson had been
learned, when a few years of experience had taught him what his master
expected him to do, the slave showed himself quite adequate to the
requirements of the one staple crop. The culture of tobacco is not
essentially difficult, especially when pursued in the unscientific
manner of the colonial period. It required many, but not skilled hands.
The slave, untutored and unintelligent, proved inadequate to the
industrial needs of the northern colonies. The niceties of shipbuilding
were beyond his capacities, he was not needed as a fisherman, he was not
a good sailor, he was useless in the system of intensive agriculture in
vogue north of Maryland. But in the tobacco field he would do. He could
not at first tend so many plants as his white rival, he could not
produce tobacco of such fine quality, but what he lacked in efficiency
he more than made up for in cheapness.

The African seems to have withstood remarkably well the diseases
indigenous to eastern Virginia. There are occasional reports of
epidemics among the slaves, but usually they were fairly immune both to
malaria and dysentery. A census taken in 1714, when there were perhaps
15,000 negroes in the colony, records burials for sixty-two slaves
only.[7-39] The births of slaves for the same year totalled 253.[7-40]
These figures indicate not only the excellent physical condition in
which these black workers were kept by their masters, but the rapidity
with which they were multiplying. The low death rate is in part
explained by the fact that only strong men and women were transported to
the colonies, but it is none the less clearly indicative of the ease
with which the African accustomed himself to the climate of tidewater
Virginia.

As a rule the negro was more docile than the white servant, especially
if the latter happened to be from the ruder elements of English society.
He was not so apt to resist his master or to run away to the mountains.
Yet plots among the blacks were not unknown. In 1710 a conspiracy was
discovered among the slaves of Surry and James City counties which was
to have been put into execution on Easter day. The negroes planned to
rise simultaneously, destroy any who stood in their way, and make good
their escape out of the colony. Among the chief conspirators were Jamy,
belonging to Mr. John Broadnax, Mr. Samuel Thompson's Peter, Tom and
Cato of Mr. William Edwards, Great Jack and Little Jack of Mr. John
Edwards, and Will belonging to Mr. Henry Hart. "Two or three of these
were tried this general court," wrote Colonel Jennings, "found guilty
and will be executed. And I hope their fate will strike such a terror
in the other Negroes as will keep them from forming such designs for the
future."[7-41] The lesson did not prove lasting, however, for in 1730 a
number of slaves from Norfolk and Princess Anne counties assembled while
the whites were at church, and chose officers to command them in a bold
stroke for freedom. As in the previous attempt they were discovered,
many arrested and several of the ringleaders executed.[7-42]

Neither the merchants nor the planters seem to have been conscious of
any wrong in the seizure and sale of negroes. They regarded the native
Africans as hardly human, mere savages that were no more deserving of
consideration than oxen or horses. And as it was right and proper to
hitch the ox or the horse to the plow, so it was equally legitimate to
put the negro to work in the fields of sugar cane or tobacco. Whatever
hardships he had to endure upon the voyage to America or by reason of
his enforced labor, they considered amply compensated by his conversion
to Christianity.

It is true that the colony of Virginia early in the Eighteenth century
imposed a heavy duty upon the importation of slaves, but it did so
neither from any consciousness of wrong in slavery itself or a
perception of the social problems which were to grow out of it. At the
time the price of tobacco was declining rapidly and many planters were
losing money. Feeling that their misfortunes arose from overproduction,
which in turn was the result of the recent purchases of negroes, the
colonial legislators decided to check the trade. "The great number of
negroes imported here and solely employed in making tobacco," wrote
Governor Spotswood in 1711, "hath produced for some years past an
increase in tobacco far disproportionate to the consumption of it ...
and consequently lowered the price of it."[7-43] "The people of Virginia
will not now be so fond of purchasing negroes as of late," declared
President Jennings of the Virginia Council in 1708, "being sensibly
convinced of their error, which has in a manner ruined the credit of the
country."[7-44]

During the years from 1680 to 1700 slaves arrived in the colony in
increasing numbers. In 1681 William Fitzhugh, in a letter to Ralph
Wormeley, refers to the fact that several slave ships were expected that
year in the York river.[7-45] At this period, for the first time in
Virginia history, we find negroes in large numbers entered as headrights
upon the patent rolls. In 1693 Captain John Storey received a grant of
land for the importation of 79 negroes, in 1694 Robert Beverley brought
in seventy, in 1695 William Randolph twenty-five.[7-46] Before the end
of the century it is probable that the slaves in Virginia numbered
nearly 6,000, and had already become more important to the economic life
of the colony than the indentured servants.[7-47]

The chief purchasers at this time were men of large estates. The
advantages of slave labor were manifest to planters of the type of
William Byrd or William Fitzhugh, men who had built up fortunes by their
business ability. It is but natural that they should have turned early
from the indentured servant to stock their plantations with the cheaper
and more remunerative African workers.

As the English secured a stronger hold upon the African trade slaves
arrived in ever increasing numbers. During the years from 1699 to 1708
no less than 6,843 came in, a number perhaps exceeding the entire
importations of the Seventeenth century.[7-48] In the summer of 1705
alone 1,800 negroes arrived.[7-49] With what rapidity the black man was
taking the place of the indentured servant and the poor freeman as the
chief laborer of the colony is shown by the fact that in 1708, in a
total tithable list of 30,000, no less than 12,000 were slaves.
President Jennings at the same time reported that the number of
servants was inconsiderable.[7-50] "Before the year 1680 what negroes
came to Virginia were usually from Barbadoes," Jennings told the Board
of Trade in 1708. "Between 1680 and 1698 the negro trade become more
frequent, tho not in any proportion to what it hath been of late, during
which the African Company have sent several ships and others by their
licence having bought their slaves of the Company brought them here for
sale, among which lately Alderman Jeffreys and Sir Jeffry Jeffreys were
principally concerned."[7-51]

The wars of Charles XII, however, which proved disastrous to the Baltic
trade, and the War of the Spanish Succession which cut off exports of
tobacco to France and Spain, caused a serious decline in prices and made
it impossible for the planters to continue the large purchases of
slaves. This fact, together with the duty which had been imposed with
the express purpose of keeping them out, reduced the importations to a
minimum during the years from 1710 to 1718.[7-52] But with the reopening
of the tobacco market and the return of prosperity to Virginia, the
black stream set in again with redoubled force. In 1730, out of a total
population of 114,000, no less than 30,000 were negroes.[7-53] In other
words the slaves, who in 1670 had constituted but five per cent of the
people, now comprised twenty-six per cent. Slavery, from being an
insignificant factor in the economic life of the colony, had become the
very foundation upon which it was established.

As we have seen it was not slavery but the protracted accumulation of
surplus stocks of tobacco in England which had broken the long continued
deadlock of the tobacco trade during the Restoration period and caused
the overflow into continental markets. That the labor of blacks at first
played no essential part in the movement is evident from the fact that
in 1682 when it first became pronounced, the slave population of
Virginia and Maryland was still insignificant. But that the trade not
only continued after the glut in England had been cleared up, but
increased with startling rapidity, was unquestionably the result of more
universal use of negroes in the years immediately preceding the War of
the Spanish Succession. Slavery so cheapened the cost of production that
it was now quite possible for those who used them to pay the half penny
a pound duty on reëxported tobacco in England, and still undersell all
rivals in the European market. Before many years had passed the tobacco
trade, with all that it meant both to England and to the colonies,
rested almost entirely upon the labor of the savage black man so
recently brought from the African wilds.

That this fact was fully understood at the time is attested by various
persons interested in the colony and the trade. In 1728 Francis Fane, in
protesting against the imposition of a new tax in Virginia on the
importation of slaves declared "that Laying a Duty on Negroes can only
tend to make them scarcer and dearer, the two things that for the good
of our Trade and for the Benefit of Virginia ought chiefly to be guarded
against, since it is well known that the cheepness of Virginia tobacco
in European Marketts is the true Cause of the great Consumption thereof
in Europe, and one would have therefore Expected rather to have seen an
Act allowing a premium on the Importation of Negroes to have Encouraged
the bringing them in, than an Act laying so large a Duty to discourage
their Importation."[7-54] Similarly Colonel Spencer wrote to the Board
of Trade. "The low price of tobacco requires it should be made as cheap
as possible. The Blacks can make it cheaper than Whites, so I conceive
it is for his Majesty's interest full as much as the Country's or rather
much more, to have Blacks as cheap as possible in Virginia."[7-55]

It is evident, then, that the opening of the European market and the
vast expansion of the tobacco trade, while bringing prosperity to the
larger planters, was no great boon to the man who tilled his fields with
his own hands. It assured him a ready sale for his crop, it is true, but
at prices so low as to leave him a very narrow margin of profit. The new
era which was opening, the so-called golden era of Virginia history, was
not for him. Virginia in the Eighteenth century was to be the land of
the slave holder, not of the little planter.




_CHAPTER VIII_

BENEATH THE BLACK TIDE


The importation of slaves in large numbers reacted almost immediately
upon the migration of whites to Virginia. As we have seen, the stream of
indentured servants that poured across the Atlantic remained remarkably
constant throughout almost all of the Seventeenth century. The larger
planters were always in need of laborers, and they looked to the surplus
population of England to supply them. But with the coming of the blacks
all was changed. The Virginians saw in the slave ships which now so
frequently entered their rivers the solution of all their problems. And
so the influx of white men and women from the mother country dwindled
and almost died out, while in its place came a still greater stream from
the coast of Africa.

At the time of Bacon's Rebellion the annual importation of servants was
between 1,500 and 2,000. The headrights for 1674 show 1931 names.[8-1]
Seven years later the whites were still arriving in large numbers, the
rolls for 1682 having 1,565 names. As the century drew to a close,
however, the effect of the slave trade upon white immigration is
reflected in the dwindling number of headrights. The change that was
taking place is illustrated by a patent of 13,500 acres to Ralph
Wormleley for the transportation of 249 persons, 149 of whom were white
and 100 black.[8-2] Yet so late as 1704 the servants were still coming
in appreciable numbers. In 1708 however, the number of servants at work
in the colony had dwindled away almost entirely.[8-3] In 1715 the names
of white persons listed as headrights was but ninety-one; in 1718 but
101.[8-4] In other words, the first great migration of Englishmen to
continental America, a migration extending over a century and comprising
from 100,000 to 150,000 men, women and children, had practically come to
an end.

English statesmen at the time looked upon this event as an unalloyed
blessing. The day had passed when they felt that there existed a surplus
of labor at home and that the country was in need of blood letting. The
proper policy was to keep Englishmen in England, to devote their
energies to local industries and so strengthen the economic and military
sinews of the nation. And if unemployment existed, it was the correct
policy to bring work to the idle rather than send the idle out of the
country in quest of work.[8-5] And the colonies were to be utilized, no
longer as outlets for the population, but as a means to the upbuilding
of local industry. They were to supply a market for English goods, keep
employed English mariners and furnish the tobacco and sugar which when
re-exported weighed so heavily in the balance of trade. And since these
great staple crops could be produced by the work of slaves, it was
thought highly advantageous for all concerned that the negro should
replace the white servant in both the tobacco and the sugar fields. The
planters would profit by the lowered cost of production, English
industry would gain by the increased volume of traffic, the Crown
revenues would be enhanced and English laborers would be kept at
home.[8-6]

Apparently the deeper significance of this great movement was entirely
lost upon the British economists and ministers. They had no conception
of the advantage of having their colonies inhabited by one race alone
and that race their own. From the first their vision was too restricted
to embrace the idea of a new and greater Britain in its fullest sense.
They could not bring themselves to look upon the soil of Virginia and
Maryland as a part of the soil of an extended England, upon the
Virginians and Marylanders as Englishmen, enjoying privileges equal to
their own. They could not realize the strength that would come from such
an empire as this, the mighty future it would insure to the Anglo-Saxon
race.

Their conception was different. The British empire must consist of two
distinct parts--mother country and colonies. And in any clash of
interest between the two, the former must prevail. It was not their
intent that the colonies should be purposely sacrificed, that they
should be made to pay tribute to a tyrannical parent. In fact, they
earnestly desired that the plantations should prosper, for when they
languished English industry suffered. But in their eyes the colonies
existed primarily for the benefit of England. England had given them
birth, had defended them, had nurtured them; she was amply justified,
therefore, in subordinating them to her own industrial needs.

Thus they viewed the substitution of the importation of slaves to the
tobacco colonies for the importation of white men purely from an
English, not an Anglo-Saxon, point of view. Had it been a question of
bringing thousands of negroes to England itself to drive the white
laborers from the fields, they would have interposed an emphatic veto.
But with the structure of colonial life they were not greatly concerned.
In 1693, when James Blair secured from the King and Queen a gift for his
new college at Williamsburg, Attorney-General Seymour objected
vigorously, stating that there was not the least occasion for such an
institution in Virginia. Blair reminded him that the chief purpose of
the college was to educate young men for the ministry and begged him to
consider that the people of the colony had souls to be saved as well as
the people of England. "Souls! Damn your souls," snapped the
Attorney-General, "make tobacco."[8-7] It would be unfair to say that
the British Government took just the same view of the colonists as did
Seymour, but there can be no doubt that their chief concern in the
plantations was centered upon the size of their exports to England and
of their purchases of English goods. And as the slaves could make more
tobacco than the indentured servants, it became the settled policy of
the Crown to encourage the African trade in every possible way.

The influx of slaves not only put almost a complete end to the
importation of white servants, but it reacted disastrously upon the
Virginia yeomanry. In this respect we find a close parallel with the
experience of ancient Rome with slave labor. In the third and second
centuries before Christ the glory of the republic lay in its peasantry.
The self-reliant, sturdy, liberty-loving yeoman formed the backbone of
the conquering legion and added to the life of the republic that rugged
strength that made it so irresistible. "To say that a citizen is a good
farmer is to reach the extreme limit of praise," said Cato. Some of the
ablest of the early Roman generals were recruited from the small farmer
class. Fabius Maximus, the Dictator, in need of money, sent his son to
Rome to sell his sole possession, a little farm of seven jugera.
Regulus, while in Africa, asked that he be recalled from his command
because the hired man he had left to cultivate his fields had fled with
all his farm implements, and he feared his wife and children would
starve.[8-8]

This vigorous peasantry was destroyed by the importation of hordes of
slaves and the purchase of cheap foreign grain. So long as the wars of
Rome were limited to Italy the number of slaves was comparatively small,
but as her armies swept over the Mediterranean countries one after
another and even subdued the wild Gauls and Britains, an unending stream
of captives poured into the city and filled to overflowing the slave
markets. Cicero, during his short campaign against the Parthians wrote
to Atticus that the sale of his prisoners had netted no less than
12,000,000 sestercias. In Epirus 100,000 men were captured; 60,000
Cimbries and 100,000 Germans graced the triumph of Marius; Caesar is
said to have taken in Gaul another 100,000 prisoners. Soon the slave
became the cheapest of commodities, and he who possessed even the most
extensive lands could readily supply himself with the labor requisite
for their cultivation.

Thus thrown into competition with slave labor the peasant proprietor
found it impossible to sustain himself. The grain which he produced with
his own hands had to compete in the same market with that made by
slaves. It must, therefore, sell for the same price, a price so low that
it did not suffice to feed and clothe him and his family. So he was
forced to give up his little estate, an estate perhaps handed down to
him by generations of farmers, and migrate to the city of Rome, to swell
the idle and plebeian population. And once there he demanded bread, a
demand which the authorities dared not refuse. So the public treasury
laid out the funds for the purchase of wheat from all parts of the
world, from Spain, from Africa, from Sicily, wheat which was given away
or sold for a song. This in turn reacted unfavorably upon the peasants
who still clung to the soil in a desperate effort to wring from it a
bare subsistence, and accelerated the movement to the city.

Thus Italy was transformed from the land of the little farmer into the
land of big estates cultivated by slaves. A sad development surely, a
development which had much to do with the decay and final overthrow of
the mighty structure of the Roman Empire. In former times, Titus Livius
tells us, "there was a multitude of free men in this country where today
we can hardly find a handful of soldiers, and which would be a
wilderness were it not for our slaves." "The plough is everywhere
bereft of honor," wrote Virgil, while Lucian bewailed the departed
peasants whose places were taken by fettered slaves.[8-9]

The importation of slaves to Virginia had somewhat similar results.
While not destroying entirely the little farmer class, it exerted a
baleful influence upon it, driving many families out of the colony,
making the rich man richer, reducing the poor man to dire poverty.
Against this unfortunate development the Virginia yeoman was helpless.
Instinctively he must have felt that the slave was his enemy, and the
hatred and rivalry which even today exists between the negro and the
lowest class of whites, the so-called "poor white trash," dates back to
the Seventeenth century.

The emigration of poor persons, usually servants just freed, from
Virginia to neighboring colonies was well under way even at the time of
Bacon's Rebellion. In 1677 complaint was made of "the inconvenience
which arose from the neighborhood of Maryland and North Carolina," in
that Virginia was daily deprived of its inhabitants by the removal of
poor men hither. Runaway servants were welcomed in both places, it was
asserted, while the debtor was accorded protection against
prosecution.[8-10] This early emigration was caused, of course, not by
the importation of slaves, for that movement had not yet assumed
important proportions, but by the evil consequences of the Navigation
Acts. The Virginia yeoman moved on to other colonies because he found it
impossible to maintain himself at the current price of tobacco.

The continuance of the movement, for it persisted for a full half
century, must be ascribed to the competition of negro labor. Like the
Roman peasant, the Virginia yeoman, to an extent at least, found it
impossible to maintain himself in the face of slave competition. The
servant, upon the expiration of his term, no longer staked off his
little farm and settled down to a life of usefulness and industry. The
poor planter who had not yet fully established himself, sold or deserted
his fields and moved away in search of better opportunities and higher
returns.

This migration was not the first of its kind in the English colonies,
for the movement of Massachusetts congregations into the valley of the
Connecticut antedated it by several decades. Yet it furnishes an
interesting illustration of the lack of permanency in American life, of
the facility with which populations urged on by economic pressure of one
kind or another change localities. The great movement westward over the
Appalachian range which followed the War of 1812, the pilgrimages of
homesteaders to the northwest and the Pacific coast, find their
precedent in the exodus of these poor families from the tobacco fields
of Virginia.

In the last decade of the Seventeenth century the migration assumed such
large proportions that the Board of Trade became alarmed and directed
Francis Nicholson to enquire into its cause in order that steps might be
taken to stop it. The emigrant stream that directed itself northward did
not halt in eastern Maryland, for conditions there differed little from
those in Virginia itself. The settlers went on to the unoccupied lands
in the western part of the colony, or made their way into Delaware or
Pennsylvania. "The reason why inhabitants leave this province," wrote
Nicholson, while Governor of Maryland, "is, I think, the encouragement
which they receive from the Carolinas, the Jerseys, and above all from
Pennsylvania, which is so nigh that it is easy to remove thither. There
handicraft tradesmen have encouragement when they endeavor to set up
woolen manufactures."[8-11]

Although this explanation does not go to the root of the matter, it was
in part correct. The northern colonies held out far greater
opportunities for the poor man than the slave choked fields of
tidewater Maryland and Virginia. The industries of Pennsylvania and
Delaware and the Jerseys demanded a certain degree of skill and yielded
in return a very fair living. In other words, the poor settlers in
Virginia, finding that tobacco culture was now based upon the cheap
labor of African slaves, moved away to other localities where
intelligence still brought an adequate reward.

The Maryland House of Delegates, when asked to give their opinion in
this matter, thought that it was a desire to escape the payment of debts
which made some of the "meaner inhabitants" seek shelter in Delaware Bay
and the Carolinas. They came nearer the real cause when they added that
the low price paid by the merchants for tobacco obliged many to
leave.[8-12] Nicholson was not satisfied with this answer. "They will
not directly own," he wrote, "that setting up manufactures and
handicraft-trades in Pennsylvania, the large tracts of land held by some
persons here and the encouragement given to illegal traders are the
causes that make people leave this province. They would have it that
they wish to avoid the persecution of their creditors, which causes them
to shelter themselves among the inhabitants of the Lower Counties of
Delaware Bay and of Carolina. The low price of tobacco has obliged many
of the planters to try their fortune elsewhere, and the currency of
money in Pennsylvania, which here is not, draws them to that province
from this."[8-13]

In Virginia the difficulty of securing desirable land because of the
large tracts patented by rich planters was usually assigned as the
reason for the migration of poor families. This view of the matter was
taken by Edward Randolph, the man who had won the undying hatred of the
people of Massachusetts by his attempts to enforce the Navigation Acts
there and by his attacks upon their charter. In 1696 Randolph did
Virginia the honor of a visit, and although encountering there none of
the opposition which had so angered him in New England, he sent to the
Board of Trade a memorial concerning the colony, criticising the
government severely. "It should be inquired into," he said, "how it
comes to pass that the colony (the first English settlement on the
continent of America, begun above 80 years ago) is not better inhabited,
considering what vast numbers of servants and others have yearly been
transported thither.... The chief and only reason is the Inhabitants and
Planters have been and at this time are discouraged and hindered from
planting tobacco in that colony, and servants are not so willing to go
there as formerly, because the members of the Council and others, who
make an interest in the Government, have from time to time procured
grants of very large Tracts of land, so that there has not for many
years been any waste land to be taken up by those who bring with them
servants, or by such Servants, who have served their time faithfully
with their Masters, but it is taken up and ingrossed beforehand, whereby
they are forced to hyer and pay a yearly rent for some of those Lands,
or go to the utmost bounds of the Colony for Land, exposed to danger and
often times proves the Occasion of Warr with the Indians."[8-14]

For their large holdings the wealthy men paid not one penny of quit
rents, Randolph said, and failed to comply with the regulations for
seating new lands. The law demanded that upon receipt of a patent one
must build a house upon the ground, improve and plant the soil and keep
a good stock of cattle or hogs. But in their frontier holdings the
wealthy men merely erected a little bark hut and turned two or three
hogs into the woods by it. Or else they would clear one acre of land and
plant a little Indian corn for one year, trusting that this evasion
would square them with the letter of the law. By such means, Randolph
adds, vast tracts were held, all of which had been procured on easy
terms and much by means of false certificates of rights. "Which drives
away the inhabitants and servants, brought up only to planting, to seek
their fortunes in Carolina or other places."[8-15]

Randolph suggested that the evil might be remedied by requiring a strict
survey of lands in every county, by demanding all arrears of quit rents,
by giving strict orders that in the future no grant should exceed 500
acres. These measures, he believed, would cause 100,000 acres to revert
to the Crown, and "invite home those who for want of Land left
Virginia." It would encourage other persons to come from neighboring
colonies to take up holdings and "mightily increase the number of
Planters." This would augment the production of tobacco by many
thousands of hogsheads, stimulate trade and industry in England, and aid
his Majesty's revenue.

The Board of Trade was deeply impressed. They wrote to Governor Andros
explaining to him the substance of Randolph's report and asking what
steps should be taken to remedy the evils he had pointed out. "But this
seeming to us a matter of very great consequence," they added, "we have
not been willing to meddle in it without your advice, which we now
desire you to give fully and plainly." But Andros knew full well that it
was no easy matter to make the large landowners disgorge. The thing had
been attempted by Nicholson several years earlier, when suit was
instituted against Colonel Lawrence Smith for arrears of quit rents upon
tracts of land which had never been under cultivation.[8-16] But before
the case came to trial Nicholson had been recalled and it was afterward
compounded for a nominal sum. The proceedings had caused great
resentment among the powerful clique which centered around the Council
of State, and Andros was reluctant to reopen the matter. He knew of no
frauds in granting patents of land, he wrote the Board, and could
suggest no remedy for what was past, "being a matter of Property." He
agreed, however, that to limit the size of future patents would tend to
"the more regular planting and thicker seating of the frontier
lands."[8-17]

Consequently when Francis Nicholson was commissioned as Governor in
1698, he received strict instructions to advise with the Council and the
Assembly upon this matter and to report back to the Board.[8-18] That
nothing was accomplished, however, may clearly be inferred from a letter
of a certain George Larkin written December 22, 1701. "There is no
encouragement for anyone to come to the Plantation," he declared, "most
of the land lying at all convenient being taken up. Some have 20,000,
30,000 or 40,000 acres, the greater part of which is unimployed."[8-19]
Two years later Nicholson himself wrote that certain recent grants were
for ten or twenty thousand acres each, so that privileged persons had
engrossed all the good land in those parts, by which means they kept
others from settling it or else made them pay for it.[8-20]

Despite all the concern which this matter created, it is doubtful
whether it was to any appreciable extent responsible for the continued
emigration of poor families. The mere granting of patents for large
tracts of land could not of itself fix the economic structure of the
colony, could not, if all other conditions were favorable, prevent the
establishment of small freeholds. Rather than have their fields lie idle
while the poor men who should have been cultivating them trooped out of
the colony, the rich would gladly have sold them in small parcels at
nominal prices. In the first half century after the settlement at
Jamestown, as we have seen, such a breakup of extensive holdings into
little farms actually occurred. Had similar conditions prevailed in the
later period a like development would have followed. But in 1630 or
1650, when slaves were seldom employed and when tobacco was high, the
poor man's toil yielded a return so large that he could well afford to
purchase a little farm and make himself independent. In 1680 or 1700, in
the face of the competition of slave labor, he was almost helpless. Even
had he found a bit of unoccupied ground to which he could secure a
title, he could not make it yield enough to sustain him and his
family.[8-21]

In 1728 Governor Gooch wrote the Board of Trade that the former belief
that large holdings of frontier land had been an impediment to
settlement was entirely erroneous. It was his opinion, in fact, that
extensive grants made it to the interest of the owners to bring in
settlers and so populate the country. In confirmation of this he pointed
to the fact that Spotsylvania country, where many large patents had been
issued, had filled up more rapidly than Brunswick, where they had been
restricted in size.[8-22]

In the first decade of the new century the emigration out of the tobacco
colonies continued without abatement. With another disastrous decline in
the price of tobacco following the outbreak of the wars of Charles XII
and Louis XIV, so many families moved over the border that the Board of
Trade, once more becoming seriously alarmed, questioned the Council as
to the causes of the evil and what steps should be taken to remedy it.
In their reply the Councillors repeated the old arguments, declaring
that the lack of land in Virginia and the immunity of debtors from
prosecution in the proprietory colonies were responsible for the
movement. But they touched the heart of the matter in their further
statement that the great stream of negroes that was pouring into the
colony had so increased the size of the tobacco crop that prices had
declined and the poor found it difficult to subsist. Not only "servants
just free go to North Carolina," they wrote, "but old planters whose
farms are worn out."[8-23]

A year later President Jennings stated that the migration was
continuing and that during the summer of 1709 "many entire families" had
moved out of the colony.[8-24] In fact, although but few indentured
servants arrived from England after the first decade of the century,
poor whites were still departing for the north or for western Carolina
so late as 1730. William Byrd II tells us that in 1728, when he was
running the dividing line between Virginia and North Carolina, he was
entertained by a man who "was lately removed, Bag and Baggage from
Maryland, thro a strong Antipathy he had to work and paying his Debts."
Indeed he thought it a "thorough Aversion to Labor" which made "People
file off to North Carolina."[8-25]

It is impossible to estimate the numbers involved in this movement, but
they must have run into the thousands. For a full half century a large
proportion of the white immigrants to Virginia seem to have remained
there for a comparatively short time only, then to pass on to other
settlements. And the migration to Virginia during these years we know to
have comprised not less than thirty or thirty-five thousand persons. In
fact, it would seem that this movement out of the older colony must have
been a very important factor in the peopling of its neighbors, not only
western Carolina and western Maryland, but Delaware and Pennsylvania.

Though many thus fled before the stream of negroes which poured in from
Africa, others remained behind to fight for their little plantations.
Yet they waged a losing battle. Those who found it possible to purchase
slaves, even one or two, could ride upon the black tide, but the others
slowly sank beneath it.

During the first half of the Eighteenth century the poor whites sought
to offset the cheapness of slave made tobacco by producing themselves
only the highest grades. The traders who dealt in the finest Orinoco,
which brought the best prices, found it not upon the plantations of the
wealthy, but of those who tended their plants with their own hands. "I
must beg you to remember that the common people make the best," wrote
Governor Gooch to the Lords of Trade in 1731.[8-26]

In fact, the wealthy planter, with his newly acquired gangs of slaves,
found it difficult at this time to produce any save the lower grades of
tobacco. The African was yet too savage, too untutored in the ways of
civilization to be utilized for anything like intensive cultivation.
"Though they may plant more in quantity," wrote Gooch, "yet it
frequently proves very mean stuff, different from the Tobacco produced
from well improved and well tended Grounds." "Yet the rich Man's trash
will always damp the Market," he adds, "and spoil the poor Man's good
Tobacco which has been carefully managed."[8-27] Thus the small farmer
made one last desperate effort to save himself by pitting his superior
intelligence against the cheapness of slave labor.

But his case was hopeless. As slavery became more and more fixed upon
the colony, the negro gradually increased in efficiency. He learned to
speak his master's language, brokenly of course, but well enough for all
practical purposes. He was placed under the tutelage of overseers, who
taught him the details of his work and saw that he did it. He became a
civilized being, thoroughly drilled in the one task required of him, the
task of producing tobacco. Thus the rich planter soon found it possible
to cultivate successfully the higher grades, and so to drive from his
last rampart the white freeholder whose crop was tended by himself
alone.

Placed at so great a disadvantage, the poor man, at all times in very
difficult circumstances, found it almost impossible to exist whenever
conditions in Europe sent the price of tobacco down. In the years from
1706 to 1714, when the tobacco trade was interrupted by the wars of
Charles XII in the Baltic region and the protracted struggle known as
the War of the Spanish Succession, he was reduced to the utmost
extremities.

Virginia and Maryland were learning that a prosperity founded upon one
crop which commanded a world market was in unsettled times subject to
serious setbacks. It was a long cry from the James and the Potomac to
the Baltic ports, yet the welfare of the Virginia and Maryland planters
was in no small degree dependent upon the maintenance of peaceful
conditions in Poland and Sweden and Russia. A war which seriously
curtailed the exportation of English leaf to the northern countries
would inevitably react on the price and so bring misfortune to the
colonial planters. When called before the Board of Trade to testify as
to the decay of the tobacco trade, the manufacturer John Linton declared
that the Baltic countries, which formerly had purchased thousands of
hogsheads a year, now took comparatively few. "The Russian trade is
ruined," he said.[8-28]

The war against France and Spain, coming at this unfortunate juncture,
still further restricted the market, sent prices down to new depths and
filled to overflowing the planters' cup of misfortune. "The war has
stopped the trade with Spain, France, Flanders and part of the Baltic,"
Colonel Quary reported in a memorial to the Board of Trade, "which took
off yearly 20,000 hogsheads of tobacco. Now our best foreign market is
Holland."[8-29] The pamphlet entitled _The Present State of the Tobacco
Plantations in America_ stated, in 1708, that France and Spain alone had
imported 20,000 hogsheads, but that both were now otherwise supplied.
"The troubles in Sweden, Poland, Russia, etc., have prevented the usual
exportation of great quantities to those ports. Virginia and Maryland
have severely felt the loss of such exportation, having so far reduced
the planters that for several years past the whole product of their
tobacco would hardly clothe the servants that made it."[8-30]

Their misfortunes were accentuated by the fact that the Dutch took
advantage of the European upheavals to gain control of a part of the
tobacco trade. Upon the outbreak of the war with Louis XIV, England
prohibited the exportation of tobacco either to France or to Spain, but
Holland, despite her participation in the struggle, apparently took no
such action. On the contrary she strained every nerve to entrench
herself in the markets of her ally before peace should once more open
the flood gates to Virginia and Maryland tobacco. With this in view the
acreage in Holland devoted to the cultivation of the leaf was rapidly
extended. "The Dutch are improving and increasing their tobacco
plantations," wrote John Linton in 1706. "In 1701 they produced only
18,000 hogsheads. Last year it was 33,500 hogsheads." Plantations at
Nimwegen, Rhenen, Amersfoort and Nijkerk turned out 13,400,000 pounds,
while great quantities were raised on the Main, in Higher Germany and in
Prussia.[8-31]

The Dutch mixed their own leaf with that of Virginia and Maryland in the
proportion of four to one, subjected it to a process of manufacture and
sent it out to all the European markets.[8-32] In 1707 a letter to John
Linton stated that they had from thirty to forty houses for "making up
tobacco in rolls," employing 4,000 men, besides great numbers of women
and girls. Their Baltic exports were estimated at 12,350,000 pounds;
2,500,000 pounds to Norway, 1,500,000 to Jutland and Denmark, 4,000,000
to Sweden, 2,350,000 to Lapland, 2,000,000 to Danzig and
Königsberg.[8-33]

With the continuation of the war on the continent Dutch competition
became stronger and stronger. In 1714, when peace was at last in
prospect, they seemed thoroughly entrenched in many of the markets
formerly supplied by the English. "The planting of tobacco in Holland,
Germany, Etc.," it was reported to the Board of Trade, "is increased to
above four times what it was 20 years ago, and amounts now to as much as
is made in both Virginia and Maryland." The tobacco trade, which had
formerly produced some £250,000 in the balance of trade, had declined to
about half that figure, exports of manufactured goods to the Chesapeake
were rapidly dwindling, the number of ships engaged in carrying tobacco
was greatly reduced, the merchants were impoverished, the planters were
ruined.[8-34]

"It is hardly possible to imagine a more miserable spectacle than the
poorer sort of inhabitants in this colony," the Council wrote in 1713,
"whose labour in tobacco has not for several years afforded them
clothing to shelter them from the violent colds as well as heats to both
which this climate is subject in the several seasons. The importation of
British and other European commodities by the merchants, whereby the
planters were formerly well supplied with clothing, is now in a manner
wholly left off and the small supplies still ventured sold at such
prodigeous rates as they please. Many families formerly well clothed and
their houses well furnished are now reduced to rags and all the visible
marks of poverty."[8-35]

This unfortunate period was but temporary. With the conclusion of peace
English tobacco was dumped upon the European market at a figure so low
as to defy competition. And when once the hogsheads began to move, the
reaction on Virginia and Maryland was rapid and pronounced. Soon prices
rose again to the old levels, and the colony entered upon a period, for
the larger planters at least, of unprecedented prosperity.[8-36] But the
eight years of hardship and poverty made a lasting imprint upon the
poorest class of whites. Coming as they did upon the heels of the first
great wave of negro immigration, they accelerated the movement of the
disrupting forces already at work. It was not by accident that the
largest migration of whites to other settlements occurred just at this
time and that the inquiries as to its cause are most frequent. The
little planter class never fully recovered from the blow dealt it by the
temporary loss of the larger part of the European tobacco trade.

The small freeholders who possessed neither servants nor slaves did not
disappear entirely, but they gradually declined in numbers and sank into
abject poverty. During the period of Spotswood's administration they
still constituted a large part of the population. The tax list for 1716
in Lancaster, one of the older counties, shows that of 314 persons
listed as tithables, 202 paid for themselves only.[8-37] Making ample
deductions for persons not owning land it would appear that more than
half the planters at this date still tilled their fields only with their
own labor. At the time of the American Revolution, however, the
situation had changed materially, and a decided dwindling of the poor
farmer class is noticeable. In Gloucester county the tax lists for
1782-83 show 490 white families, of which 320 were in possession of
slaves. Of the 170 heads of families who possessed no negroes, since no
doubt some were overseers, some artisans, some professional men, it is
probable that not more than eighty or ninety were proprietors.[8-38] In
Spotsylvania county similar conditions are noted. Of 704 tithable whites
listed in 1783 all save 199 possessed slaves.[8-39] In Dinwiddie county,
in the year 1782, of 843 tithable whites, 210 only were not slave
holders.[8-40] Apparently the Virginia yeoman, the sturdy, independent
farmer of the Seventeenth century, who tilled his little holding with
his own hands, had become an insignificant factor in the life of the
colony. The glorious promises which the country had held out to him in
the first fifty years of its existence had been belied. The Virginia
which had formerly been so largely the land of the little farmer, had
become the land of masters and slaves. For aught else there was no
room.

Before the end of the Eighteenth century the condition of the poorest
class had become pitiable. The French philosopher Chastellux who spent
much time in Virginia during the American Revolution testifies to their
extreme misery. "It is there that I saw poor persons for the first time
since crossing the ocean," he says. "In truth, near these rich
plantations, in which the negro alone is unhappy, are often found
miserable huts inhabited by whites whose wan faces and ragged garments
give testimony to their poverty."[8-41]

Philip Fithian, in his _Journal_, describes the habits of this class and
is vigorous in his condemnation of the brutal fights which were so
common among them. "In my opinion animals which seek after and relish
such odius and filthy amusements are not of the human species," he says,
"they are destitute of the remotest pretension of humanity."[8-42] Even
the negroes of the wealthy regarded these persons with contempt, a
contempt which they were at no pains to conceal.

The traveller Smyth thought them "kind, hospitable and generous," but
"illiberal, noisy and rude," and much "addicted to inebriety and averse
to labor." This class, he says, "who ever compose the bulk of mankind,
are in Virginia more few in numbers, in proportion to the rest of the
inhabitants, than perhaps in any other country in the universe."[8-43]

But it must not be imagined that slavery drove out or ruined the entire
class of small farmers, leaving Virginia alone to the wealthy. In fact,
most of those who were firmly established remained, finding their
salvation in themselves purchasing slaves. Few indeed had been able to
avail themselves of the labor of indentured servants; the cost of
transportation was too heavy, the term too short, the chances of
sickness or desertion too great. But with the influx of thousands of
negroes, the more enterprising and industrious of the poor planters
quite frequently made purchases. Although the initial outlay was
greater, they could secure credit by pledging their farms and their
crops, and in the end the investment usually paid handsome dividends and
many who could not raise the money to buy a full grown negro, often
found it possible to secure a child, which in time would become a
valuable asset.

This movement may readily be traced by an examination of the tax lists
and county records of the Eighteenth century. In Lancaster even so early
as 1716 we find that the bulk of the slaves were in the hands, not of
wealthy proprietors, but of comparatively poor persons. Of the 314
taxpayers listed, 113 paid for themselves alone, 94 for two only, 37 for
three, 22 for four, thirteen for five, while thirty-five paid for more
than five. As there were but few servants in the colony at this time it
may be taken for granted that the larger part of the tithables paid for
by others were negro slaves. It would seem, then, that of some 200 slave
owners in this country, about 165 possessed from one to four negroes
only. There were but four persons listed as having more than twenty
slaves, William Ball with 22, Madam Fox with 23, William Fox with 25 and
Robert Carter with 126.[8-44]

Nor did the class of little slave holders melt away as time passed. In
fact they continued to constitute the bulk of the white population of
Virginia for a century and a half, from the beginning of the Eighteenth
century until the conquest of the State by Federal troops in 1865. Thus
we find that of 633 slave owners in Dinwiddie county in 1782, 95 had one
only, 66 had two, 71 three, 45 four, 50 five, making an aggregate of
327, or more than half of all the slave holders, who possessed from one
to five negroes.[8-45] In Spotsylvania there were, in 1783, 505 slave
owners, of whom 78 possessed one each, 54 two, 44 three, 41 four, and 30
five each. Thus 247, or nearly 49 per cent of the slave holders, had
from one to five slaves only. One hundred and sixteen, or 23 per cent,
had from six to ten inclusive.[8-46] The Gloucester lists for 1783 show
similar conditions. There were in this country 320 slave holders, having
3,314 negroes, an average of about 10-1/3 for each owner. Fifty had one
each, 41 had two each, 9 had three, 30 had four and twenty-six had five.
Thus 156, or about half of all the owners, had from one to five
slaves.[8-47] In Princess Anne county, of a total of 388 slave owners,
100 had one each, 56 had two each and forty-five had three each.[8-48]

Records of transfers of land tend to substantiate this testimony, by
showing that the average holdings at all times in the Eighteenth century
were comparatively small. In the years from 1722 to 1729 Spotsylvania
was a new county, just opened to settlers, and a large part of its area
had been granted in large tracts to wealthy patentees. Yet the deed book
for these years shows that it was actually settled, not by these men
themselves, but by a large number of poor planters. Of the 197 transfers
of land recorded, 44 were for 100 acres or less and 110 for 300 acres or
less. The average deed was for 487 acres. As some of the transfers were
obviously made for speculative purposes and not with the intent of
putting the land under cultivation, even this figure is misleading. The
average farm during the period was probably not in excess of 400 acres.
One of the most extensive dealers in land in Spotsylvania was Larkin
Chew who secured a patent for a large tract and later broke it up into
many small holdings which were sold to new settlers.[8-49]

This substitution of the small slave holder for the man who used only
his own labor in the cultivation of his land unquestionably saved the
class of small proprietors from destruction. Without it all would have
been compelled to give up their holdings in order to seek their fortunes
elsewhere, or sink to the condition of "poor white trash." Yet the
movement was in many ways unfortunate. It made the poor man less
industrious and thrifty. Formerly he had known that he could win
nothing except by the sweat of his brow, but now he was inclined to let
the negro do the work. Slavery cast a stigma upon labor which proved
almost as harmful to the poor white man as did negro competition. Work
in the tobacco fields was recognized as distinctly the task of an
inferior race, a task not in keeping with the dignity of freemen.

Jefferson states that few indeed of the slave owners were ever seen to
work. "For in a warm climate," he adds, "no man will labour for himself
who can make another labour for him."[8-50] Chastellux noted the same
tendency, declaring "that the indolence and dissipation of the middling
and lower classes of white inhabitants of Virginia is such as to give
pain to every reflecting mind."[8-51]

Slavery developed in the small farmers a spirit of pride and haughtiness
that was unknown to them in the Seventeenth century. Every man, no
matter how poor, was surrounded by those to whom he felt himself
superior, and this gave him a certain self-esteem. Smyth spoke of the
middle class as generous, friendly and hospitable in the extreme, but
possessing a rudeness and haughtiness which was the result of their
"general intercourse with slaves."[8-52] Beverley described them as
haughty and jealous of their liberties, and so impatient of restraint
that they could hardly bear the thought of being controlled by any
superior power. Hugh Jones, Anbury, Fithian and other Eighteenth century
writers all confirm this testimony.

Despite the persistence of the small slave holder it is obvious that
there were certain forces at work tending to increase the number of
well-to-do and wealthy planters. Now that the labor problem, which in
the Seventeenth century had proved so perplexing, had finally been
solved, there was no limit to the riches that might be acquired by
business acumen, industry and good management. And as in the modern
industrial world the large corporation has many advantages over the
smaller firms, so in colonial Virginia the most economical way of
producing tobacco was upon the large plantations.

The wealthy man had the advantage of buying and selling in bulk, he
enjoyed excellent credit and could thus often afford to withhold his
crop from the market when prices were momentarily unfavorable, he could
secure the best agricultural instruments. Most important of all,
however, was the fact that he could utilize the resources of his
plantation for the production of crude manufactured supplies, thus to a
certain extent freeing himself from dependence upon British imports and
keeping his slaves at work during all seasons of the year. Before the
Eighteenth century had reached its fifth decade every large plantation
had become to a remarkable degree self-sustaining. Each numbered among
its working force various kinds of mechanics--coopers, blacksmiths,
tanners, carpenters, shoemakers, distillers. These men could be set to
work whenever the claims of the tobacco crop upon their time were not
imperative producing many of the coarser articles required upon the
plantation, articles which the poor farmer had to import from England.
For this work white men were at first almost universally made use of,
but in time their places were taken by slaves. "Several of them are
taught to be sawyers, carpenters, smiths, coopers, &c.," says the
historian Hugh Jones, "though for the most part they be none of the
aptest or nicest."[8-53]

The carpenter was kept busy constructing barns and servants' quarters,
or repairing stables, fences, gates and wagons. The blacksmith was
called upon to shoe horses, to keep in order ploughs, hinges, sickles,
saws, perhaps even to forge outright such rough iron ware as nails,
chains and hoes. The cooper made casks in which to ship the tobacco
crop, barrels for flour and vats for brandy and cider. The tanner
prepared leather for the plantation and the cobbler fashioned it into
shoes for the slaves. Sometimes there were spinners, weavers and
knitters who made coarse cloth both for clothing and for bedding. The
distiller every season made an abundant supply of cider, as well as
apple, peach and persimmon brandy.

And the plantation itself provided the materials for this varied
manufacture. The woods of pine, chestnut and oak yielded timber for
houses and fuel for the smithy. The herd of cattle supplied hides for
the tanner. The cloth makers got cotton, flax and hemp from the
planter's own fields, and wool from his sheep. His orchard furnished
apples, grapes, peaches in quantities ample for all the needs of the
distiller. In other words, the large planter could utilize
advantageously the resources at hand in a manner impossible for his
neighbor who could boast of but a small farm and half a score of
slaves.[8-54]

It was inevitable, then, that the widespread use of slave labor would
result in the gradual multiplication of well-to-do and wealthy men. In
the Seventeenth century not one planter in fifty could be classed as a
man of wealth, and even so late as 1704 the number of the well-to-do was
very narrowly limited. In a report to the Lords of Trade written in that
year Colonel Quary stated that upon each of the four great rivers of
Virginia there resided from "ten to thirty men who by trade and industry
had gotten very competent estates."[8-55] Fifty years later the number
had multiplied several times over.

Thus in Gloucester county in 1783, of 320 slave holders no less than 57
had sixteen or more. Of these one possessed 162, one 138, one 93, one
86, one 63, one 58, two 57, one 56, one 43 and one 40.[8-56] In
Spotsylvania, of 505 owners, 76 had sixteen or more. Of these Mann Page,
Esq., had 157, Mrs. Mary Daingerfield had 71, William Daingerfield 61,
Alexander Spotswood 60, William Jackson 49, George Stubblefield 42,
Frances Marewither 40, William Jones 39.[8-57]

The Dinwiddie tax lists for 1783 show that of 633 slave holders, no less
than 60 had twenty-one or more negroes. Among the more important of
these were Robert Turnbull with 81, Colonel John Banister with 88,
Colonel William Diggs with 72, John Jones with 69, Mrs. Mary Bolling
with 51, Robert Walker with 52, Winfield Mason with 40, John Burwell
with 42, Gray Briggs with 43, William Yates with 55, Richard Taliaferro
with 43, Major Thomas Scott with 57, Francis Muir with 47.[8-58] The
wealth of the larger planters is also shown by the large number of
coaches recorded in these lists, which including phaetons, chariots and
chairs, aggregated 180 wheels.

Thus it was that the doors of opportunity opened wide to the
enterprising and industrious of the middle class, and many availed
themselves of it to acquire both wealth and influence. Smyth tells us
that at the close of the colonial period there were many planters whose
fortunes were "superior to some of the first rank," but whose families
were "not so ancient nor respectable."[8-59] It was the observation of
Anbury that gentlemen of good estates were more numerous in Virginia
than in any other province of America.[8-60]

In fact the Eighteenth century was the golden age of the Virginia slave
holders. It was then that they built the handsome homes once so numerous
in the older counties, many of which still remain as interesting
monuments of former days; it was then that they surrounded themselves
with graceful furniture and costly silverware, in large part imported
from Great Britain; it was then that they collected paintings and filled
their libraries with the works of standard writers; it was then that
they purchased coaches and berlins; it was then that men and women
alike wore rich and expensive clothing.

This movement tended to widen the influence of the aristocracy and at
the same time to eliminate any sharp line of demarkation between it and
the small slave holders. There was now only a gradual descent from the
wealthiest to the poor man who had but one slave. The Spotsylvania tax
lists for 1783 show 247 slaveholders owning from one to five negroes,
116 owning from six to ten inclusive, 66 owning from eleven to fifteen
inclusive, and seventy-six owning more than fifteen.[8-61] In Gloucester
156 had from one to five slaves, 66 from five to ten inclusive, 41 from
eleven to fifteen inclusive, and fifty-seven over fifteen. Thus in a
very true sense the old servant holding aristocracy had given way to a
vastly larger slave holding aristocracy.

It is this fact which explains the decline in power and influence of the
Council in Virginia, which was so notable in the Eighteenth century.
This body had formerly been representative of a small clique of families
so distinct from the other planters and possessed of such power in the
government as to rival the nobility of England itself. Now, however, as
this distinction disappeared, the Council sank in prestige because it
represented nothing, while the House of Burgesses became the mouthpiece
of the entire slave holding class, and thus the real power in the
colonial Government.

Historians have often expressed surprise at the small number of Tories
in Virginia during the American Revolution. The aristocratic type of
society would naturally lead one to suppose that a large proportion of
the leading families would have remained loyal to the Crown. Yet with
very few exceptions all supported the cause of freedom and independence,
even though conscious of the fact that by so doing they were
jeopardizing not only the tobacco trade which was the basis of their
wealth, but the remnants of their social and political privileges in the
colony. When the British Ministry tried to wring from the hands of the
Assembly the all-important control over taxation which all knew to be
the very foundation of colonial self-government, every planter, the
largest as well as the smallest, felt himself aggrieved, for this body
was the depository of his power and the guardian of his interests. A
hundred years before, when the commons rose against the oppression and
tyranny of the Government, the wealthy men rallied to the support of Sir
William Berkeley and remained loyal to him throughout all his troubles.
In 1775 there was no such division of the people; the planters were
almost a unit in the defense of rights which all held in common.

It is obvious, then, that slavery worked a profound revolution in the
social, economic and political life of the colony. It practically
destroyed the Virginia yeomanry, the class of small planters who used
neither negroes nor servants in the cultivation of their fields, the
class which produced the bulk of the tobacco during the Seventeenth
century and constituted the chief strength of the colony. Some it drove
into exile, either to the remote frontiers or to other colonies; some it
reduced to extreme poverty; some it caused to purchase slaves and so at
one step to enter the exclusive class of those who had others to labor
for them. Thus it transformed Virginia from a land of hardworking,
independent peasants, to a land of slaves and slave holders. The small
freeholder was not destroyed, as was his prototype of ancient Rome, but
he was subjected to a change which was by no means fortunate or
wholesome. The wealthy class, which had formerly consisted of a narrow
clique closely knit together by family ties, was transformed into a
numerous body, while all sharp line of demarkation between it and the
poorer slave holders was wiped out. In short, the Virginia of the
Eighteenth century, the Virginia of Gooch and Dinwiddie and Washington
and Jefferson, was fundamentally different from the Virginia of the
Seventeenth century, the Virginia of Sir William Berkeley and Nathaniel
Bacon. Slavery had wrought within the borders of the Old Dominion a
profound and far reaching revolution.




NOTES TO CHAPTERS


NOTES TO CHAPTER I

[1-1] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, A True
Declaration, p. 25.

[1-2] Purchas, Vol. XVIII, pp. 437-438.

[1-3] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, A True
Declaration, p. 23.

[1-4] Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, p. 37.

[1-5] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. I, Nova Brittania, pp.
21-22.

[1-6] Hakluyt, Discourse, pp. 89-90.

[1-7] Hakluyt, Discourse, p. 105.

[1-8] Hakluyt, Discourse, p. 31.

[1-9] Hakluyt, Discourse, pp. 14-15.

[1-10] Alexander Brown, The First Republic in America, p. 49.

[1-11] Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, p.
349; Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. I, Nova Brittania, pp.
16-17.

[1-12] Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, p.
239.

[1-13] Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, p.
202.

[1-14] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 445.

[1-15] Neill, The Virginia Company of London, p. 338.

[1-16] Randolph Manuscript, p. 212.

[1-17] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 440;
Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, p. 239.

[1-18] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 441.

[1-19] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 443.


NOTES TO CHAPTER II

[2-1] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 161;
Alexander Brown, The First Republic in America, p. 232.

[2-2] William Strachey, Historie of Travaile into Virginia Britannia, p.
121; P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 162.

[2-3] Ralph Hamor, True Discourse, pp. 24, 34.

[2-4] G. L. Beer, The Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 79.

[2-5] Edward Arber, The Works of Captain John Smith, p. 535.

[2-6] Alexander Brown, The First Republic in America, p. 268.

[2-7] G. L. Beer, The Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 87.

[2-8] G. L. Beer, The Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 81.

[2-9] Alexander Brown, The First Republic in America, p. 268.

[2-10] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IX, pp. 40-41.

[2-11] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IX, pp. 176-177.

[2-12] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 416.

[2-13] Alexander Brown, The Genesis of the United States, Vol. I, pp.
355-356.

[2-14] The lack of towns in Virginia was a source of great regret to the
English Government, and more than once attempts were made to create them
by artificial means.

[2-15] Even at the end of the Seventeenth century the average price for
land in the older counties was about thirty pounds of tobacco an acre.

[2-16] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 578; Vol.
II, p. 48.

[2-17] It was Chanco, an Indian boy living with a Mr. Pace, who revealed
the plot to massacre the whites in 1622, and so saved the colony from
destruction. Edward Arber, The Works of Captain John Smith, p. 578.

[2-18] P. A. Bruce, The Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 70.

[2-19] For a full discussion of this matter see p.--.

[2-20] Hakluyt, Vol. VII, p. 286.

[2-21] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 582.

[2-22] Abstracts of Proceedings of Virginia Company of London, Vol. I,
pp. 28, 172; Edward Arber, The Works of Captain John Smith, p. 609.

[2-23] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. II, p. 510.

[2-24] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 603.

[2-25] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 605.

[2-26] Virginia Land Patents, Vol. V, Register of Land Office, Virginia
State Capitol.

[2-27] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. II, p. 510.

[2-28] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 611.

[2-29] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to the Board of
Trade.

[2-30] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Orders and
Constitutions, 1619, 1620, p. 22.

[2-31] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[2-32] Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, 1574-1660, p. 208.

[2-33] Princeton Transcripts, Virginia Land Patents, Princeton
University Library.

[2-34] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.


NOTES TO CHAPTER III

[3-1] L. G. Tyler, Narratives of Early Virginia, pp. 21-22.

[3-2] Abstracts of Proceedings of Virginia Company of London, Vol. II,
p. 171.

[3-3] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to Board of
Trade.

[3-4] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 257.

[3-5] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 411.

[3-6] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 539.

[3-7] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to Board of
Trade.

[3-8] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[3-9] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p. 595.

[3-10] J. C. Hotten, Original Lists of Emigrants to America (1600-1700).

[3-11] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 3.

[3-12] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to Board of
Trade.

[3-13] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, p. 119, Colonial Entry
Book, Governor Andros to the Lords of Trade.

[3-14] E. D. Neill, Virginia Vetusta, p. 123.

[3-15] Hugh Jones, Present State of Virginia, p. 61.

[3-16] Surry County Records, 1684-1686, Virginia State Library.

[3-17] York County Records, 1696-1701, Virginia State Library.

[3-18] Rappahannock County Deeds, 1680-1688, Virginia State Library.

[3-19] Essex County, Orders, Deeds, Etc., 1692-1695, Virginia State
Library.

[3-20] J. C. Hotten, Original Lists of Emigrants to America, pp.
266-275.

[3-21] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, pp. 529-532.

[3-22] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[3-23] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. I, p. 30.

[3-24] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XII, p. 387.

[3-25] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[3-26] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[3-27] Essex County, Orders, Deeds, Etc., 1692-1695, Virginia State
Library.

[3-28] Surry County Records, 1645-1672, p. 17.

[3-29] Essex County, Orders, Deeds, Etc., 1692-1695, p. 348, Virginia
State Library.

[3-30] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol, Vol. V.

[3-31] Essex County, Orders, Deeds, Etc., 1692-1695, pp. 199, 202, 205,
209, 216, 348, 394, 407, 413, Virginia State Library.

[3-32] H. R. McIlwaine, Journals of the House of Burgesses, 1686, p. 37.

[3-33] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 91-92, Colonial Entry
Book.

[3-34] British Public Record Office, CO5-1306, Document 116,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[3-35] British Public Record Office, CO5-1355, p. 361, Colonial Entry
Book.

[3-36] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 91-92, Colonial Entry
Book.

[3-37] British Public Record Office, CO5-1405, p. 460, Council Minutes,
1680-1695.

[3-38] British Public Record Office, CO5-1405, pp. 544-545, Council
Minutes, 1680-1695.

[3-39] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, p. 345, Colonial Entry
Book, 1696-1700.

[3-40] British Public Record Office, CO5-1339, Document 33V.
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[3-41] British Public Record Office, CO5-1314, Document 63VIII,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade. A copy of this interesting
document is published as an appendix to this volume.

[3-42] See appendix.

[3-43] See appendix.

[3-44] Of this land 15 acres belonged to Thomas Jefferson, probably the
grandfather of President Jefferson.

[3-45] In the opening years of the Eighteenth century the increased
importation of slaves brought about an immediate decline in the
migration of whites to Virginia from England.

[3-46] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. II, p. 480. The laws governing
the tithables were altered slightly from time to time.

[3-47] Surry County, Wills, Deeds, Etc., 1671-1684, pp. 134-138,
Virginia State Library.

[3-48] Surry County, Wills, Deeds, Etc., 1671-1684, pp. 134-138,
Virginia State Library.

[3-49] Surry County, Deeds, Wills, Etc., 1684-1686, pp. 59-63, Virginia
State Library.

[3-50] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. I, pp. 364-373.

[3-51] Prince George county was formed out of Charles City in 1703.

[3-52] Surry County, Wills, Deeds, Etc., 1671-1684; Surry County, Deeds,
Wills, Etc., 1684-1686, Virginia State Library.

[3-53] Elizabeth City County Records, 1684-1699, Virginia State Library.


NOTES TO CHAPTER IV

[4-1] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. VIII, p. 273.

[4-2] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. VIII, p. 273.

[4-3] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 42.

[4-4] Robert Beverley, History of Virginia, p. 221.

[4-5] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel,
p. 11.

[4-6] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXVI, p. 31.

[4-7] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel,
p. 11.

[4-8] In fact, it was stated by John Hammond in 1656 that many servants
acquired considerable property even before the expiration of their
indentures. "Those servants that will be industrious may in their time
of service gain a competent estate before their Freedomes," he says,
"which is usually done by many, and they gaine esteeme and assistance
that appear so industrious: There is no master almost but will allow
his Servant a parcell of clear ground to plant some tobacco in for
himselfe, which he may husband at those many idle times he hath allowed
him and not prejudice, but rejoyce his Master to see it, which in time
of Shipping he may lay out for commodities, and in Summer sell them
again with advantage, and get a Sow-Pig or two, which any body almost
will give him, and his Master suffer him to keep them with his own,
which will be no charge to his Master, and with one year's increase of
them may purchase a Cow calf or two, and by that time he is for himself;
he may have Cattle, Hogs and Tobacco of his own, and come to live
gallantly; but this must be gained (as I said) by Industry and
affability, not by sloth nor churlish behaviour." Peter Force, Tracts
and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel, p. 14.

[4-9] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IV, p. 157.

[4-10] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 262.

[4-11] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 261.

[4-12] R. L. Beer, Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 154.

[4-13] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 160.

[4-14] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XIII, p. 381.

[4-15] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, pp. 4-6.

[4-16] British Public Record Office, CO1-21, Secretary Ludwell to Lord
John Berkeley.

[4-17] Alexander Brown, The First Republic in America, p. 268.

[4-18] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 267,
King Charles I to the Governor and Council of Virginia.

[4-19] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. I, p. 293.

[4-20] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VI, p. 376.

[4-21] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. II, p. 53.

[4-22] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. II, p. 394.

[4-23] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VI, p. 260.

[4-24] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 382.

[4-25] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 149.

[4-26] Governor Yeardley's Instructions of 1626 contain the statement
that "tobacco falleth every day more and more to a baser price."

[4-27] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 376.

[4-28] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 159.

[4-29] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IX, p. 177.

[4-30] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. X, p. 425.

[4-31] G. L. Beer, Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 159.

[4-32] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 4.

[4-33] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 150.

[4-34] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. II, p. 288. In
Feb. 1627, orders were issued once more that all colonial tobacco,
whether of Virginia or of the West Indies, should be shipped only to
London. Calendar of State Papers, 1574-1660, p. 84.

[4-35] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, pp. 149,
155.

[4-36] British Public Record Office, CO1-12, Petition of Jan. 2, 1655.

[4-37] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, pp. 349-356.

[4-38] G. L. Beer, Origins of the British Colonial System, pp. 203-204.

[4-39] G. L. Beer, Origins of the British Colonial System, p. 216.

[4-40] The author of A New Description of Virginia, published in 1649,
states that "in Tobacco they can make L20 sterling a man, at 3d a pound
per annum." Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New
Description of Virginia, p. 6.

[4-41] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 382.

[4-42] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 149,
Vol. II, p. 53, Vol. VII, p. 259.

[4-43] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VII, p. 260.

[4-44] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 158.

[4-45] Abstracts of Proceedings of Virginia Company of London, Vol. I,
pp. 41-42.

[4-46] J. C. Hotten, Original Lists of Emigrants to America, pp.
201-265.

[4-47] Colonial Virginia Register, pp. 54-55.

[4-48] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, p. 16.

[4-49] Colonial Virginia Register, pp. 68-69.

[4-50] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[4-51] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. II, p. 420.

[4-52] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. II, p. 421; Vol.
IV, p. 75.

[4-53] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. I, p. 77.

[4-54] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, pp. 15-18.

[4-55] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, p. 56.

[4-56] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[4-57] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XI, p. 271.

[4-58] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XI, p. 276.

[4-59] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XI, pp. 271-276.

[4-60] Virginia Colonial Register, pp. 64, 68, 70.

[4-61] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. IX, p. 72.

[4-62] Virginia Land Patents, Vol. V, p. 224, Register of Land Office,
Virginia State Capitol.

[4-63] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, New Series Vol. I, p. 4.

[4-64] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, pp. 83, 84, 125,
126.

[4-65] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VII, p. 5.

[4-66] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, p. 78.

[4-67] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, pp. 77, 191,
281.

[4-68] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, p. 122.

[4-69] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, p. 192.

[4-70] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VI, p. 76.

[4-71] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. IX, p. 144.

[4-72] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. IX, p. 144.

[4-73] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XI, p. 276.

[4-74] Virginia Land Patents, Vol. III, Register of Land Office,
Virginia State Capitol. The name is here spelled John Blackborne.

[4-75] Virginia Land Patents, Vol. III, Register of Land Office,
Virginia State Capitol. On the lists the name is spelled William
Butcher.

[4-76] J. C. Wise, The Early History of the Eastern Shore of Virginia,
pp. 135-137.

[4-77] Virginia Land Patents, Vol. IV, Register of Land Office, Virginia
State Capitol.

[4-78] J. C. Wise, The Early History of the Eastern Shore of Virginia,
p. 95.

[4-79] G. C. Greer, Early Virginia Immigrants, p. 68.

[4-80] J. C. Wise, The Early History of the Eastern Shore of Virginia,
p. 376.

[4-81] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. V, p. 101.

[4-82] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. VII, p. 177.

[4-83] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VI, p. 92.

[4-84] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VI, p. 298.

[4-85] In 1656 John Hammond declared that though it cost six pounds
sterling to go to Virginia, those who decided to make the venture could
be sure that their money was well spent. He advised "any that goes over
free, but in a mean condition, to hire himself for reasonable wages of
Tobacco and Provision, the first year," for by that means he could live
free of disbursement, and "have something to help him the next year."
Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel, p. 14.

[4-86] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. VIII, p. 441.

[4-87] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IX, p. 27.

[4-88] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. X, p. 271.


NOTES TO CHAPTER V

[5-1] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. II, p. 109.

[5-2] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 26,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

?[5-3] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, p.
401.

?[5-4] R. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 160.

?[5-5] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Perry and Hyde to
the Lords of Trade, Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

?[5-6] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, The Present State
of the Tobacco Plantations in America, Correspondence of the Board of
Trade.

[5-7] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade; Statutes of the Realm, Vol. IX, p. 917.

[5-8] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. I, pp. 141-155.

[5-9] British Public Record Office, CO1-16, Petition of Berkeley and
Others, Aug. 26, 1662.

[5-10] British Public Record Office, CO1-20, Thomas Ludwell to Secretary
Arlington, May 1, 1666.

[5-11] British Public Record Office, CO1-20, Sir William Berkeley and
others to Secretary Arlington, July 13, 1666.

[5-12] British Public Record Office, CO1-20, Sir William Berkeley and
others to Secretary Arlington, July 13, 1666.

[5-13] British Public Record Office, CO1-21, Thomas Ludwell to Lord
Arlington, Feb. 12, 1667.

[5-14] British Public Record Office, CO1-21, Thomas Ludwell to Lord John
Berkeley.

[5-15] British Public Record Office, CO1-23, p. 19, Ludwell to Lord
Arlington.

[5-16] British Public Record Office, CO1-21, Governor and Council to the
King.

[5-17] British Public Record Office, CO1-30, p. 51, Petition of the
Governor and Council.

[5-18] British Public Record Office, CO5-1356, p. 408, Report of the
Council to the King.

[5-19] British Public Record Office, CO5-1355, p. 385, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-20] British Public Record Office, CO1-23, p. 19, Ludwell to Lord
Arlington, July 20, 1665.

[5-21] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 246, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-22] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, pp. 232-240, Dialogue
Between John Good and Nathaniel Bacon, Colonial Entry Book, 1677.

[5-23] British Public Record Office, CO1-30, p. 51, Petition of the
Governor and Council to the King, July 1673.

[5-24] British Public Record Office, CO5-1355, p. 410, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-25] British Public Record Office, CO5-1356, p. 179, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-26] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. II, p. 147.

[5-27] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 276, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-28] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 276, Colonial Entry
Book.

[5-29] This view of the matter has the support of the dean of Virginia
historians, Dr. Philip Alexander Bruce. Dr. Bruce writes: "No less an
authority than Robert Beverley, the historian, states that the
Navigation Acts had a sensible influence in precipitating Bacon's
Rebellion. In the early life of this writer he must have been closely
associated with hundreds of people who had been through the uprising,
and knew much, by direct observation, of the currents that governed it.
The elder Beverley was thoroughly informed and thus, in his own home,
the son had the best of opportunities of learning the truth. Beverley
himself declared that the Acts were causing discontent among the people,
long before the Rebellion actually occurred, and so did John Bland in
his memorable petition. There is no doubt that the Acts, by keeping
alive a sense of friction, left the people in just the state of mind to
seize with eagerness on the more palpable wrongs which were specifically
brought forward as the justification for resistance. It was really the
groundwork of the movement, though if it had been the only cause, might
not have precipitated open resistance to the Government."

[5-30] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. II, p. 115.

[5-31] Secretary Thomas Ludwell in a long report to the British
Government spoke of the Virginia Government as Berkeley's own, "Which I
so term," he explains, "because he is the sole author of the most
substantial parts of it, either for Lawes or other inferior
institutions." British Public Record Office, CO1-20.

[5-32] British Museum, Egerton Manuscript, 2395, f. 356b.

[5-33] British Public Record Office, CO1-19, Berkeley to Lord Arlington,
Aug. 1, 1665.

?[5-34] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, pp.
399-400.

[5-35] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to the Board of
Trade.

[5-36] British Public Record Office, CO1-30-78, Memorial of John Knight,
Oct. 29, 1673.

[5-37] British Public Record Office, CO1-30-71, Council of Virginia to
the King, 1673.

[5-38] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, pp. 1-16.

[5-39] British Museum, Egerton Manuscript, 2395, f. 356b, A Discourse
and View of Virginia.

[5-40] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to the Board of
Trade.

[5-41] British Public Record Office, CO1-34-95, Petition of Francis
Moryson, Thomas Ludwell and Robert Smith.

[5-42] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[5-43] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 20, 21, 22, Colonial
Entry Book.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VI

[6-1] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 3.

[6-2] British Public Record Office, CO1-30, pp. 17, 51.

[6-3] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1671-1624, Virginia State Library.

[6-4] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1684-1686, pp. 34-35, Virginia
State Library.

[6-5] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1684-1686, pp. 86-87, Virginia
State Library.

[6-6] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 199.

[6-7] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 3.

[6-8] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 200.

[6-9] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 3.

[6-10] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 18.

[6-11] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 15.

[6-12] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 201.

[6-13] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel,
p. 13.

[6-14] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Statement of Mr. Perry
and Captain Hyde, Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[6-15] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Virginia Richly
Valued, p. 10.

[6-16] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Albion, p. 32.

[6-17] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. III, Leah and Rachel,
p. 18.

[6-18] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 7.

[6-19] Abstracts of Proceedings of the Virginia Company of London, Vol.
II, p. 171.

[6-20] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 153.

[6-21] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, pp. 160-161.

[6-22] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. V, p. 285.

[6-23] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1684-1686, p. 7, Virginia State
Library.

[6-24] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1684-1686, pp. 34-35, Virginia
State Library.

[6-25] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1684-1686, pp. 86-87, Virginia
State Library.

[6-26] Surry County Wills, Deeds, Etc. 1671-1684, Virginia State
Library.

[6-27] John Splitimber paid for himself alone in the tithable lists of
1675.

[6-28] York County Records, 1694-1702, Virginia State Library.

[6-29] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 15.

[6-30] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 14.

[6-31] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 241.

[6-32] "I would have all men consider how meanly we are provided of men
of learning, ability and courage, nay indeed of honesty, to stand up in
the people's behalf and oppose the oppressing party," said Nathaniel
Bacon in 1676. British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 246.

[6-33] The most notable case of betrayal is that of Isaac Allerton, who
sold himself to the Governor for the promise of a seat in the Council of
State. British Public Record Office, CO5-1356, pp. 125-126, Colonial
Entry Book.

[6-34] British Public Record Office, CO1-4.

[6-35] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. I, pp. 287-288.

[6-36] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. X, p. 271.

[6-37] British Public Record Office, CO1-8, p. 48.

[6-38] British Public Record Office, CO1-8.

[6-39] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, pp. 360-361.

[6-40] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 361.

[6-41] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 355.

[6-42] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, p. 363.

[6-43] Sixth Report of Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, Part
I, Instructions to Sir George Ayscue, Sept. 26, 1651.

[6-44] The commissioners were Capt. Robert Dennis, Richard Bennett,
Thomas Stegge and Captain William Claiborne, all of whom with the
exception of Dennis were Virginians.

[6-45] Hening, Statutes at Large, Vol. I, pp. 371, 373.

[6-46] Southern Literary Messanger, Jan. 1845; Charles Campbell, History
of Virginia, p. 74.

[6-47] Southern Literary Messanger, Jan. 1845.

[6-48] British Public Record Office, CO5-1371, p. 387, Colonial Entry
Book.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VII

[7-1] British Public Record Office, CO5-1356, p. 104, Colonial Entry
Book.

[7-2] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 40.

?[7-3] British Public Record Office, CO5-1305, Document 23,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[7-4] British Public Record Office, CO5-1345, Document 16,
Correspondence of the Secretary of State.

[7-5] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 42.

[7-6] Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, 1702.

[7-7] British Public Record Office, CO5-1355, pp. 381-385, Colonial
Entry Book.

[7-8] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 168.

[7-9] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 16,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[7-10] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 91.

[7-11] British Public Record Office, CO5-1345, Document 16, John Linton
to the Board of Trade, Correspondence of the Secretary of State.

[7-12] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Report of John Linton on
the Tobacco Trade, Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[7-13] British Public Record Office, CO5-1345, Document 16,
Correspondence of the Secretary of State.

[7-14] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 26,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[7-15] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 26,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[7-16] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[7-17] British Public Record Office, CO5-1340, Document 91, Col. Quary's
Memorial.

[7-18] R. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 42.

[7-19] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade; CO5-1360, p. 233, Governor Nicholson to the Lords of
Trade.

[7-20] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 91, Col. Quary's
Memorial.

[7-21] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade, Letter of Col. Quary Sept. 1, 1706.

[7-22] Princeton Transcripts, Virginia Land Patents, Princeton
University Library.

[7-23] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 107-108, Colonial
Entry Book. In 1699 Gov. Nicholson stated that Orinoco was bringing 20
shillings the hundredweight and Sweetscented 25 shillings and up, which
he considered an unusually good return. British Public Record Office,
CO5-1359, p. 322.

[7-24] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 66.

[7-25] J. C. Hotten, Original Lists of Emigrants to America, pp.
202-265.

[7-26] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 89.

[7-27] Peter Force, Tracts and Other Papers, Vol. II, New Description of
Virginia, p. 3.

[7-28] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to the Board of
Trade.

[7-29] British Public Record Office, CO5-1355, p. 345, Lord Culpeper's
account of his compliance with the King's instructions, Dec. 1681.

[7-30] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 75.

[7-31] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 75.

[7-32] British Public Record Office, CO1-26-77, Berkeley to the Board of
Trade.

[7-33] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 323.

[7-34] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, pp. 324-325.

[7-35] York County Records, 1664-1672, Virginia State Library.

[7-36] York County Records, 1694-1702, Virginia State Library.

[7-37] Henrico Records, 1677-1692, Virginia State Library.

[7-38] York County Records, 1694-1697, Virginia State Library.

[7-39] British Public Record Office, CO5-1317, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[7-40] British Public Record Office, CO5-1317, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[7-41] British Public Record Office, CO5-1406, Minutes of the Council
March 21, 1710, CO5-1363, pp. 189-191, Colonial Entry Book.

[7-42] British Public Record Office, CO5-1322, Governor Gooch to the
Lords of Trade, Sept. 14, 1730; Feb. 12, 1731.

[7-43] British Public Record Office, CO5-1363, pp. 317-324, Colonial
Entry Book.

[7-44] British Public Record Office, CO5-1362, pp. 369-373, Colonial
Entry Book.

[7-45] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 83.

[7-46] Princeton Transcripts, Virginia Land Patents, Princeton
University Library.

[7-47] P. A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, p. 108.

[7-48] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[7-49] British Public Record Office, CO5-1314, Document 66, Governor
Nott to the Board of Trade.

[7-50] British Public Record Office, CO5-1362, pp. 365-367, Colonial
Entry Book.

[7-51] British Public Record Office, CO5-1362, pp. 365-367, Colonial
Entry Book.

[7-52] During these years the planters were too impoverished to purchase
slaves. The decline in the tobacco trade produced a feeling among the
people that the colony had been overstocked with blacks.

[7-53] British Public Record Office, CO5-1322, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade, Report of Governor Gooch.

[7-54] British Public Record Office, CO5-1322, Francis Fane to the Lords
of Trade, Dec. 10, 1728.

[7-55] British Public Record Office, CO5-1356, p. 139, Colonial Entry
Book.


NOTES TO CHAPTER VIII

[8-1] Princeton Transcripts, Virginia Land Patents, Princeton University
Library.

[8-2] Princeton Transcripts, Virginia Land Patents, Princeton University
Library.

[8-3] British Public Record Office, CO5-1362, pp. 365-367, Colonial
Entry Book.

[8-4] Virginia Land Patents, Register of Land Office, Virginia State
Capitol.

[8-5] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, p. 28.

[8-6] G. L. Beer, The Old Colonial System, Vol. I, pp. 320-321.

[8-7] Jared Sparks, The Works of Benjamin Franklin, Vol. X, iii.

[8-8] Maurice Vanlaer, La Fin d'un Peuple, pp. 38-39.

[8-9] Maurice Vanlaer, La Fin d'un Peuple, pp. 112-117.

[8-10] British Public Record Office, CO1-39-38.

[8-11] Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, 1696-1697, p. 420.

[8-12] Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, 1696-1697, p. 500.

[8-13] Calendar of State Papers, Colonial Series, 1696-1697, p. 546.

[8-14] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 20, 21, 22.

[8-15] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 20, 21, 22.

[8-16] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, p. 23, Colonial Entry
Book.

[8-17] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, p. 113, Andros to the
Lords of Trade, July 1, 1697.

[8-18] British Public Record Office, CO5-1359, pp. 266-303, Colonial
Entry Book.

[8-19] British Public Record Office, CO5-1312, p. 4O9A, Correspondence
of the Board of Trade.

[8-20] British Public Record Office, CO5-1360, p. 441, Colonial Entry
Book.

[8-21] Rent Roll of 1704, p. 46.

[8-22] British Public Record Office, CO5-1321, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade, Gooch to the Lords of Trade, Nov. 6, 1728.

[8-23] British Public Record Office, CO5-1362, pp. 374-382, Colonial
Entry Book.

[8-24] British Public Record Office, CO5-1364, p. 27, Colonial Entry
Book.

[8-25] J. S. Bassett, Writings of William Byrd, p. 31.

[8-26] British Public Record Office, CO5-1322, Gooch to the Lords of
Trade, Feb. 27, 1731.

[8-27] British Public Record Office, CO5-1321, Gooch to the Lords of
Trade, Aug. 9, 1728.

[8-28] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 16,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[8-29] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 91,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[8-30] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[8-31] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 16.

[8-32] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Document 91,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[8-33] British Public Record Office, CO5-1315, Correspondence of the
Board of Trade.

[8-34] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Account of the tobacco
trade by Perry and Hyde, June 2, 1714.

[8-35] British Public Record Office, CO5-1316, Petition of the Council,
Correspondence of the Board of Trade.

[8-36] British Public Record Office, CO5-1318, Address of King and Queen
county inhabitants to Spotswood; address of Westmoreland inhabitants;
letter of Spotswood to Lords of Trade, Dec. 22, 1718.

[8-37] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXI, pp. 106-122.

[8-38] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XII, pp.
414-416.

[8-39] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IV, pp. 297-299.

[8-40] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXVI, pp. 97-106, 196-201,
250-258.

[8-41] Chastellux, Travels in North America, p. 291.

[8-42] Philip Fithian, Journal and Letters, p. 243.

[8-43] Smyth, A Tour of the United States, Vol. I, p. 58.

[8-44] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXI, pp. 106-122.

[8-45] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXVI, pp. 97-106, 196-201,
250-258.

[8-46] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IV, pp. 297-299.

[8-47] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XII, p. 415.

[8-48] Lower Norfolk County Antiquary, Vol. IV, p. 144.

[8-49] W. A. Crozier, Virginia County Records, Vol. I, pp. 88-110.

[8-50] Thomas Jefferson, Notes on Virginia, Edition of 1801, p. 321.

[8-51] Chastellux, Travels in North America, p. 292 note.

[8-52] Smyth, A Tour of the United States, Vol. I, p. 66.

[8-53] Hugh Jones, History of Virginia, p. 36.

[8-54] Rowland, Life of George Mason, Vol. I, pp. 101, 102; Philip
Fithian, Journal and Letters, pp. 67, 104, 130, 130, 138, 217, 259; P.
A. Bruce, Economic History of Virginia, Vol. II, pp. 411, 418.

[8-55] British Public Record Office, CO5-1314, Document 63IV.

[8-56] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XII, p. 415.

[8-57] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. IV, pp.
292-299.

[8-58] William and Mary Quarterly, Vol. XXVI, pp. 97-106, 196-201,
250-258.

[8-59] Smyth, A Tour of the United States, p. 67.

[8-60] Anbury, Travels Through America, Vol. II, p. 330.

[8-61] Virginia Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. XII, p. 415.




_APPENDIX_




RENT ROLL OF VIRGINIA

1704-1705


A True and Perfect Rent Roll of all the Lands held of her Maj^tie in
Henrico County, Aprill 1705


  A

  Andrews Thomas                      396
  Ascoutch Mary                       633
  Archer Jno                          335
  Adkins Jno                          125
  Archer Geo                         1738
  Aldy John                           162
  Akins James Sen^r                   200
  Asbrook Peter Sen^r                 200
  Akins James Jun^r                   218
  Allin Widd^o                         99
                                    -----
                                     4106


  B

  Byrd Esq^r                        19500
  Bolling Rob^t                       500
  Bolling John                        831
  Bevill John                         495
  Branch X^to                         646
  Blackman Wm                         175
  Bridgwater Sam                      280
  Bowman John Jun^r                   300
  Bowman Edw^d                        300
  Branch Benj                         550
  Brown Martha                        893
  Bullington Benj                     100
  Bowman Lew                           65
  Bullington                          144
  Bevell Essex                        200
  Baugh John                          448
  Baugh James                         458
  Burton Isaac                        100
  Bottom John                         100
  Bayley Abr                          542
  Brooks Jane belonging to
    Wm Walker New Kent                550
  Braseal Henry                       200
  Brazeal Henry Jun^r                 300
  Burton Rob^t                       1350
  Burgony John                        100
  Branch James                        555
  Burrows Wm. Wm. Blackwell
    New Kent                           63
  Branch Thomas                       540
  Bailey Thomas                       251
  Branch Matthew                      947
  Burton Wm                           294
  Bullington Rob^t                    100
  Broadnax Jno Jr                     725
  Beverley Rob^t                      988
                                    -----
                                    33590


  C

  Cheatham Tho                        300
  Cox Batt                            100
  Cox John                            150
  Cox George                          200
  Chamberlaine Maj. Tho              1000
  Childers Abr. Sen^r                 368
  Cannon John                         108
  Cox Wm                              300
  Childers Ab^r Jun^r                 100
  Clark Wm                            333
  Clark John                          300
  Cox Rich^d                          300
  Cardwell Tho                        350
  Crozdall Roger                      200
  Cock Wm                            1535
  Cock Rich^d Sen^r                  2180
  Childers Philip Sen^r                50
  Childers Philip                     300
  Childers Tho                        300
  Carter Theod                         75
  Cock Capt Thomas                   2976-1/2
  Couzins Charles                     362
  Clerk Alonson                       604
  Cock James                         1506
  Curd Edw^d                          600
  Cock Rich^d                         476
  Cock Jno                             98
                                    -----
                                    15171-1/2


  D

  Dixon Nicholas                      150
  Dodson Wm                           100
  Douglas Charles                      63
                                    -----
                                      313


  E

  Edw^d Tho                           676
  Entroughty Derby                    200
  Ealam Rob^t                         400
  Ellis John                          217
  East Tho Sen                        475
  East Tho                            554
  East Edw^d                          150
  Epes Capt Fra^s                    2145
  Evans Charles                       225
  Ealam Martin                        130
  Epes Isham, Epes Fra. Jun^t
    each 444-1/2 acres                889
                                    -----
                                     6061


  F

  Field Peter Major                  2185
  Farrar Capt Wm                      700
  Farrar Tho                         1444
  Farrar Jno                          600
  Fowler Godfrey                      250
  Ferguson Robert                     230
  Ferris Wm                            50
  Franklin James Sen                  250
  Franklin James Jun                  786
  Ferris Rich^d Sen                   550
  Farmer Henry                        100
  Forrest James                       138
  Forrest John                        150
  Fetherstone Henry                   700
  Farloe John Sen                     100
  Farloe John Jun                     551
  Faile John                          240
                                    -----
                                     9024


  G

  Gilley Grewin Arrian               2528
  Gee Henry                           435
  Good John Sen                       600
  Garthwaite Sam^l                     50
  Garthwaite Ephriam                  163
  Granger John                        472
  Gill John                           235
  Good Sam^l                          588
  Gower James Grigs Land              500
                                    -----
                                     5571


  H

  Hill James                          795
  Holmes Rich                         100
  Harris Thomas                       357
  Harris Tim^o                        250
  Hill Rosam^d                       1633
  Hobby Lawrence                      500
  Hatcher John                        215
  Haskins Edward                      225
  Hatcher Edward Sen                  150
  Hunt Geo                            200
  Hughs Edward                        100
  Hancock Samuel                      100
  Holmes Thomas                        50
  Hambleton James                     100
  Hutchins Nich^o                     240
  Hatcher Benj Sen                    250
  Hatcher Wm Jun                       50
  Hobson Wm                           150
  Hatcher Wm Sen                      298
  Hatcher Henry                       650
  Hancock Robert                      860
  Harris Mary                          94
  Hall Edward                         184
  Herbert Mrs                        1360
  Hudson Robert                       281
                                    -----
                                     9242


  J

  Jones Hugh                          934
  Jefferson Thomas                    492
  Jones Philip                       1153
  Jorden Henry                        100
  Jamson John                         225
  Jackson Ralph                       250
                                    -----
                                     3154


  K

  Kennon Elizabeth                   1900
  Knibb Samuel                        209
  Knibb Solomon                       833
  Kendall Richard                     400
                                    -----
                                     3342


  L

  Liptroll Edward                     150
  Lewis Wm                            350
  Lester Darens                       100
  Ladd Wm                              70
  Ligon Elizabeth Widdow}
  Ligon Mary Widdow     }            1341
  Laforce Reu                         100
  Lochett James                        50
  Lownd Henry                         516
  Lockitt Benj                        104
  Ligon Richard                      1028
  Ligon Hugh                          150
                                    -----
                                     3959


  M

  Mann Robert                         100
  Matthews Edward                     330
  Moseby Edward                       150
  Moseby Arthur                       450
                                    -----
                                     1030


  N

  Nunnally Richard                     70


  O

  Osbourn Thomas                      288
  Owen Thomas                          68
                                    -----
                                      356


  P

  Perkinson John                      622
  Perrin Ann                          500
  Pleasants John                     9669
  Parker Wm                           100
  Parker Nich Sen                     500
  Pledge Jno.                         100
  Powell Robert                       150
  Peice John                          130
  Pleasants Jos                      1709
  Porter Wm                           305
  Peirce Wm                           175
  Peirce Francis                      312
  Paine Thomas                        300
  Portlock Elizabeth                 1000
  Pero Henry                          350
  Pattram Ira                         778
  Pride Wm Sen.                      1280
  Pollard Thomas Sen                  130
  Perkinson Seth                       50
  Pinkitt Wm                          192
  Pinkitt Thomas                      300
  Pattison Joseph                     500
  Porter John                         100
  Pollard Thomas Jun                  235
  Pollard Henry                       235
  Pinkitt John                        215
                                    -----
                                    19937


  R

  Robertson Geo                      1445
  Ragsdaile Godfrey                   450
  Rawlett Peter                       164
  Russell Charles                     200
  Rowlett Wm                          200
  Rowen Francis                       148
  Robertson John                      415
  Rouch Rachell                       300
  Robertson Thomas                    200
  Russell John                         93
  Royall Joseph                       783
  Redford John                        775
  Randolph Col Wm including
    1185 acres swamp                 9465
                                    -----
                                    14648


  S

  Steward Jno Jun                     902
  Scott Walter                        550
  Soane Capt Wm                      3841
  Stanley Edward                      300
  Snuggs Charles                      400
  Sewell Wm                            59
  Smith Humphrey                       40
  Sharp Robert                        500
  Stovoll Barth^o                     100
  Skerin Widdow                        75
  Steward Daniell                     270
  Smith Obadiah                       200
  Stowers Widdow                      200
  Sarrazin Stephen                    120
                                    -----
                                     7557


  T

  Tancocks Orphans                   1230
  Trent Henry                         224
  Turpin Thomas                       491
  Turpin Philip                       444
  Turpin Thomas                       100
  Turner Henry                        200
  Taylor Thomas                       475
  Tanner Edward                       217
  Traylor Edward                      100
  Totty Thomas                        260
  Traylor Wm                          730
                                    -----
                                     4471


  V

  Veden Henry                         100


  W

  Woodson John                       4060
  Williams Robert                     300
  Woodson Robert Jun                 1157
  Ward Richard                        300
  Watson John Sen                    1603
  Walthall Wm                         500
  Walthall Henry                      832
  Whitby Wm                           215
  Watkins Henry Sen                   100
  Webb John                           100
  Watkins Thomas                      200
  Woodson Rich                        180
  Woodson Widdow                      650
  Williamson Thomas                  1077
  Webb Giles                         7260
  Wood Thomas                          50
  Watkins Wm                          120
  Watkins Jos                         120
  Watkins Edward                      120
  Ward Seth                           700
  Wood Moses                          100
  Wilkinson Jos                        75-1/2
  Wilkinson John                      130
  Worsham John                       1104
  Womack Abr                          560
  Willson Jno Sen                    1686
  Willson Jno Jun                     100
  Walthall Richard                    500
  Wortham Geo                         400
  Wortham Charles                      90
  Womack Wm                           100
                                    -----
                                    24489-1/2


  W                                 24489-1/2
  V                                   100
  T                                  4471
  S                                  7557
  R                                 14648
  P                                 19937
  O                                   396
  N                                    70
  M                                  1030
  L                                  3959
  K                                  3342
  J                                  3154
  H                                  9242
  G                                  5571
  F                                  9024
  E                                  6061
  D                                   313
  C                                 15171-1/2
  B                                 33590
  A                                  4106
                                   ------
                                   165814

  Out of which must be deducted these several quantities of land
    following Viz:

  Tancocks Orphans Land              1230
  Allens Orphans Land                  99
                                    -----
                                     1329

  An account of Land that hath been concealed

  John Steward Jun                      2
  Thomas Jefferson                     15
  Thomas Turpin                        10
  Henry Gee                            10
  Stephen Sarrzen                      10
  Mr. Lownd                             1
  James Atkin Sen                      32
  Matthew Branch                       10
  James Franklin                      360
  James Hill                           50
  Rosemond Hill                        33
  John Bullington                      44
  Benjamin Lockett                      4
  John Russell                         23
  Charles Douglas                      13
  Col Randolph Carless Land          1049
                                    -----
                                     1669

  The Quit Rent being 162719 acres.


A Rent Roll of all the Lands held in the County of Prince George for the
Year 1704


  A

  Thomas Anderson                     450
  Wm Aldridge                         160
  Mr. Charles Anderson                505
  Richard Adkinson                    200
  Thomas Adams                        250
  Matthem Anderson                    349
  Henry Ally                          390
  Wm Anderson                         235
  Jno Anderson                        228
  Henry Anderson                      250
  Robert Abernathy                    100
  Jno Avery                           100
                                    -----
                                     3217


  B

  Richard Bland                      1000
  Robert Birchett                     375
  Arthur Biggins                      200
  James Benford                       461
  Jno Barloe                           50
  Charles Bartholomew                 600
  Philip Burlowe                      350
  Nicholas Brewer                     100
  Jno Bishop Sen                      100
  Jno Bishop Jun                      100
  Isaac Baites                        360
  Thomas Busby Capt                   300
  Thomas Busby                        200
  Wm Batt                             750
  Coll Byrd Esq                       100
  Edward Birchett                     886
  Coll Bolling                       3402
  Edmund Browder                      100
  Matus Brittler                      510
  Jno Butler                         1385
  Andrew Beck                         300
  Henry Batt                          790
  Wm Butler                           283
  Thomas Blitchodin                   284
                                    -----
                                    12986


  C

  Thomas Curiton                      150
  Henry Chammins                      300
  Capt Clements                      1920
  Wm. Claunton                        100
  Robert Catte                        100
  Bartho Crowder                       75
  Thomas Clay                          70
  Jno Coleman                         200
  George Crook                        489
  Francis Coleman                     150
  Jno Clay                            350
  Wm Coleman Jun                      100
  George Croohet                       30
  James Cocke                         750
  Robert Carlill                      100
  Jno Clerk                            83
  Richarl Claunton                    100
  Stephen Cock for Jones Orphans     2405
                                    -----
                                     7622


  D

  Thomas Daniell                      150
  Roger Drayton                       270
  Joseph Daniell                       50
  Jno Doby                            500
  George Dowing                       100
  Wm Davis                            100
  Jno Duglas                          300
  Richard Darding                     500
  Christopher Davis                    50
  Thomas Dunkin                       136
                                    -----
                                     2156


  E

  Robert Ellis                         50
  Jno Epes Sen                        530
  Wm Epes Sen                         750
  Jno Epes                            300
  Wm Epes                             633-1/2
  Edward Epes                         500
  Littlebury Epes                     833-1/2
  Benj Evans                          700
  Thomas Edwards                      250
  Dan Epes                            200
  Jno Evans                           800
  Jno. Ellis Jun                      400
  John Ellis Sen                      400
  Mary Evans                          400
  Peter Evans                         270
  Capt Francis Epes                   226
                                    -----
                                     7243


  F

  Jno Freeman                         300
  Wm Frost                             50
  Jno Fountaine                       350
  Robert Fellows                      418
  Elizabeth Flood                     100
  Benj Foster                         923
  Jno Field                           100
                                    -----
                                     2241


  G

  Jno Green                           125
  Richard Gord                        100
  David Goodgamd                      479
  James Greithian                     363
  Major Goodrich                      900
  Thomas Goodwin                      150
  Hubert Gibson                       250
  Richard Griffith                    335
  James Griffin                       100
  Charles Gee                         484
  Charles Gillam                      200
  Hugh Goelightly                     500
  Lewis Green                         149
  Wm Grigg                            200
  John Gillam                        1000
  John Goelightly                     100
                                    -----
                                     5435


  H

  Coll Hill                          1000
  Daniell Hickdon                     280
  Robert Harthorn                     243
  Jno Hamlin                         1484-1/2
  Coll Harrison Esq                   150
  Ralph Hill                          175
  Wm Harrison                        1930
  Wm Heath                            320
  Edward Holloway                     100
  Robert Hobbs                        100
  Jno Hobbs Sen                       250
  Edward Holloway Sen                 620
  Jno Hobbs                           100
  James Harrison                      200
  Gilbert Haye                        200
  Richard Hudson                       75
  Gabriell Harrison                   150
  Robert Hix                         1000
  Joseph Holycross                     84
  Charles Howell                      125
  Sam Harwell                         125
  Isaac Hall                          450
  Jno Howell                          183
  Thomas Howell                        25
  Mrs. Herbert                       3925
  Jno Hixs                            216
  Richard Hamlin                      240
  Thomas Harnison                    1077
  Elizabeth Hamlin                    250
  Wm Hulme                            100
  Jeffrey Hawkes                      125
  Adam Heath                          300
  Jno Hill                            160
  Jno Hardiman                        872
  Justance Hall                       614
                                    -----
                                    17366


  J

  Wm Jones Jun                        230
  Wm Jones Sen                        600
  Henry Jones                         200
  Robert Jones                        241
  Edmund Irby                         800
  Nich. Jarrett                       700
  James Jackson                        80
  Adam Ivie                           200
  Thomas Jackson                       60
  James Jones Sen                    1100
  Henry Ivye                          450
  Peter Jones                         621
  Ricard Jones                        600
  Ralph Jacskon                       110
  Joshua Irby                         200
  John Jones                          350
                                    -----
                                     6542


  K

  Richard Kirkland                    300
  John King                            50
  Henry King                          650
  Arthur Kavanah                       60
  Ensobius King                       100
                                    -----
                                     1160


  L

  John Livesley                       300
  Samuel Lewey                        100
  Jno Lumbady                         400
  Jno Leeneir                         100
  Mrs Low                              70
  Sam Lewey for Netherland Orphans    498
  Thomas Lewis Sen                    200
  Hugh Liegh                          762
  Francis Leadbeatter                 100
  Jno Leadbeatter                     400
  Wm Low                             1584
                                    -----
                                     3114


  M

  Wm Madox                            190
  Robert Munford                      339
  James Mingo Sen                     500
  Matt Marks                         1500
  Samuell Moody                       328
  Francis Mallory                     100
  Daniell Mallone                     100
  Jno Mayes                           365
  Richard More                        472
  Henry Mitchell Sen                  100
  Jno Mitchell                        170
  Wm Mayes                            763
  Edward Murrell                      100
  Thomas Mitchell Jun                 100
  Peter Mitchell                      305
  Henry Mitchell Jun                  200
  Francis Maberry                     347
  James Matthews                      100
  Jno Martin                          200
                                    -----
                                     6839


  N

  Richard Newman                      120
  Walter Nannaley                     299
                                    -----
                                      419


  O

  Nicholas Overburry                  809
  Jno Owen                             25
                                    -----
                                      834


  P

  George Pasmore                      330
  Francis Poythwes Sen               1283
  Joseph Pattison                     200
  George Pail                         246
  Nathaniel Phillips                  150
  Jno Price                            50
  Wm Peoples                          150
  Elizabeth Peoples                   235
  Joseph Perry                        275
  Richard Pigeon                      524
  Thomas Potts                        200
  Joseph Pritchett                     50
  Jno Petterson                       373
  George Pace                        1000
  Ephram Parkam                       300
  Thomas Poythres                     616
  Dand Peoples                         60
  Grace Perry                         100
  Jno Poythres Jun                    916
  Jno Petterson                       420
  Mr Micajah Perry                    600
                                    -----
                                     9203


  R

  Jno Roberts                         316
  Nath. Robinson                      100
  Roger Reace Jun                     100
  Henry Read                           75
  Roger Reace Sen                     100
  Wm Reanes                           250
  Frances Raye                        300
  Jno Reeks                            50
  Wm Rachell                          100
  Timothy Reading Sen                 460
  Jno Riners                          200
  Edward Richardson                   300
  Coll Randolph                       226
                                    -----
                                     2677


  S

  Matthew Smart                       100
  Wm Standback                        150
  Thomas Symmons                      566
  James Salmen                        477
  Wm Savage                           150
  Wm Sandborne                         40
  Jno Scott                           300
  Martin Shieffield                   150
  James Smith                          67
  John Stroud                          60
  Richard Seeking                     100
  Wm Sexton                            50
  James Leveaker                      710
  Chichester Sturdivant               214
  Daniell Sturdivant                  850
  Richard Smith                       550
  Jno Spaine                          118
  Matthew Sturdivant                  150
  Capt Stith                          470-1/2
                                    -----
                                     8272-1/2


  T

  Major Henry Tooker for the
     Merchants in London             4600
  Ricard Jones                        600
  George Tilliman                     446
  Jno Tilliman                        530
  Wm Tomlinson                        400
  Adam Tapley                         977
  Capt Jno Taylor                    1700
  Mich. Taburd                        150
  Maj^r Tooker                        181
  Robert Tooker                       400
  Robert Tester                       170
  Joseph Tooker                       200
  Wm Tempel                           100
  Jno Thornhill                       350
  Jno Taylor                          100
  Nath. Tatham Jun                    200
  Samuel Tatham Sen                   100
  Samuel Tatham Jun                   195
  Henry Talley                        639
  Richard Turberfield                 140
  Francis Tucker                      100
  Nath. Tatham Sen                    501
  Jno Thrower                         250
  Thomas Thrower                      150
  James Taylor                        306
  Sanders Tapley                      300
  Thomas Tapley                       300
  James Thweat Sen                    715
  James Thweat Jun                    100
  Elizabeth Tucker                    212
  Thomas Taylor                       400
  Edward Thrower                      150
                                    -----
                                    14462


  V

  Jno Vaughan                         169
  Samuel Vaugham                      169
  Nath. Vrooin                        150
  Daniell Vaughan                     169
  James Vaughan                       169
  Richard Vaughan                     309
  Wm Vaughan                          309
  Thomas Vinson                       550
  Nicholas Vaughan                    169
                                    -----
                                     2163


  W

  John Woodlife Sen                   644
  Wm Wallis                           200
  Jno Wickett                         250
  Capt. James Wynn                    860
  Jno Woodlife Jun                    750
  Jno Winningham Jun                  200
  Richard Wallpoole                   625
  Jno Womack                          550
  Capt Thomas Wynn                    400
  Jno Wall                            233
  Thomas Winningham                   100
  Elizabeth Woodlife                  844
  Richard Worthern                   1600
  Richard Winkles                     450
  Capt Nicholas Wyatt                 700
  Antho Wyatt                         250
  Valentine Wiliamson                 250
  Hurldy Wick                         600
  Wm Wilkins                          900
  Francis Wilkins                     150
  Robert Winkfield                    107
  Jarvis Winkfield                    100
  Henry Wall                          275
  Jno Wilkins                         150
  James Williams                     1436
  George Williams                     216
  Jno White                           150
  Edward Winningham                   100
  Samuel Woodward                     600
                                    -----
                                    13684


  Y

  Dannell Young                       283
  John Young                          200
                                    -----
                                      583


  A                                  3217
  B                                 12986
  C                                  7622
  D                                  2156
  E                                  7243
  F                                  2241
  G                                  5435
  H                                 17366-1/2
  J                                  6542
  K                                  1160
  L                                  5114
  M                                  6839
  N                                   419
  O                                   834
  P                                  9203
  R                                  2677
  S                                  8272
  T                                 14462
  V                                  2163
  W                                 13684
  Y                                   583
                                   ------
                                   127218-1/2

  Deduct the new discovered Land    10000

  Accounted for                    117218-1/2

  Orphans Land which is refulld paying Quit Rents for viz:

  Mr. John Bannister Orphans
    per Stephen Cock                 1970
  Capt Henry Batesorph and
    their Mother Mrs Mary Bates      1200
  Capt Henry Randolph Orphans
    per Capt Giles Webb               129
  Morris Halliham Orphans
    per Robert Rivers                 200
  Crockson Land formerly
    & who it belongs to now I
    cannot find                       750
                                    -----
                                     4245

  117218-1/2 acres at 24 lb tob^o per
    100 is                   28132 lb tobacco
    at 5s per lb is               70  6   6
  Sallary 10 per cent              7  0  10-1/2
                                  ---------
                                  63  5   7-1/2

  per William Epes Sheriff


Rent Roll of all the Lands held of her Maj^tie In Surry County Anno
Domini 1704


  A

  Allin Arthur Major                 6780
  Andrews Bartho                      375
  Avery Jno                           150
  Atkins Thomas                        80
  Averett Jno                         120
  Atkinson Richard                    100
  Andrews Thomas                      190
  Andrews Robert                      130
  Andrews David                       225
                                    -----
                                     8150


  B

  Baker Henry Coll                    850
  Bruton James                        500
  Bennett James                       200
  Bland Sarah                        1455
  Browne Jno                          600
  Benbridge George                    200
  Bighton Richard                     590
  John Bell                           180
  Berham Robert                       650
  Blake Wm                            200
  Browne Edward                       200
  Bincham Jno                         100
  Bennett Richard                     200
  Baker Sarah                          50
  Briggs Sarah                        300
  Baxter Joell                        100
  Briggs Samuel                       300
  Blico Christopher                    50
  Brigs Charles                       331
  Brigs Henry                         100
  Bentley                             180
  Blackbun Wm                         150
  Blunt Thomas                       1355
  Bookey, Edward                      180
  Browne Wm Coll                     2510
  Browne Wm Capt                      398
  Bineham James                       157
  Bullock Mary                        100
  Barker Jno                         1160
  Bagley Peter                        100
  Barker Jery                         420
  Bunell Hezichiah                    150
  Bougher Phill                       100
  Baile Jno                           250
  Bagley Edward                       350
                                    -----
                                    14716


  C

  Chapman Benjamin                    500
  Cockin Wm                           100
  Cocker Jno                          900
  Crafort Robert                     1000
  Crafort Carter                      100
  Chambers Wm                          50
  Clark Jno                           100
  Cook Elizabeth                      200
  Carriell Thomas                     100
  Clements Jno                        387
  Clarke Jno                          100
  Cook Elizabeth                      200
  Carriell Thomas                     100
  Clements Jno                        387
  Clark Robert                        400
  Checett James                        50
  Cotten Walter                       257
  Cotten Thomas                       257
  Collier Jno                         350
  Collier Joseph                       40
  Cock Wm                             630
  Cock Walter                         875
  Cooper James                        100
  Cleaments Francis                   600
  Collier Thomas                      550
  Candenscaine Obedience              200
                                    -----
                                     7746


  D

  Dicks James                         400
  Davis Arthur                        460
  Drew Thomas                         800
  Drew Edward                         600
  Delk Roger                          790
  David Arthur                         50
  Dean Richard                        100
  Davis Nath.                         157
                                    -----
                                     3357


  E

  Edward Wm Mr.                      2755
  Evans Antho                         100
  Edward John                         470
  Ellitt Wm                           250
  Edmund Howell                       300
  Ellis James                         180
  Edmund Wm                           100
  Ellis Edward                         30
  Ellis James                         170
  Ezell Geirge                        150
  Ellis Jere                           50
  Evans Abrah.                        150
                                    -----
                                     4705


  F

  Flake Robert                        200
  Foster Anne                         200
  Ford George                         100
  Flood Walter                        820
  Flood Thomas                        150
  Ford Elias                          200
  Flemin Lawrence                     360
  Foster Christo                      500
  Foster Wm                           100
  Ferieby Benj                        170
                                    -----
                                     2800


  G

  Gray Wm Capt                       1750
  Gray Wm Jun                        1050
  Grines Austis                       100
  Gwalney Wm                          400
  Gray Jno                            200
  Gwalney Wm                          225
  Goodman Wm                          200
  Gillham Hinche                      658
  Griffin John                        200
  Gully Richard                        50
  Gray Wm                             100
  Green Edward                        200
  Green Richard                       260
                                    -----
                                     5393


  H

  Harrison Benj Coll                 2750
  Harrison Nath. Capt                2177
  Hunt Wm                            4042
  Holt Elizabeth                     1450
  Holt John                           150
  Holt Thomas Capt                    538
  Holt Wm                             630
  Harris Wm                           150
  Hart Henry                          725
  Humfort Hugh                        150
  Hancock John                         60
  Hart Robert                         600
  Humphrey Evan                        70
  Hollyman Mary                       290
  Harde Thomas                        900
  Hill Robert                         200
  Holloman Richard                    480
  Hargrove Bryan                      100
  Humfort Wm                           50
  Hill Lyon                           300
  Holloman Thomas                     450
  Heath Adam                          200
  Harrison Daniell                     70
  Ham Richard                          75
  Heart Thomas                        750
  Hyerd Thomas                         50
  Hunt Wm                             696
  Horne Richard                       100
  Hollingsworth Henry                  60
  Howell Wm                            50
                                    -----
                                    18413


  J

  Jackman Jos John Mr.               2980
  Jones James                        1000
  Jarrell Thomas                      115
  Jarrett Charles                     615
  Judkins Samuell                     100
  Judkins Wm                          100
  Jurdan George                       620
  Jarrett Fardo                       630
  Johnson Wm                          360
  Johnson John                        350
  Jurdan Richard                      350
                                    -----
                                     7220


  K

  Kigan Mary                          200
  Killingworth Wm                      60
  Knott Wm                            300
                                    -----
                                      560


  L

  Ludwell Philip Coll                1100
  Lancaster Robert                    100
  Lacey Mary                          100
  Lang Mary                            77
  Lane Thomas                         200
  Lane Thomas Jun                     200
  Laughter Jno                        300
  Laneere George                      300
  Lasley Patrick                      520
  Lucas Wm                            315
                                    -----
                                     3212


  M

  Matthew Edmund                       50
  Merriell George                     250
  Moorland Edward                     225
  Mason Elizabeth                     300
  Mallory Francis                     147
  Merrett Matt.                        60
  Middleton Thomas                    100
  Moss Wm                             100
  Moreing John                        695
  Mierick Owen                        250
                                    -----
                                     2177


  N

  Newton Wm                           225
  Newton Robert                       250
  Newitt Wm                           330
  Norwood Richard                      80
  Nicholl George                      150
  Nichols Robert                      230
  Noeway Barefoot                     150
  Norwood George                      330
                                    -----
                                     1745


  P

  Park Mary                           100
  Pittman Thomas Jun                  100
  Phillips, John                      270
  Price John                          340
  Pettoway Elizabeth                  650
  Pulystone Jno                      1400
  Parker Richard                      269
  Phelps Humphrey                     100
  Pully Wm                            300
  Procter Joshua                      660
  Persons John                        830
  Phillips Wm                         300
  Pettfort Jno                        200
  Pettfort Wm                          50
                                    -----
                                     5569


  R

  Randolph Wm Coll                   1655
  Ruffice Elizabeth                  3001
  Reynolds Robert                     150
  Richardson Joseph                   300
  Reynolds Elizabeth                  150
  Reagon Frances                      200
  Roads Wm                            150
  Rolling George                      106
  Road Wm                             450
  Rose Richard                        100
  Raehell George                       70
  Rowling Jno                         476
  Rohings Wm                          596
  Roger Wm                            450
                                    -----
                                     7854


  S

  Scat Joseph                         295
  Sims George                         200
  Secoms Nicholas                     800
  Savage Charles                      358
  Stringfellow Richard                 75
  Suger Jno                           250
  Sewurds Anne                        300
  Sharp Thomas                         70
  Sewins Thomas                       400
  Steward John                        200
  Smith Richard                       200
  Savage Mary                         263
  Smith Thomas                        750
  Swann Wm                           1800
  Shrowsbury Joseph                   260
  Shrowsbury Francis                  820
  Savage Henry                        200
  Short Wm                            400
  Scarbro Edw                         150
  Scagin Jno                          100
  Simmons Jno                        1300
  Shrowsbury Thomas                   566
  Stockly Richard                     100
  Smith Thomas                        380
                                    -----
                                    10237


  T

  Thompson Samuell                   3104
  Tooker Henry Major                  700
  Taylor Ethelred                     538
  Thorp Joseph                        250
  Tyous Thomas                        400
  Taylor Richard                       77
                                    -----
                                     5069


  V

  Vincent Mary                        187


  W

  Wright Thomas                       100
  Williams Charles                    100
  Wall Joseph                         150
  Williams Wm                         300
  Ward Thomas                         100
  Wall Joseph Jun                     150
  Warren Allen                        300
  Warren Thomas                      1040
  Watkins Richard                    1345
  Williams Roger                      150
  Webb Robert                         340
  Wattkins John                      1160
  Warren Robert                       150
  Welch Henry                         100
  Warrick John                         80
  Wilkinson Matthew                   200
  Wiggins Thomas                      300
  Waple Jno                           300
  Witherington Nicholas               100
  Will Roger                           78
  White Charles                       136
                                    -----
                                     6679


  Y

  Young John                          300


  A                                  8150
  B                                 14716
  C                                  7746
  D                                  3357
  E                                  4705
  F                                  2800
  G                                  5393
  H                                 18413
  J                                  7220
  K                                   560
  L                                  3212
  M                                  2177
  N                                  1745
  P                                  5569
  R                                  7854
  S                                 10237
  T                                  5069
  V                                   187
  W                                  6679
  Y                                   300
                                   ------
                                   116089

  New Land allowed per order         3841
                                   ------
                                   112248

  Aprill 19th 1705
  Errors excepted per Jos Jno. Jackman Sheriff.

  Persons denying payment for Lands
    held in this County (viz) Capt
    Tho Holt as belonging to Mr. Tho
    Benules Orphans                   950
    Mrs. Mary White                   200
                                    -----
                                     1150

  Lands held by persons living out of the Country

  Capt Jno Taylor                     850
  Mrs. Sarah Low                      500
  Mr. Jno Hamlin                      100
  Capt Thomas Harrison                530
                                     1150
                                    -----
                                     3130

  Bartho Clement one tract of Land he living in England the quantity
    unknowne
  Jno Davis one Tract Living in Isle of Wight
  Geo & River Jorden one Tract & denys to pay Qt Rents for it & no
    persons living thereon, there is one Bray Living in Warwick has
    a small tract Land


A List of her Maj^tys Q^t Rents For the Isle Wighte County in the Year
1704

  Jno Atkins                          200
  James Atkinson                      400
  Wm Exam                            1440
  Wm Brown                            150
  Francis Exam                        200
  Richard Bennett                      70
  James Briggs                        100
  Ph. Bratley                         200
  Abr. Drawler                        200
  Jno Branch                           45
  Francis Branch                       50
  Edward Brantley                     175
  John Brantley                       364
  Edward Boykin                      1100
  George Barloe                        80
  Jno Geoge                           200
  Thomas Carter                       700
  Reubin Cooke                        250
  Jno Clarke                          850
  Thomas Cook                         300
  Wm Clark                            600
  Edward Champion                     600
  Jno Dowles                          150
  Peter Deberry                       100
  Thomas Davis                        100
  Jno Davis                           250
  Peter Hayes                         600
  Christo. Hollyman                   400
  Richard Hardy                       700
  Thomas Holyman                      150
  Jno Harris                          365
  Silvester Hill                      925
  Roger Hodge                         300
  Arthur Jones                        900
  Edward Jones                        250
  Richard Jones                       250
  Jno Johnson                         890
  Roger Ingram                        300
  Matt. Jorden                       1950
  Thomas Newman                       360
  George Readich                      790
  Francis Lee                         100
  Ph. Pardoe                          100
  Jno Parsons                         155
  George Moore                        400
  Jno Mangann                         100
  Robert Mongo                        400
  Henry Martin                        200
  Jno Murray                          650
  Francis Rayner                       80
  Jno Richardson                      150
  James Sampson                      1200
  Jno Stevenson                       150
  Thomas Sherrer                      200
  Jno Sherrer                         200
  Wm Thomas                           250
  Thomas Tooke                       1228
  Thomas Throp                        350
  Baleaby Terrell                     100
  Peter Vasser                        230
  Jno Williams                        600
  George Williamson                  2735
  Fra. Williamson                    2035
  Thomas Wood                          50
  James Lupe                           45
  Elizabeth Reynolds                  100
  Jno Sojourner                       240
  Robert Hoge                          60
  Andrew Woodley                      770
  Arthur Allen                       1800
  Henry Baker                         750
  Rubin Prochter                      250
  Thomas Howell                       100
  Nath Whitby                         170
  Jane Atkins                         600
  Jno Mongo                           100
  Natt Ridley                         200
  Jno Bell                            200
  Wm West                             250
  Charles Goodrich                     80
  Jno Britt                           350
  Jno Barnes                          200
  Henry Goldham                      1000
  Jno Waltham                         450
  Charles Edwards                     400
  Wm Exam                             150
  Major Lewis Burwell                7000
  Henry Applewaite                   1500
  Thomas Pitt                         300
  Jno Pitt                           3400
  Mary Benn                           675
  Robert Clark                        450
  Antho Holliday                      860
  Wm Westrah                          450
  Elizabeth Gardner                   100
  Jno Gardner                         246
  Jno Turner                          950
  Antho Foulgham                      100
  Anne Williams                       150
  Edward Harris                       240
  Jno Cotton                          200
  Thomas Joyner                      1400
  Jno Lawrence                        400
  Thomas Mandue                       200
  Wm Mayo                             300
  Jno Garcand                         100
  James Bryan                        1200
  Wm Keate                            200
  Jno Browne                          100
  Francis Sanders                     100
  John Rogers                         200
  Hodges Councie                      420
  Hardy Councie                       900
  Jno Councie                         760
  Thomas Reeves                       600
  Wm Crumpler                         580
  Bridgeman Joyner                   1100
  Elizabeth Swan                      600
  Thomas Jones                        700
  Arthur Whitehead                    250
  Thomas Allen                        150
  Jerimiah Exam                       300
  Nicholas Casey                      550
  Jno Giles                          1150
  Alexander Camoll                    200
  Jno Rutter                          300
  Godfrey Hunt                        600
  Wm Trygell                          100
  Benj Jorden                         150
  Thomas Jorden                       207
  Jno King                            300
  Wm Wilkinson                        200
  Thomas Grace                        160
  Wm West                              50
  Jno Penny                           300
  Robert Richards                     100
  Thomas Northworthy                  600
  Fra Parker                          210
  Widdo Long                          104
  Trustram Northworthy               1000
  George Green                        250
  Jno Druer                           100
  Philip Peerce                       500
  Wm Best                             100
  Humphrey Marshall                   600
  Thomas Brewer                       200
  Wm Smith                           2100
  Samuel & Wm Bridger               12900
  Wm Williams                         100
  Richard Ratcliffe                   380
  Joshua Jordan                       150
  Daniall Sandbourne                  180
  Nicholas Houghan                    780
  Mary Marshall                       200
  Joseph Godwin                       250
  Joseph Bridger                      580
  Henry Pitt                          700
  James Baron                         300
  Arthur Smith                       3607
  Robert Broch                        400
  Wm Godwin                           400
  Hugh Bracey                        1000
  Henry Turner                        350
  Thomas Wootten                      963
  Richard Reynolds Esq                853
  Richard Reynolds                    746
  Jno Parnell                         400
  Benj Deall                          467
  Thdo. Joyner                        595
  Jno Jordan                          100
  Henry Wiggs                         506
  Wm Body                            1375
  Arthur Purcell                      750
  Jno Porteus                         100
  Wm West                             690
  Simon Everett                      1100
  Walter Waters                       150
  John Jordan                         150
  John Nevill                         433
  Robert Colman                      1500
  Wm Green                            150
  Mary Cobb                           150
  Robert Edwards                      150
  Anne Jones                          100
  Abraham Jones                       600
  John Jones                          200
  Richard Lewis                       100
  Henry Dullard                       100
  Thomas Williams                     100
  James Mercer                        100
  Poole Hall                          350
  Jno Howell                          100
  Thomas Lovett                       100
  George Anderson                     150
  Daniell Nottiboy                    100
  Henry Wilkinson                     350
  Jno Watkins                         200
  Thomas English                      100
  Thomas Page                         203
  Francis Davis                       100
  Richard Braswell                    100
  Robert Johnson                     2450
  Jno Minshea                         300
  Wm Pryan                            200
  Wm Dawes                            400
  Nicholas Tyner                      300
  Isaac Ricks                         700
  Robert Scott                        300
  Jno Roberts                         950
  Wm Duck                             180
  Robert Lawrence                     400
  Jno Denson                          200
  Robert Smelly                       600
  Francis Bridle                      250
  Roger Fearlton                      237
  Thomas Bullock                      100
  Wm. Marfry                          600
  Thomas Powell                       100
  Widdo Glyn                          390
  Jno Pope                            250
  Thomas Gayle                        200
  Wm Powell                           200
  Richard Hutchins                    300
  Henry Boseman                       100
  Henry Pope                          557
  John Williams                       971
  Henry Sanders                       700
  Jno Selloway                        900
  Jno Bardin                          100
  Phill Rayford                       650
  Phill Pearse                        500
  Jno Terseley                        150
  Geo Northworthy                    1176
  Robert Richards                     450
  Thomas Bevan                        100
  Wm Hunter                           150
  Madison Street                      150
  Thomas Wheatley                     400
  Richard Wilkinson                   150
  James Bragg                         500
  Jno Portous                         300
  Thomas Harris                       350
  Edward Harris                       100
  Nicholas Askew                       80
  Ambrose Hadley                      100
  Widdo Powell                        480
  Thomas Jones                        100
  Thomas Underwood                    100
  Robert King                         300
  Thomas Giles                        880
  Lewis Smelly                        550
  Wm Smelly                           280
  Godfrey Hunt                        600
  Edmund Godwin                       400
  Wm Williams                        1000
  John Wilson                        1200
  John Bryan                          200
  John Askew                          100
  Samuell Bridger                     200
  Roger Nevill                        200
  Coll Godwin                         600
  Jacob Durden                        500
                                   ------
                                   138533

  Wm Bridger.


A Compleat List of the Rent Roll of the Land in Nansemond County In Anno
1704

  John Murdaugh                       300
  Jno Duke                            113
  Thomas Duke Jun                     930
  Edward Roberts                      250
  Paul Pender                         240
  Thomas Duke                         400
  James Fowler                        440
  Robert Baker                         50
  Isaac Sketto                        100
  Edward Sketto                       200
  Antho Gumms                          50
  Francis Sketto.                     100
  Wm Parker                           100
  Francis Parker                      170
  Thomas Parker                       300
  Jno Small                           100
  Moses Hall                           95
  Edward Beamond                      550
  Richard Parker                      514
  Capt James Jessey                   550
  Wm Sanders                          200
  Jno Sanders                         165
  Thomas Mansfield                     60
  Wm Woodley                          350
  Andrew Bourne                       200
  Gilbert Owen                        120
  Wm Sanders Jun                      165
  Capt John Speir                     500
  Capt James Reddick                  943
  James Griffin                       500
  Nicholas Stallings                  965
  John Stallings                      250
  Richard Stallings                   165
  Elias Stallings Jun                 250
  Joseph Baker                        740
  Wm Jones                            500
  Robert Roundtree                    245
  John Roundtree                      475
  George Spivey                       200
  James Spivey                        600
  James Knight                        300
  Jno Gorden                          330
  Edward Arnold                        80
  James Mulleny                       500
  Thomas Docton                       200
  Wm Britt                            400
  Nath Newby                          850
  Elias Stalling                      470
  Robert Lassiter                     850
  Patrick Wood                        200
  Wm Thompson                         133
  Jonathan Kitterell                  300
  Adam Rabey                          586
  Jno Powell                          758
  John Reddick                        300
  Henry Copeland                      150
  Thomas Davis                        250
  Jno Smith                           100
  Thomas Harrald                      652
  Richard Baker                        40
  Samuell Smith                       230
  Wm Hood                             200
  Thomas Roundtree                    350
  Henry Hill                          175
  Jno Larkhum                         500
  Wm Vann                             100
  Joseph Cooper                       267
  John Harris                         600
  Francis Copeland                    513
  Elizabeth Price                     150
  Wm Hill                             150
  Thomas Spivey                       200
  Jno Campbell                        400
  Jno Morley                          100
  Jos Rogers                           15
  Jno Cole                            814
  Thomas Harrald                      100
  Christopher Gawin Jun                20
  Daniell Horton                      200
  Wm Bruin                            300
  Peter Eason                         400
  Anne Pugh                          2300
  Benj Blanchard                      130
  Thomas Norfleet                     500
  John Odum                            50
  Thomas Gough                        150
  Hugh Gough                          150
  Epapap Boyne                        100
  Henry Baker                         375
  Christopher Gwin                   1010
  James Speirs                        200
  Epaphra Benton                      250
  Wm Eason                            180
  Andrew Brown                         25
  Wm Horne                            100
  Robert Reddick                      200
  Henry Hackley                       210
  Thomas Roberts                       30
  Abr Reddick                         400
  Jno Parker                          240
  Richard Barefield                   900
  John Benton                         660
  Jno Pipkin                          100
  Jos Brady                           250
  Christopher Dudley                  200
  Thomas Norris                       100
  Thomas Wiggins                      100
  Patrick Lawley                       50
  Robert Warren                       100
  Richard Odium                        50
  Thomas Davis                        340
  Thomas Barefield                    100
  John Eason                          150
  Jerimiah Arlin                      250
  Jno Perry                           870
  Jno Drury                            87
  Joseph Booth                        987
  Cresham Cofield                     350
  Richard Sumner                      600
  Edward Norfleet                     200
  Jno Norfleet                        600
  Edward Moore                        250
  Thomas Moore                        200
  James Lawry                          40
  James Daughtie                      400
  John Wallis                         150
  Richard Sanders Jun                 100
  Wm Byrd                             300
  James Howard                        700
  John Brinkley                       430
  Robert Horning                       80
  Wm Speirs                           200
  Sarah Exum                          150
  Jno Larrence                        175
  Nicholas Perry                      200
  Sampson Merridith                   400
  Coll Thomas Milner                 1484
  Joseph Merridith                    250
  Thomas Kinder                       160
  Henry King                          300
  Joseph Hine                         150
  Wm King                             140
  Julian King                         700
  Mich King                            80
  Capt Tho Godwin Jun                 697
  Henry Lawrence                      200
  Jno King                           1000
  Richard Hyne                        200
  Capt Francis Milner                 479
  Benj Nevill                         475
  Elizabeth Marler                     80
  Wm Keene                            200
  Jno Symmons                         678
  Hen: Johnson                        150
  Jno Darden                          500
  Wm Everett                          150
  Wm Pope                             890
  Joseph Worrell                      270
  Thomas Jemegan Jun                  135
  Richard Lawerence                   200
  Jonathan Robinson                   400
  Robert Yates                        150
  Thomas Odium                         20
  John Barefield                      300
  John Raules                         600
  Thomas Boyt                         400
  Thomas Vaughan                      200
  Jno Parker                          300
  Richard Green                       200
  Elizabeth Ballard                   300
  Samuell Watson                      200
  Francis Spight                      400
  Joseph Ballard                      200
  John Oxley                          100
  Benj Rogers                         600
  Robert Rogers                       300
  Henry Jerregan                      200
  Jno Hansell                         500
  Henry Jenkins                       400
  Capt William Hunter                 800
  Jno Moore                           200
  Richard Moore                       250
  Edward Homes                        300
  Fra Cambridge                       100
  Wm Ward                             200
  Jno Rice                            140
  Wm Battaile                         800
  Wm Spite                            500
  Abr Oadham                           20
  Jacob Oadam                          20
  Jno Lee                             100
  Wm Macklenny                        200
  Robert Coleman                     1400
  Jno Bryan                           200
  Wm Daughtree                        100
  Jno Copeland                        600
  Jno Butler                          200
  James Butler                         75
  Thomas Roads                         75
  Wm Collins                         1220
  Jno Hedgpath                        700
  Jno Holland                         700
  Robert Carr                         200
  Wm Waters                           600
  Robert Lawrence                     400
  Wm Bryon                            350
  Lewis Bryon                         400
  James Lawrence                      100
  Wm Gatlin                           100
  Joseph Gutchins                     250
  George Lawrence                     400
  Lewis Daughtree                     100
  Thomas Rogers                        50
  Jno Rogers                          200
  Henry Core                           50
  Edward Cobb                         100
  Richard Taylor                      300
  Robert Brewer                       200
  Wm Osburne                          200
  Thomas Biswell                      400
  Jno Gatlin                          200
  Richard Folk                        100
  Thomas Parker                       100
  Peter Parker                        140
  Wm Parker                           140
  Richard Hine Jun                    200
  Stephen Archer                      200
  Charles Roades                      800
  Henry Roades                        100
  James Collings                      300
  Henry Holland                       400
  Wm Kerle                            325
  Joseph Holland                      100
  Jno Thomas Jun                      100
  Jno Thomas                          275
  Thomas Mason                        350
  Edward Mason                        150
  Jno Sanders                         150
  Mich Brinkley                       200
  James Moore                         400
  Henry Blumpton                     1500
  Jno Symmons                         100
  Jeremiah Edmunds                     70
  John Gay                            200
  Philip Aylsberry                    100
  James Copeland                      390
  Jno Brothers                        460
  Richard Creech                      200
  Richard Bond                         90
  Thomas Handcock                      30
  James Knott                        1050
  Wm Edwards                          150
  Robert Elkes                        175
  Edward Price                        140
  Jane Belson                         100
  Wm Staples                          210
  Robert Mountgomery                  150
  John Moore                          100
  Capt Edmund Godwin                  800
  Thomas Wakefield                    150
  Godfrey Hunt                        360
  Henery Wilkinson                    250
  Nicholas Dixon                      200
  George Keeley                       650
  Richard Taylor                      300
  Anne Coefield                       300
  Joseph Hollyday                    1000
  Mr Jno Braisseur                    400
  Thomas Best                         160
  Alexander Campbell                  500
  Capt Charles Drury                  570
  Thomas Drury                         75
  Luke Shea                           650
  John Babb                           500
  Abraham Edwards                     400
  Richard Sanders                     500
  Antho Wallis                         80
  Daniell Sullivan                    100
  Joseph Ellis                        290
  Nicholas Hunter                     190
  Richard Webb                        200
  John Hare                           190
  Christopher Norfleet                400
  Jno Heslop                          148
  Francis Benton                      200
  Capt Wm Sumner                      275
  Elizabeth Syrte                     100
  Anne Hare                           600
  Jno Porter                          450
  Edward Welsh                        100
  Jno Winbourne                       400
  Paul Pender                         200
  Mich Cowling                        100
  John Cowling                        100
  Rowland Gwyn                         75
  Andrew Ross                         150
  Jno Ballard                         400
  Benjamin Montgomery                 910
  Thomas Corbell                      200
  Jno Yates                           400
  Jno White                           150
  George White                         50
  Jno Bond                            150
  Wm Hay                              100
  Henry Bowes                         600
  Wm Sevill                            85
  Jno Hambleton                       200
  Robert Jordan                       850
  James Howard                         25
  Ruth Coefield                       110
  Jno Chilcott                        100
  Jno Rutter                           80
  Thomas Rutter                        75
  Wm Rutter                            75
  Capt Barnaby Kerney                 460
  Thomas Cutchins                     150
  Robert Lawrence                     130
  Samuell Cahoone                     240
  Jno Iles                            220
  Thomas Sawyer                       180
  Wm Outland                          400
  Coll George Northworthy             650
  Coll Thomas Godwin                  810
  Caleb Taylor                        200
  Thomas Carnell                      320
  Richard Bradley                     250
  Jno Corbin                          300
  Wm Sykes                            150
  Major Thomas Jorden                 700
  Richard Lovegrove                   150
  Thomas Davis                        144
  Samuell Farmer                      160
  Henry Bradley                       500
  Jno Clarke                           25
  Margarett Jorden                    200
  Wm Elkes                            100
  Humphrey Mires                      150
  James Ward                          100
  Widdow Hudnell                       45
  Wm Grandberry                       300
  Israell Shepherd                    200
  Benj. Small                         100
  Anne Crandberry                      75
  Charles Roberts                      50
  Richard Sclator                     300
  Robert Murrow                       320
  Elizabeth Peters                    334
  Thomas Jones                        200
  Elizabeth Butler                    200
  Coll Samuell Bridger                500
  Jno Lawrence                        100
  Thomas Jarregan                     165
  Thomas Jarregan Jun                 600
  Wm Drury                             80
  Wm Butler                           120
  Henry Jenkins                       860
  Edward Bathurst                     250
  Thomas Houffler                     200
  Edward Streater                     200
  Wm Duffield                          50
  Charles Thomas Jun                   50
  Jno Blessington                     150
  Ursula Goodwin                      100
  Thomas Acwell                       440
  Wm Peale                            180
  John Lambkin                         50
  James Murphice                      160
  Robert Peale                        275
  John Peters                         368
  James Peters                        340
  John Wakefield                       50
  Richard Wynn                        890
  James Lockhart                      800
  John Keeton                        2000
                                   ------
                                   117024
  Jno Murrow                          200
                                   ------
                                   117224
  Added to make up equll            13850
    the last year list             ------
    which may be supposed          131074
    to be held by persons
    that have not made both

  Persons living out of the County and other that will not pay or give
    account. Viz:

  Capt Thomas Lovett
  Capt Jno Wright
  Fra Parker Jun
  Tho Martin
  Jno Wright
  Wm Lapiter
  Jno Lapiter
  Capt Luke Haffield
  Mrs Elizabeth Swann

  Errors excepted per me Henry Jenkins


An Alphabetical List of the Quit Rents of Norfolk County 1704

  Ashley Dennis                       150
  Avis Widdow                          50
  Adam Wm                             100
  Alexander John                      300
  Barington Wm                        100
  Bartee Robert                       150
  Bull Robert Sen                    1050
  Blanch Wm                           100
  Bond Wm                             200
  Brown Widdow                        270
  Bruce Abraham                      1010
  Brown Wm                            100
  Bowers Jno                          166
  Bolton Wm                           212
  Byron Roger                         200
  Bayley Walter                       290
  Bruce Jno                           300
  Bishop Wm                           100
  Bull Henry                         1500
  Bucken Wm                           410
  Babington Thomas                    150
  Babington Jno                       150
  Babington Rich                       50
  Burges George                       200
  Burges Robert                       535
  Butt Richard                       1840
  Brown Edward                        300
  Bigg Thomas                         100
  Balingtine Alexander                300
  Balengtine George                   510
  Bull Thomas                        2200
  Bramble Henry                       100
  Blake Arthur                        200
  Bolton Richard                      700
  Branton John                        330
  Bacheldon Joseph                    300
  Bush Samuell Major                 1628
  Balingtine Wm                        60
  Bowles Henry                        330
  Cartwright Peter                   1050
  Cooper Wm                           150
  Cooper Jno                          150
  Cramore George                      100
  Carling Walton                       50
  Carling Joseph                      200
  Curch Richard                      1050
  Churey Widdow                       600
  Cuthrell Going                      470
  Crekmore Edward                     800
  Cartwright Widdow                   800
  Corprew Jno                         650
  Corprew Thomas                      650
  Crekmore Jno                        750
  Caswell Widdow                      350
  Colley Jno                          100
  Cottell Thomas                      200
  Conden Thomas                       390
  Conner Lewis                       2200
  Carney Jno                          100
  Carney Richard                      100
  Collins Wm                          100
  Crekmore Edmund                     690
  Charleton Jno                        50
  Cutrell Thomas                      150
  Chapman Richard                      50
  Churey Thomas                       100
  Churey Jno                          150
  Dixon Jno                           300
  Davis Wm Sen                        250
  Davis Wm                            158
  Dresdall Robert                     318
  Davis Thomas                        332
  Desnall Wm                          100
  Davis Edward                        300
  Dalley Henry                       1524
  Dalley Wm                           156
  Davis Thomas                        340
  Denby Edward                        100
  Daniell Hugh                        100
  Etherdge Thomas Cooper               75
  Etherdge Thomas B R                  50
  Etherdge Thomas Sen                  34
  Etherdge Thomas Jun                  33
  Etherdge Edward                      66
  Etherdge Wm                         250
  Etherdge Wm Jun                      80
  Etherdge Marmaduke                  525
  Edmonds John                         50
  Ellis Wm                            200
  Etherdge Edward Cooper              200
  Estwood Thomas                      170
  Estwood John                         75
  Etherdge Edward Sen                  33
  Edwards John                        250
  Etherdge Charles                     75
  Evans Abrigall                      100
  Furgison Thomas                     100
  Freeman Jno                         190
  Foreman Alexander                   750
  Foster Henry                       1000
  Ferbey Jno                          500
  Fulsher Jno                        1396
  Godfry Waren                        350
  Godfry John                        1470
  Godfry Matthew                      450
  Grefen Jno                          200
  Garen Daniell                        50
  Guy John                            110
  Gwin Wm                             350
  Gilhgun Ferdinando                  182
  Gilhgan John                        200
  Gresnes James                       150
  Gaines John                          50
  Guy James                           100
  Herbert Thomas                      150
  Hayes Wm                            200
  Harris John                         110
  Holyday Jno                         440
  Hodges Joseph                        50
  Hoges Thomas                        407
  Hoges John                          520
  Hollowell Jno Sen                   524
  Hollygood Thomas                    100
  Hollowell Jno                       200
  Holsted Henry                       633
  Hollowell Joseph                   1280
  Holsted John                        350
  Hues Edward                        1304
  Hullett Jno                         300
  Hodges Roger                        109
  Hodges Thomas                        50
  Hodges Richard                      375
  Harvey Richard                      265
  Handberry                           300
  Hollowell Elener                   1550
  Herbert Jno                         400
  Hargrave Benjamin                   250
  Hartwell Richard                    150
  Henland Jno                         800
  Ivey George                         496
  Jackson Symon                       720
  Ives Timothy                        400
  Ives Timothy Jun                    100
  Ives John                           434
  Johnston John                       275
  Johnston Mercey                     275
  Joles Thomas                        200
  Joyce Jno                           200
  Jolef Jno Jun                       300
  Jenings Henry                       100
  Jolef Jno Sen                       840
  Kaine Richard                        50
  Langley Wm                         1487
  Langley Thomas                      878
  Loveney James                       100
  Luelling Edward                     315
  Luelling Richard                    200
  Lovell Widdow                       740
  Low Henry                           191
  Lane Robert                         460
  Ludgall Matthew                     250
  Levima John                         510
  Lenton Wm                           150
  Mercer Thomas                       600
  Maning Thomas                        97
  Maning Nicholas                     260
  Mones Joseph                         73
  Matthias Matthew                    100
  Miller Wm                          1090
  Miller Jno                          200
  Miller Widdow                       100
  Murden Widdow                      2000
  Miller Thomas                      1050
  Maund Wm                            200
  Maning Jno Sen                      300
  Miller Joseph                       882
  Mocey Dennis Sen & Jun              160
  Mohan James                         100
  Murfrey Alexander                   800
  Maning Jno Jun                      100
  Moseley Widdow                      300
  Miller Widdow Sen                   200
  Mason Thomas                        125
  Masom Lemuell                       400
  Mason Thomas                        653
  Mason George                        300
  Mockey Adam                         400
  Newton George                      1119
  Nicholson Jno                       160
  Nash Thomas                          50
  Nicholson Henry                     320
  Nash Richard                        100
  Nicholson Wm                        300
  Norcote Thomas                      273
  Outlaw Edward                       208
  Owens Wm                            650
  Odyam Wm                            200
  Pearce Wm                           100
  Peters Widdow                       698
  Portlock                            360
  Porter Samuell                      100
  Prescot Moses                      1200
  Philpot Richard                     200
  Powell Richard                      100
  Powell Lemuell                      246
  Powell Wm                           624
  Perkins Wm                           50
  Patison Robert                      350
  Roberts Jos                         100
  Robert Samuell                      800
  Rose Robert                         385
  Rose Jno                             60
  Randall Giles                       150
  Richardson Thomas                   379
  Spring Robert                        98
  Spivey Matt                         600
  Smith John                          127
  Scoll Thomas                        400
  Smith Richard                       600
  Smith John                          200
  Silvester Richard                  1280
  John Smith Sen                     1200
  Sickes Walter Sen                   550
  Sickes John                         200
  Sugg George                         408
  Sugg Wm                             200
  Sayer Francis                       600
  Smith Humphrey                      100
  Standbro Jno                         40
  Standley Richard                    200
  Sharples Henry                      100
  Sugg Joseph                         300
  Symons Thomas                       166
  Symon James                         200
  Sparrow Wm                          350
  Tuker Wm                            100
  Thornton Francis                    200
  Thurston Matthew                    100
  Theobald James                      140
  Thellaball Widdow                   600
  Tuker Richard                       100
  Tuker Thomas                        280
  Taylor Jno                          100
  Taylor Richard                       75
  Tully Jno                           165
  Tarte Elezar Sen                    300
  Taylor Andrew                       222
  Tuker Jno                           400
  Tart Alice                          300
  Tarte Elezar Jun                    595
  Taylor Wm                           265
  Trigoney Henry                      200
  Velle Moriss                        335
  Walice Thomas                       150
  Weston Edward                       100
  Willoughby Thomas Coll             3200
  Weshart John                        150
  Woodly Robert                       350
  Williams John                       125
  Wilder Mich                         200
  Watkins Thomas                      190
  Williamson Jno                      750
  Whedon Jno Jun                      100
  Willoughby Thomas Capt              660
  Whedon Wm                           200
  West John                           500
  Watson Robert                        80
  Wallis Richard                      250
  Wallis Jno                          135
  Wallis Wm                           450
  Whithurst Richard                   150
  Whithurst Wm                        150
  Wilkins Wm                          200
  Williams John                       200
  Whedbey George                      200
  Worden James                        400
  Wilson James Jun                    200
  Wilson Lemuell                      300
  Wilson James Coll                  2800
  Woodward Henry                      280
  Whedon Jno Jun                      320
  White Patrick                       500
  Willis John                         470
  Weldey Dorothy                       25
  Ward Jno                            320
  Wakfield Thomas                      40
  Wilden Nath                         100
  Wooding Thomas                      170
  Wood Edward                         100
  Watford Joseph                       97
  Wate John                           400
  Wright Wm                           574
  Wright James                        216
  Wadborn Mich                        500
  Williams Jane                       400
  Webb Mary                           100
  Worminton John                      200
  Wilden Francis                      100
  Widdick Henry                       343
                                   ------
                                   113684
  New discovered Land                1615
                                   ------
                                   112069

  An Account of the Land belonging to such persons out of the County and
    also others out of the County.

  Coll Cary
  Tully Robinson
  James Daves
  Robert Berrey                        95
  Jno Bennett                          33
  Coll Nasareth                       400
  Cornelius Tullery                   150

  James Wilson Sherriff


Princess Anne County Rent Roll 1704

  John Carraway                       180
  Thomas More                         100
  Henry Chapman                       250
  George Poole                       1085
  James Whithurst                     600
  Thomas Morris                        63
  Thomas Joy                          600
  Thomas Scott                        100
  George Smith                        250
  Thomas Hife                         200
  Richard Smith                       200
  Thomas Hattersley                    90
  Thomas Jolley                       150
  Mich Ventres                        450
  Capt Blomer Bray                    270
  James Mecoy                         200
  Francis Bond                        264
  Edward Wood                          50
  Jno Morrah                          200
  Alexander Morrah                    200
  Ruth Woodhouse                      450
  Horatia Woodhouse                   525
  Joseph White                        330
  Jon Basnett                         250
  Owen Wilbe                          100
  Mr. Wm. Corneck                    1974
  Jno Oakham                          390
  David Scott                         600
  Jno Keeling                        2000
  Adam Keeling                        500
  Humphrey Smith                       50
  Jno Halise                          130
  Capt Wm Crawford                   2650
  Richard Williamson                  450
  Edward Tranter                      180
  Jno. Sherland                       800
  Robert Rany                          70
  Edward Old                          450
  Coll Lemuell Mason                  650
  Mr. Francis Emperor                 400
  James Kemp                          681
  Bartho: Williamson                  400
  Symon Hancock Jun                   200
  George Batten                       150
  Matth: Brinson                      250
  Mr. Edward Mosseley Sen            1000
  Wm Martin                           200
  James Joslin                        100
  Alexander Lilburn                   500
  James William                       100
  Mr. Henry Spratt                   1736
  Symon Hancock Sen                   300
  Thomas Walk                         298
  Jno Kemp                            340
  Randolph Lovett                     100
  Edward Davis                        200
  Jno Sammons                         150
  Elizabeth Edwards                    50
  Mr. Benj. Burroughs                 800
  Jno Muncreef                        140
  Matt: Pallett                       600
  Mrs. Thurston                       290
  Lancaster Lovett                   1850
  Robert Cartwright                   260
  Jno. Cartwright                     100
  Nath: Macklakan                     100
  Adam Thorowgood                     700
  Henry Walstone                      800
  Edward Land                         400
  Thomas Hall                         400
  Wm. Catherill                       150
  Doctor Browne                       600
  John Richardson                    1000
  Robert Richmond                    1000
  Thomas Benson                       225
  Lewis Pervine                       800
  Edward Attwood                      400
  Wm. Moore                           414
  Mr. Henry Woodhouse                3000
  Tully Emperor                       300
  Jno. Godfrey                        170
  Wm Dyer                             700
  Edward Cooper                       200
  Wm Ship                             300
  Jno Buck                            250
  Peter Mallbourn                     280
  Benjamin Roberts                    100
  Capt Jno Gibbs                     3100
  Sarah Sanford                      1200
  Henry Harrison                      300
  James Lemon                        1500
  Wm Wallsworth                       100
  Wm Capps                           1050
  Jacob Taylor                         80
  Stephen Pace                         50
  Adam Hayes                         1360
  Wm Chichester                       400
  Robert Dearemore                    514
  Capt. Francis Morse                1300
  Patrick Anguish                     150
  Thomas Brock                        400
  Wm Brock                            100
  Jno Sullivant                       200
  Francis Sheene                      300
  Jno Acksted                         400
  Charles Hendley                     100
  Duke Hill                            70
  Job Brooks                          150
  Jno Brooks                          100
  Thomas Turton                       110
  Peter Crosby                        250
  Jno Pisburn                         314
  James Sherwood                      200
  Edward Cannon                       550
  Richard Capps                       100
  John Doley                          640
  Matthew Mathias                      80
  Mr. James Peters                    889
  Jno Owens                           190
  Josvas Morris                       900
  Thomas Mason                        140
  Wm. Wishart                         200
  Jno Russell                         300
  Stephen Sall                        250
  Timothy Dennis                      100
  George Walker                       425
  Wm. Ashby                           100
  Charles Griffin                     216
  Symon Franklin                      100
  Alice Thrower                       125
  James Wishart                       225
  Richard Draught                     500
  Doctor Wm. Hunter                    80
  Mr. Jon Sanders                     203
  Wm Grinto                           650
  Henry Fithgerreld                   200
  Coll. H. Lawson                    3100
  Capt. John Thorowgood              1000
  Robert Thorowgood                   940
  Henry Southern                      640
  John Wharton                        850
  Joseph Doller                       150
  Jno Briggs                          600
  Francis Jones                       100
  Thomas Lurrey                       100
  Thomas Walker                       820
  Steph Swaine                        450
  Edward Mulsin                       100
  George Bullock                      300
  Jno Leggett                         400
  Mark Tully                          300
  Wm. Walstone                        400
  Mark Powell                         550
  Elizabeth Nicholls                  500
  Hugh Hoskins                         50
  Wm. Burrough                         50
  Wm. Warren                          100
  Capt. Hugh Campble                  800
  George Worrinton                    400
  James Tully                         400
  Wm. Lovett                         1300
  Wm. Grant                           150
  Thomas More                         100
  Richard Whithurst                   350
  Capt. Thomas Cocke                  800
  John Comins                         175
  Thomas Griffin                      200
  Thomas Spratt                       600
  Jno Russell                         150
  James Heath                         550
  David Duncon                        100
  Daniell Lane                        350
  George Fowler                       600
  Jno Booth                           350
  Giles Collier                       500
  Jacob Johnson                      1700
  Alexander Willis                    150
  Richard Bonny                      2000
  Mr. James Doage                     784
  Antho: Barnes                       200
  Jno. Macklalin                      120
  Thomas Etherington                  108
  Jno James                           328
  Wm. Woodhouse                       300
  John Mayho                          160
  Joseph Perry                         35
  Thomas Perry                        650
  Mr. Argoll Thorowgood              1000
  Capt. Wm. Moseley                   600
  Jno Moseley                         325
  Wm. Smith                           180
  Wm. Symmons                         400
  Adam Forguson                       120
  Banj. Commins                       200
  Jno Elkes                           500
  Patrick White                      1250
  Richard Jones                       200
  Evan Jones                          600
  Mich. Jones                         200
  Richard Wicker                      300
  Henry Snaile                        250
  Mr. Samiel Bush                     550
  Mr. Tully Robinson                  500
  Jno Briberry                         50
  Wm. Moseley                          50
  Capt. Christ. Merchant              400
  Richard Cox                          50
  Matt. Godfrey                       150
  Thomas Tully                        600
  Hector Denby                        600
  Thomas Keeling                      700
  Wm. More                            100
  Thomas Cason                        550
  Sarah Jackson                       600
  Jacob More                          200
                                    -----
                                    98728

  Henry Spratt


A True and Perfect Rent Roll of the Lands In Elizabeth City County for
the Year 1704

  Coll. Wm. Wilson                   1024
  Mr. Wm. Smelt                       150
  Mr. Pasquo Curle                    300
  Mr. Nicho. Curle                    950
  Coll. Dudley Diggs                  216
  Samuell Pearce                      100
  Mary Jenings                        250
  Mark Powell                         184
  Wm. Davis                            42
  Jno Skinner                          50
  Thomas Baines                        50
  Wm Latham                            90
  Thomas Tucker                        60
  Matthew Smell                       100
  Charles Cooley                      200
  Jno Chandler                        150
  Wm. Umpleet                          25
  Charles Tucker                      240
  Thomas Allin                        227
  Wm. Williams per the School         600
  Wm Williams per himself             260
  Mrs. Bridgett Jenkins               100
  Christopher Davis                    25
  Wm. Spicer                           60
  Thomas Hawkins                      270
  Jno Bowles                          260
  Jno Theodam                         100
  Bartho. Wetherby                    300
  Jos: White                          200
  Capt. Henry Royall                  750
  Robert Bright Sen.                  100
  Thomas Naylor                       100
  George Cooper Sen                   100
  Thomas Needham                      100
  Cha: Cooper                         100
  Wm. Dunn                            100
  Charles Jenings                     225
  Samuell Davill                      100
  Paltey Davill                       100
  Francis Rogers                      200
  Thomas Babb per Selden              300
  Richard Horsley                      90
  Sarah Nagleer                       230
  Henry Dunn                           50
  Peter Pearce                         50
  Moses Davis                         150
  Mich: Breltuen                      100
  Henry Robinson                      200
  Christo. Copeland                   340
  Thomas Faulkner                      50
  Mr. James Wallace                  1300
  Mr. Berthram Servant                418
  Robert Taylor                        50
  Joseph Harris                        50
  Wm. Robinson                         50
  Wm. Boswell                         220
  Wm. Winter                           70
  John Lowry per Selden               110
  Edward Roe                          100
  Henry James                         100
  Richard Roatton                      50
  Thomas Poole                       1200
  John Wheat Land                      66
  George Bell                          80
  Widdow Ballis                       350
  George Walker                       325
  Mr. Robert Beverley                 777
  Jno House                           157
  Jno Bushell Jun                     150
  Roger Masinbred                      50
  John Shepherd                       210
  Wm. Minsor                          150
  Edward Lattimore                    190
  James Baker                         225
  Thomas Tucker                        60
  Jno. Cotton                          50
  Mark Johnson                        400
  Major Wm. Armistead                 460
  Coll. Antho. Armistead             2140
  Daniell Preeday                      50
  Matthew Watts                       454
  Bryan Penny                          50
  Giles Dupra                         150
  Jno Bayley                          415
  Mary Simmons                        200
  Jno Parish                           50
  Antho. Griggs                        50
  Abr: Parish                         100
  Mark Parish                         200
  Benj. Smith                         650
  Thomas Nobling per Archer           212
  Wm. Mallory                         200
  Widdow Croashell                    100
  Charles Powers                      400
  Robert Charwill per Jno Young       440
  Samuell Fingall                     333
  Francis Savoy                        50
  Mr. Edward Mihills                  600
  Jane Nichols                         50
  John Francis                         25
  James Priest                         50
  Simon Hollier                       200
  Mr. Thomas Gebb                     630
  Mr. Richard Booker                  526
  Mr. Wm. Lowry                       526
  Mr. Merry or Mrs Dunn               500
  Wm. Haslyitt                        100
  Capt. Augustine More                285
  John More                           250
  John Passones                       780
  Rebeckha Morgan                      50
  Thomas Roberts                      250
  Mr. John Turner                      50
  Henry Lais                           50
  Capt. Henry Jenkins                 300
  Mr. Francis Ballard per Selden      460
                                    -----
                                    29560

  Henry Royall Sheriff


A True & Perfect Rent Roll of all the Lands that is held in Warwick
County 1704

  Major Wm. Cary                      300
  Mr. Nedler Plantacon                 80
  Rober Hubbert                       101
  Wm. Harwood                         625
  Richard Glanvills Orphans           165
  Wm. Hubbert                         200
  Henry Gibbs                         315
  Wm. Hewitt                          150
  James Hill                          135
  John Golden                          50
  Thomas Harwood                      575
  Jno. Harwood                        704
  Capt. Thomas Charles                100
  Hump: Harwood                       400
  Matthew Wood                        300
  Edward Joyner                        60
  Coll. Dudley Diggs                 4626
  Elizabeth Lucas                     800
  John Hillard                         74
  Edward Loftes                        60
  Wm. Rowles Orphans                  150
  Samuell Hatton                      225
  Isaac Goodwin                       225
  George Robinson                      70
  Seymon Powell                       250
  John Dawson                         300
  Wades Orphans                       100
  Henry Dawson                        200
  John Bowger                         100
  Joseph Cooper                       200
  Robert Roberts                       60
  George Burton                       330
  Capt. Mills Wells                   425
  Roger Daniell Orphans               196
  Jno Hansell                         100
  Emanuell Wells                      325
  Elizabeth Wells Widdow              155
  Widdow Lewelling                    100
  Wm. Wells                           615
  Elias Wells                          50
  Widdow Pierce                       155
  Thomas Haynes                       850
  John Scarsbrook                     850
  Francis Jones                       150
  Matthew Jones                       750
  Jno. Read                           875
  Mr. Brewer Land                    1350
  Mr. Henry Cary                      670
  Langhorne Orphans                   602
  Coll. Coles Orphans                1350
  Peter Jones                         150
  Samuell Crew Orphans                150
  Samuell Symons                      173
  Mrs. Elizabeth Whitaker             600
  Capt. Miles Cary                    600
  John Cannon                          75
  John Linton                          75
  Richard Gough                        60
  Coll. Miles Cary                   1960
  Mr. Jno. Mallnote                    61
  Rowlands Williams                   170
  Robert Chapell                      150
  James Chapell                       100
  Edward Powers                       200
  James White                          40
  Peter Sawers Orphans                 95
  Wm. Cotton                          143
  James Cotton                         70
  John Croley                         100
  Stephen Burgess                     128
  Widdow Yorgen                        60
  George Jackson                      193
  Sarah Ranshaw                       125
  Richard Wootton                     243
  Samuell Hoggard                     120
  James Floyd                         100
  Fr: Rice Orphans                    200
  Mr. Math Hoggard                    270
  Widdow Chapell                      321
  Thomas Ascow                         50
  Garrett Ridley                      300
  Samuell Ranshaw                     238
  Charle Stuckey                       86
  Jos Naylor                          100
  Jos Russell                         150
  Charles Allen                       295
  Wm. Newberrey                       100
  John Turmer                         100
  Wm. Smith                           150
  Elizabeth Holt                      150
  James Browne                        150
  Henry Royall                        246
  Edward Rice                         375
  Thomas Blackistone                   75
  Mark Noble                          215
  James Reynolds                       75
  John Holmes                         200
  Samuell Duberry                     200
  Edward Powers                       200
  Jno Hatton Orphans                   93
  Wm. Lowland                          25
  Thomas Morey                        363
  Wm. Bracey                          150
  Cope Doyley                         500
  Nath Edwards                        100
  Samuel Groves                       490
  Croncher Orphans                     50
  Henry Whitaker                       60
  Woodman Land                        200
  Wm Cook                              29
  Jno Tignall                         392
  Thomas Mountfort                    890
  Joseph Mountfort                    558
  James Priest                         50
  Abr: Cawley                          80
  Wm. Jones                            70
  Edward Davis                        200
  The County Land                     150
  Denbigh per Gleab                   130
  Mulberry Island Gleab                50
  Thomas Hansford                      75
  Mr. Rascows Orphans                1195
                                    -----
                                    37685
  Thomas Hansford never before paid    75
                                    -----
                                    37610

  Persons out of the County

  Jno Trevillian            248
  Holman Orphans            200       448

  Robert Hubberd Sherriff


A Rent Roll of all the Land In York County 1704

  Wm. Jackson                         200
  Matt: Pierce                        100
  Jno. Latin                          150
  Robert Cobbs                        100
  Francis Sharp                       100
  Geo: Baskewyle                      350
  Richard Gilford                     100
  Jos: Frith                           50
  Wm. Jones                            70
  Nath: Crawley                       384
  Thomas Crips                        750
  Wm. Davis                           200
  Lewis Barnoe                         80
  Arthur Lun                           50
  Jno. Bates                          669
  Jno Serginton                       150
  Wm. Taylor                          100
  Richard Page                        150
  Wm. Jorden                          580
  Jno. Lynes                          150
  Alex: Banyman                        50
  Wm. Cobbs                            50
  Mary Whaley                         550
  Henry Tyler                         180
  Richard Kendall                     150
  Wm. Hansford                        300
  Nicholas Sebrell                    150
  David Stoner                         50
  Ralph Hubberd                        50
  Wm. Harrison                         50
  Jno. Wyth                           100
  Thomas Hill                         930
  Thomas Vines                        200
  Morgan Baptist                      100
  Phil. Deadman                        75
  Bazill Wagstaff                     127
  Wm. Allen                           117
  Robert Read                         750
  Jos: Mountford                      307
  Roger Boult                         100
  Edward Fuller                        70
  Thomas Jefferson                    100
  Henry Duke                           25
  Jno. Hansford                       100
  Robert Peters                       160
  Jno. Morland                        100
  Wm. Lee                             350
  Richard Burt                        200
  John Eaton                          170
  Rob: Starke                         250
  Robt. Harrison                      200
  Jno. Morris                         125
  James Bates                         117
  Elizabeth Jones                      94
  Edward Young                        100
  Robert Green                        200
  Tho: Fear                           100
  Edward Thomas                       223
  John Loyall                         100
  Stephen Pond                        200
  Wm. Wise                            850
  Cornelius Shoohorn                  100
  Joseph White                        750
  Daniell Park Esq.                  2750
  Thomas Fear Jun                     130
  Orlando Jones                       450
  Ambrose Cobbs                       163
  Henry Dyer                           50
  Wm. Davis                           100
  Wm. Buckner                         302-1/2
  Tho. Barber                         600
  Elizb. Tindall                       60
  Dudley Diggs                       1350
  Wm. Hewitt                          150
  Mary Collier                        433
  Charles Collier                     684
  Tho. Hansford                        75
  Geo. Browne                         150
  Wm. Gibbs                            50
  Wm. Pekithman                       650
  Jno. Smith                          150
  Baldwin Matthews                   1300
  Jno Daniell                         200
  Seamor Powell                       130
  Jno. Lewis Esq.                     300
  Wm. Timson                         1000
  Jno. Page                           490
  Jos. Benjafield                      80
  Tho. Stear                           60
  Stephen Fouace                      565
  Edmund Jenings Esq.                 850
  Elizb. Archer                       370
  Wm. Coman                            50
  Elizb. Hansford                     100
  Samll: Hill                          25
  Jno. Anderson                        50
  Tho Buck                            250
  Lewis Burwell                      2100
  Robt. Crawley                       400
  Robt. Hyde                          200
  Robt. Harrison                      250
  Jeffry Overstreet                    50
  Tho. Overstreet                      50
  John Myhill                          52
  Mary Roberts                         25
  Benja. Stogsdall                     50
  Tho Wade                            375
  Jos: Walker                         615
  Jno. Sanders                        100
  Mongo Inglis                        400
  Tho Holyday                         100
  Jno. Williams                       100
  Antho: Sebrell                       50
  Robt. Jones                         100
  James Cansebee                      200
  Richd. Booker                       200
  James Morris                        100
  Henry Adkinson                       82
  Robt. Jackson                       150
  Anthoney Robinson                   183
  Hannah Lamb                          50
  James Calthorp                      900
  Tho Boulmer                         265
  Peter Pasque                         12
  Jno. Chapman                         70
  Jno. Pond                           112
  Sarah Tomkins                       250
  Robt. Kirby                         200
  Tho. Kirby                          270
  Edward Curtis                       200
  Jno. Forgison                       200
  Wm. Row                             902
  Jno. Hunt                           550
  Wm. Taverner                        100
  Armiger Wade                        424
  Richard Dixon                       450
  Edmund Jennings Esq.               1650
  Jno. Persons                        300
  Tho. Nutting                        375
  Peter Manson                        150
  Richard Slaughter                   275
  James Persons                       350
  Tho. Roberts                        450
  Jno. Toomer                         335
  Daniell Taylor                      225
  Robert Hayes                        220
  Henry Andros                        274
  Jno. Wells                          750
  Robert Curtis                       250
  Tho. Cheesman Sen.                 1800
  Jos Potter                           25
  Hen: Heywood                       1300
  David Holyday                       600
  John Northern                       130
  Jno. Doswell                        367
  Isaac Powell                        100
  Symon Staice                        200
  Jno. Drewet                         200
  Robert Topladie                     100
  Jno. Potter                          93
  Lewis Vernum                        150
  James Slaughter                     250
  Tho: Burnham                         50
  Jno: Doswell Jun                    100
  Robert Shields                      400
  Wm. Wilson                           50
  Owen Davis                          247
  Tho. Walker                         100
  Richard Nixon                       150
  Henry Clerk                         100
  Elias Love                           25
  Wm. Howard                          100
  Jno. Sanderver                      100
  Jno. Cox                             50
  Tho. Gibbins                        100
  Tho. Hind                           100
  Tho Cheesman Jun                    600
  Wm. Browne                          200
  Jno. Rogers                         650
  Jno. Moss                           150
  Jno. Lawson                         100
  Nicho. Philips                      150
  Wm. Sheldon                         750
  Jno. Wayman                         100
  Tho Edmonds                         150
  Lawrence Smith                     1700
  James Paulmer                       150
  Wm. Gurrow                          150
  Peter Goodwin                       400
  Robt. Snead                          50
  Edward Cawley                       150
  Wm. Gorden                          150
  Jno. Hilsman                         75
  Jno. Wright                         100
  Jno. Gibons                          50
  Elizb. Goodwin                     1200
  Samuell Cooper                      150
  Jno. Fips                           150
  Tho Wooton                          150
  Edward Moss                         759
  Rebecka Watkins                     100
  Wm. Whitaker                       1800
  Hampton Parish                      200
  Bruton parish Gleabe                300
  Robt. Ivy he living in
    James City County &
    no Tennt. on ye Land              100
                                    -----
                                    61132-1/2
  Added to make up the old Roll       168
                                    -----
                                    61300-1/2

  Wm. Barbar S Y C


The Rent Roll of the Land in James City County 1704


  A

  Adkinson Tho                         50
  Adkinson Henry                      250
  Armestone Joshua                     50
  Adams Anne                          150
  Argo James                          200
  Abbitt Francis                      100
  Apercon Wm.                          80
  Allen Richard                       540
                                    -----
                                     1420


  B

  Baker Jno.                          100
  Bentley Jno                         125
  Bess Edmund                          75
  Burwell Lewis                      1350
  Beckitt Tho                          60
  Bray James                         3500
  Bryon Jno.                          100
  Bingley James                       100
  Benham Jno.                          50
  Brown James                         250
  Bowers Wm.                           50
  Broadnax Wm.                       1683
  Bayley Wm                           100
  Black Geo                           200
  Bush Jno                            800
  Ballard Tho                         100
  Bray David                         5758
  Burton Ralph                        200
  Blankitt Henry                      100
  Brand Richard                       125
  Breeding Jno.                       100
  Bruer Thackfield                    350
  Blackley Wm                         142
  Barratt Wm.                         305
  Barron Tho                          100
  Blankes Henry                       650
  Bagby Tho                           180
  Barnes Francis                      200
  Brackitt Tho                        150
  Browne Wm.                         1070
  Buxton Samuell                      300
  Bimms Christo.                      300
  Ballard Wm.                         300
  Boman                                90
  Benge Robert                         60
                                    -----
                                    19123


  C

  Center Jno                          100
  Clerk Wm.                          1100
  Charles Phill                       200
  Capell Tho.                         200
  Cearley Wm.                         450
  Clerk Robert                        300
  Clerk Sarah                         200
  Cole Richard                         80
  Cooper Tho                           60
  Cook Richard                         75
  Cosby Charles                       250
  Crawley Robert                      460
  Cryer George                        100
  Cobbs Ambrose                       350
  Cock Jonathan                       250
  Cowles Thomas                       675
                                    -----
                                     4850


  D

  Dormar Jno.                         100
  Drummond Wm                         150
  Deane Jno                           150
  Duckitt Abraham                     290
  Danzee Jno Jacob Coignan           4111
  Deane Tho                            80
  Deane Wm                            100
  Drummond Jno                        700
  Deane Tho                           150
  Duke Tho                            750
  Davey Francis                       778
  Doby Jno.                           300
  Duke Henry Jun                       50
  Duke Henry Esq.                    2986
                                    -----
                                    11695


  E

  Elerby Elizabeth                    600
  Edmunds Elizabeth                   175
  Eggleston Joseph                    550
  Eglestone Benj.                    1375
                                    -----
                                     2700


  F

  Fearecloth Tho                      277
  Farthing Wm.                         50
  Frayser Jno                         250
  Fox Wm.                              50
  Fouace Stephen                      150
  Fish Jno.                           100
  Freeman George                      197
  Furrbush Wm.                        400
  Flanders Francis                    350
                                    -----
                                     1824


  G

  Goodrich Benj.                     1650
  Gwin Jno.                           100
  Garey Tho.                           60
  Guilsby Tho.                        300
  Graves Joseph                       250
  Goss Charles                        171
  Goodall Jno.                        400
  Geddes                              476
  Gill Jno.                           100
  Green Tho.                           50
  Gregory Nicho.                       50
  Green Wm.                           100
  Ginnings Phill.                     400
  Gibson Gibey                        150
  Goodman John                        275
  Goodwin Robert                      150
  Grice Aristotle                     700
  Greene Tho                          500
                                    -----
                                     5882


  H

  Hudson Wm                            50
  Herd Leph.                          100
  Hadley Dyonitia                     100
  Hall Jno.                            50
  Harvey George                      1425
  Howard Jno.                          25
  Hughes Geo.                         250
  Harfield Mich                        50
  Hudson George                       100
  Hudson Leonard                      170
  Hood Jno.                           250
  Harris Wm.                          140
  Hamner Nicho.                       500
  Henley Leonard                      360
  Hooker Edward                      1067
  Higgins Jno.                         75
  Henley Jno.                         100
  Holiday Tho.                        250
  Hitchcock John                      100
  Holeman James                       150
  Hubert Matt                        1834
  Handcock Robt.                      300
  Haley James                         310
  Hook Mick                           260
  Hill Tho.                           310
  Hatfield Richard                    100
  Hilliard Jerimiah                   225
  Hilliard John                       200
  Hopkins John                        120
  Hunt Wm.                           1300
  Hix John                            115
  Harrison Wm.                        150
  Hawkins John                        200
  Hix Joseph                          100
  Harrison Benj. Jun                  100
                                    -----
                                    10936


  J

  Inch Jno.                            30
  Jone Fred                           300
  Inglis Mingo                       1300
  Jenings Edmund Esq.                 200
  Jaquelin Edward                     400
  Jeffrys Tho                          60
  Jackson Elizabeth                   200
  Jackson Richard                     150
  Jeffrys Matt.                       100
  Johnson Antho                       100
  Jones Wm.                            50
  Johnson Jno                         260
  Jones Wm.                           150
  Jordan John                        1000
                                    -----
                                     4265


  K

  Knowstarp                           150


  L

  Lawrence Richard                    250
  Ludwell Phil Esq                   6626
  Lattoon John                         75
  Lund Thomas                         100
  Lillingtone Benj.                   100
  Lidie Robt.                         500
  Loftin Comeles                      200
  Lightfoot Phil                     1650
  Lightfoot Jno. Esq                  250
  Love Jno.                           100
  Loftin Comeles Jun                  200
  Liney Wm.                            55
                                    -----
                                    10106


  M

  Mookins Roger                       160
  Macklin Wm                          300
  Marston Wm                          150
  Morris Edward Jun                   100
  Manningaren                         150
  Marston Tho                        1000
  Martin Richard                      150
  Maples Tho                          300
  Muttlow Jno                         170
  Morris James                        800
  Moris David                         170
  Myers Wm Jun                        100
  Mountfort Tho                       600
  Morris John                         195
  Marble Geo                          135
  Mallard Poynes                      100
  Merryman James                      300
  Morecock Tho                        700
  Meekings Tho                        175
  Marraw Dennis                        30
  Major John                          100
                                    -----
                                     5885


  N

  Norrell Hugh                        328
  Nicholson Jno                       144
  Nicholls Henry                      100
  Nailer Wm                           300
  O'Mooney Mary                       126
                                    -----
                                      998


  P

  Prince George                        50
  Page John                          1700
  Page Mary                           900
  Pigot Benj.                          90
  Pall Wm                             450
  Parker Tho                         1650
  Peper Stephen                       100
  Phillips Jno                        300
  Pattison Alex                       100
  Perkins Charles                     320
  Philips Edward                      100
  Philips Wm                          300
  Pearman Wm                          270
  Pearman Jno                         200
  Pendexter Tho                       550
  Parish Tho                          100
  Pattisson Tho                       200
  Parke Daniell Esq                  1800
  Pattison Catherine                  150
                                    -----
                                     9330


  R

  Rhodes Randall                       50
  Ryder Mary                          350
  Rhodes Francis                      100
  Rovell Jno                           50
  Revis Wm.                           150
  Russell Samuell                     350
                                    -----
                                     1050


  S

  Stafford Mary                       210
  Sanders Jno.                         50
  Sewell Jno.                          75
  Sprattley Jno.                      350
  Smith Christo.                      450
  Short Jno.                           90
  Smallpage Robt.                     190
  Santo Robt.                         100
  Smith Jno.                          114
  Slade Wm.                            80
  Soane Henry                         750
  Sykes Barnard                      1012
  Selvey Jacob                         50
  Sharp Jno.                          800
  Shaley Jno.                         150
  Simes Wm.                           650
  Sorrell Mary                        500
  Sherman Elizb.                      500
                                    -----
                                     6121


  T

  Tinsley Edward                      100
  Tinsley Richard                     100
  Tomson James                        100
  Thackson John                       289
  Tyery Wm.                          1590
  Thurston John                       500
  Thomas Wm.                          150
  Tyler Henry                         730
  Tullett John                        625
  Thomas Hanah                        100
  Thomson Henry                       150
  Twine Tho.                          100
  Thomas Jno.                         250
                                    -----
                                     4784


  V

  Vaughn Henry                       1900
  Udall Matthew                        50
  Verney Wm.                           50
  Vaiding Isaac                       300
                                    -----
                                     2300


  W

  Weathers Tho.                       130
  Wood Richard                        130
  Whitaker Wm.                        320
  Ward Tho.                           100
  Weldon Sarah                        100
  Whaley Mary                         200
  Winter Timo.                        250
  Wilkins Samll.                      170
  Wright Samll.                       100
  Winter Wm.                          100
  Williams Matt.                       75
  Walker Alex.                        500
  Williamson John                     120
  Walker David                        150
  Walker Alex. Jun.                  2025
  Warberton Tho.                      190
  Weldey Geo.                         317
  Wragg Tho.                          500
  Wooton Jno.                         150
  Willson Jno.                        140
  Wilkins Tho.                        600
  Wood Edward                         300
  Wood Tho.                           200
  Walker David                        100
  Ward Robt.                          800
  Wright Mary                         175
  Woodward Lanslett                   650
  Woodward John                       650
  Woodward Geo.                       350
  Woodward Samll.                     350
  Ward Henry                          150
  Ward Edward                         150
                                    -----
                                    10662


  Y

  Young Robt.                         350
  Young Thomas                        350
                                    -----
                                      700
                                   114780

  Benj. Shottwater of York County     300
  Tho. Sorrell                        300
  Mary Nosham at the Blackwater       168
                                    -----
                                      768

  Henry Soane Junr. Sher.

  The Totall of the Acres
    in James City County
                                   114780

  Discovered of this for which
    the Sheriff is to be allowed
    the Qt. Rts. according to
    his Ex.cy odrs in Council
                                     6000
                                   ------
                                   108780

  108780 acres at 24 tob per
    100 is                       26107 tob
                                ------

  Whereof pd in Aronoco at
    6 per Ct.                     4000
                                     12.0.0
  In Sweet Scented at 3s " 4d
    per Ct.                      22107
                                     92.2.3
                                    104.2.3


New Kent County Rent Roll

A Rent Roll of the Lands held of her Maj^tie in the Parish of St. Peters
and St. Paulls. Anno 1704.


  A

  Alford John                         240
  Allen Richard                       550
  Alex Abraham                        100
  Allen Robt.                         100
  Austin                              245
  Austin James                        700
  Amos Fran                           100
  Ashcroft Tho                        180
  Aldridge Jno                        250
  Atkinson Jno                        300
  Anthony Mark                        190
  Anderson Jno                        100
  Anderson Robt                       900
  Arise Margt                         200
  Austin Rich                          50
  Anderson Robt.                      700
  Anderson David                      300
  Anderson Rich                       200
  Allen Reynold                       205
  Allvis George                       325
  Aron Josiah                         200
  Amos Nocho                           50
  Allen Daniell                       250
  Allen Samll                         150
  Anderson John                       100
  Ashley Charles                      100
                                    -----
                                     6785


  B

  Bourn Wm                            140
  Bray Sarah                          790
  Bradbury Geo                        100
  Brothers Jno                        200
  Bayley Jno                           80
  Beck Wm Mr.                         200
  Butts Alice                         150
  Burnell Mary Mrs.                  2750
  Bassett Wm.                         550
  Ball David                          200
  Baughan Jno Junr                    300
  Bassett Tho                         350
  Blackburn Rowland                   700
  Baker Christo                       100
  Beer Peter                          100
  Brooks Richd                         85
  Burnell Edwd                        200
  Brown Jno                           100
  Bullock Richd                       450
  Blackwell James Junr                200
  Brooks Robt                          45
  Bulkley Benj                        200
  Blackwell                           950
  Baughan Jno                         100
  Baughan Joseph                      100
  Bostock Jno                         100
  Bostock Wm                           80
  Bumpus Robt.                        100
  Burwell Lewis                       200
  Bryan Charles                       100
  Bullock Edwd                        450
  Blalock Jno                         492
  Baker Jno                           130
  Bearne Henry                         50
  Buhly Jno                           225
  Bow Henry                           200
  Bradley Tho                         255
  Barker Cha                          100
  Bugg Samll                           60
  Baskett Wm. Esq.                   1250
  Beck Wm.                            433
  Beare Joseph                        150
  Barrett Christo                      60
  Baughtwright Jno                    250
  Bad Samll                           150
  Banks Andrew                         50
  Baker Richd                          80
  Bowles John                         500
  Bunch John                          100
  Burnett Jno                         150
  Barnhowes Richd                    1600
  Barbar Tho                          500
  Burkett Tho                          41
  Bates Edwd                           50
  Breeding John                       300
  Brewer Mary                         100
  Bassett Wm. Esq.                   4100
  Bradingham Robt.                    150
  Baxter James                         90
                                    -----
                                    21786


  C

  Cotrell Richd                       200
  Clarkson David                      200
  Crump Stephen                        60
  Crump Wm.                           330
  Clopton Wm.                         454
  Chandler Robt.                      160
  Crump Richd.                         60
  Cambo Richd.                         80
  Crawford David Junr                 400
  Crawford David Mr.                  300
  Chambers Edwd                       235
  Clerk Edwd                          282
  Collett Tho                         100
  Clerk Christo                       300
  Cocker Wm.                         1000
  Case Hugh                           100
  Carley Richd                         80
  Chiles Henry                        700
  Cook Abraham                        200
  Crump Elizb                          80
  Colum Richd                         130
  Crump James                         150
  Crump Robt                          150
  Clough Capt.                         80
  Chandler Wm.                        300
  Chandler Francis                    150
  Cordey Tho.                         150
  Currell Andrew                       30
  Croome Joell                        600
  Crutchfield Peter                   400
  Chesley Wm.                         500
  Crutchfield Junr                    400
  Carlton Wm.                         140
  Chambers George                     100
  Cox Wm.                             350
                                    -----
                                     9251


  D

  Dolerd Wm                            50
  Dennett John                        350
  Durham James                        100
  Dumas Jerimiah                      250
  Deprest Robt                        350
  Dodd John                           300
  Dabony James                        320
  Davis Elizar                        375
  Duke Henry Esq.                     325
  Dibdall Jno                         800
  Darnell Rachell                     100
  Duke Henry Esq.                     170
  Davis John                           80
  Davenport Mest                      125
  Daniell John                        150
                                    -----
                                     3845


  E

  Eperson John                        120
  Elmore Tho                          300
  Elmore Tho Junr                     100
  Ellicon Garratt Robt                520
  England Wm.                         490
  Elderkin John                       300
  Elmore Peter                        100
  English Mungo                       500
  Ellis Wm.                           100
                                    -----
                                     2530


  F

  Finch Edwd                          300
  Foster Joseph                       800
  Forgeson Wm                         507
  Fleming Charles                     920
  Francis Tho                         150
  Freeman Wm.                         200
  Fenton Widdo                        270
  Feare Edmd                          200
  Fisher Wm.                          100
                                    -----
                                     3447


  G

  Goodger Jno                         200
  Green Edwd                          200
  Gibson Tho                          370
  Garrat James                        375
  Gonton Jno                          250
  Glass Tho                           150
  Graham Tho                          250
  Gleam Jno                           300
  Giles Jno                           120
  Gentry Nicho                        250
  Garland Edwd                       2600
  Glass Anne                          150
  Granchaw Tho                        480
  Greenfield Fran.                     80
  Gillmett Jno                        160
  Gawsen Phillip                       50
  Gillmett Richd                      150
  Glassbrook Robt                     400
  Gadberry Tho                        200
  Gill Nicho                          222
  Gosling Wm                          460
  Goodring Alexander                  100
  Gills John                          100
  Grindge Richd                       225
                                    -----
                                     7442


  H

  Herlock John                        320
  Hilton Jno                          300
  Hughs Jno                           180
  Huberd Jno                          827
  Howie Jno                           150
  Howie Jno Junr                      100
  Hughs Robt                          966
  Harris Edmd                         100
  Harris Tho                          100
  Hawes Haugton                       850
  Harris John                         146
  Hill Jno                            250
  Hester Fra                          300
  Horsley Rowland                     250
  Herman Robt                         300
  Hughes Rees                         400
  Hill Samll                          300
  Holled Samll                        100
  Harrelston Paul                     360
  Hatfield Wm                         318
  Harris Wm                           125
  Harris Benj                         100
  Horkeey John                        800
  Hairy John                          280
  Haiselwood Jno                      200
  Haiselwood Tho                      150
  Hockiday Wm                         300
  Holdcroft Henry                      95
  Hogg Mary                           140
  Harmon Wm                           350
  Hogg Jno. Junr                      260
  Harris Wm                           100
  Hopkins Wm                          200
  Howes Job                           300
  Hight John                          100
  Hankins Charles                     340
  Harris Wm                           150
  Harris Robt                          75
  Handey Wm                           150
  Hogg Wm                             200
  Haselwood Richd                     100
  Harlow Tho                          230
  Hutton Geo                          150
                                    -----
                                    11312


  J

  Jackson Tho                         500
  Izard Fran                         1233
  Jarratt Robt                       1600
  Johnson Mich                         40
  Jones John                          100
  Johnson Wm                          265
  Jones Jane                          200
  Johnson John                        100
  Johnson Edwd                        150
  Jennings Robt                       100
  Jones Fredirick                     500
  Johes John                          100
  Jeeves Tho                          100
  Jones Francis                       200
  Jones John                          100
  Jones Evan                          500
                                    -----
                                     5838


  K

  King Elizb                          300
  Kembro Jno                          540
  Kembro Jno Junr                     150
  Keeling Geo                        1500
                                    -----
                                     2490


  L

  Lightfoot John Esq.                3600
  Littlepage Richd                   2160
  Losplah Peter                       100
  Lestrange Tho                       200
  Liddall Geo                         100
  Lawson Nicho                        200
  Levermore Phill                    1000
  Lewis John Esq                     2600
  Lawson John                          50
  Lewis John                          375
  Lovell Geo                          920
  Lovell Charles                      250
  Leak Wm                             280
  Logwod Tho                          100
  Lacey Wm                            500
  Lacey Tho                           100
  Lacey Emanuell                      180
  Luke Jno                            150
  Lochester Robt                       80
  Lewis Tho                           115
  Lee Edwd                            120
  Lochester Edwd                       80
  Law James                           100
  Laton Reubin                        100
  Linsey Joseph                      1150
  Linsey Wm                            50
  Lane Tho                            100
                                    -----
                                    14760


  M

  Millington Wm Junr                  450
  Mitchell Stephen Junr                75
  Millington Wm                       200
  Moss Samll                          200
  Mitchell Tho                        300
  Meanley Wm                          100
  Minis Tho                           200
  Mitchell Stephen                    200
  Moor Pelham                         125
  Martin Tho                          100
  Martin Martin                       150
  Morris Robt                         245
  Moss Tho                            430
  Morgan Edwd                          50
  Moon Stephen                         70
  Major Wm                            456
  Murroho Jno                         100
  Moor Jno                            250
  Masey Tho                           300
  Martin John                         400
  Masey Peter                         100
  Madox John                          300
  Martin Wm                           230
  Martin James                        100
  Moss James                          720
  Moon Tho                             65
  McKing Alexander                    170
  McKoy Jno                           300
  Merridith Geo                       400
  Melton Richd                        290
  Morreigh John                       110
  Merfield John                       210
  Mills Nicho                         300
  Mask Jno                            411
  Medlock John                        350
  Moor Edwd                            65
  McKgene Wm                           13-1/2
  Merriweather Nicho                 3327
  Mage Peter                          450
  Mitchell Wm                         512
  Marr Geo                            100
  Moor Anne                            75
  Mutray Tho                          382
  Mirideth James                      270
  Mohan Warwick                       850
  Muttlow James                       150
  Morgan Matthew                      210
  Morris John                         450
  Markham Tho                         100
  Moxon Wm                            100
  Mackony Elizb                       250
  Meacon Gideon                       270
                                    -----
                                    16149-1/2


  N

  Nucholl James                       300
  Neaves James                        150
  Nonia Richd                         100
  Norris Wm                           100
                                    -----
                                      650


  O

  Osling John                         150
  Otey John                           290
  Oudton Matt                         190
                                    -----
                                      630


  P

  Page John Junr                      400
  Pendexter Geo                      1490
  Pattison David                      300
  Park Jno Junr                       300
  Park John                           200
  Pease John                          100
  Philip Geo                          100
  Penix Edwd                          200
  Plantine Peter                      240
  Pendexter Tho                      1000
  Pyraul James                        150
  Pullam Wm                           575
  Purdy Nicho                         200
  Page Mary Madm                     3450
  Perkins John                        120
  Paite Jerim                         220
  Pasley Robt                         300
  Perkins Wm                          305
  Pait John                          1500
  Petever Tho                         100
  Pittlader Wm                        147
  Pickley Tho                         281
  Pittlader Tho                       295
  Petty Stephen                       200
  Porter John                         100
  Petty John                         2190
  Park Coll                          7000
  Purly John                          100
                                    -----
                                    21573


  R

  Raglin Evan                         300
  Raglin Evan Junr                    100
  Raglin Tho                          100
  Ross Wm                             150
  Richardson Henry                    300
  Raymond James                        80
  Reynold Tho                         255
  Reyley Jno                          100
  Reynolds Jonah                       50
  Rhoads Charles                      175
  Reynolds Samll                      820
  Rice Tho                            300
  Redwood John                       1078
  Rule Widdo                           50
  Richardson Richard                  890
  Russell John                        550
  Richardson John                    1450
  Richard Eman                       1250
  Round Free Wm                       100
  Randolph Widdo                      100
                                    -----
                                     8928


  S

  Styles John                         200
  Smith Nathll                         82
  Sanders Wm                           40
  Spear Robt                          450
  Sanders James                        60
  Scott John                          300
  Scrugg Richd                        100
  Strange Alexander                   450
  Smith Wm                            110
  Scrugg Jno                           50
  Snead Tho                           200
  Sunter Stephen                      478
  Symons Josiah                       100
  Sanders John                        130
  Stephens Wm                         100
  Stanley Tho                         150
  Sandidge Jno                        100
  Sprattlin Andrew                    654
  Snead John                           75
  Smith James                          80
  Sexton Wm                            80
  Sims Jno                           1000
  Smith Roger                         300
  Sherritt Henry                      100
  Salmon Thomas                        50
  Sanders Tho                          25
  Symons George                       125
  Stamp Ralph                         625
  Stanop Capt                        1024
  Stanup Richd                        325
  Shears Paul                         200
  Stepping Tho                        350
  Slater James                        700
                                    -----
                                     9813


  T

  Tony Alexandr                       170
  Tovis Edmd                          100
  Turner Henry                        250
  Turner Wm                           250
  Turner Geo                          400
  Thorp Tho                           200
  Thurmond Richd                      131-1/2
  Tucker Tho                          700
  Turner James                         50
  Thompson James                      100
  Tully Wm                            200
  Turner Geo Junr                     200
  Tate James                          160
  Town Elizb                          100
  Thomasses Orphans                   500
  Tinsley Cournelius                  220
  Tyler                               100
  Tinsley Tho                         150
  Tirrell Wm                          400
  Taylor Tho                           25
  Tinsley Jno                         130
  Tapp Jno                            110
  Tyrrey James                        150
  Tyrrey Alexandr                     210
  Thompson Capt.                     2600
  Tyrey Thom                          190
  Taylor Joseph                       150
  Taylor Lemuell                      212
  Taylor Thomas                       350
  Twitty Thomas                       200
                                    -----
                                     8708-1/2


  V

  Upsherd Jon                          60
  Vaughan Wm                          300
  Via Amer                             50
  Venables Abr.                       100
  Venables John                       200
  Vaughan John                        250
  Vaughan Vincent                     410
                                    -----
                                     1370


  W

  Wintby Jacob                        250
  Winfry Charles                      100
  Waddill Jno                          40
  Walker Wm                           650
  Walton Edwd                         150
  Wilson Jno                          200
  Waddill Wm                          375
  Warring Peter                        88
  Wingfield Tho                       150
  Weaver Sam                          100
  Wyatt Alice                        1300
  West Nath                          6370
  Webb Mary                           200
  Wilmore Jno                         100
  Webster Joseph                       80
  West Giles                          200
  Wharton Tho                         270
  Willis Fran                         134
  Waddy Samll                         150
  Willford Charles                    100
  Waid James                          150
  White Jno                           320
  Wood Henry                          100
  Woody Symon                          50
  Woody Jno                           100
  Winstone Antho                      310
  Winstone Isaac                      850
  Woody James                         130
  Winstone Sarah                      275
  Watson Theophilus                   325
  Woodson Jno                         600
  Walton Edwd                         450
  Wood Walter                         100
  Watkins Wm                           50
  Wilkes Joseph                       250
  Williams Clerk                      300
  Willis Stephen                      500
  Williams Tho                        100
  Worrin Robt                         300
  Woodull James                       200
  Walker Capt                         400
  Wilson James                         60
  Wheeler John                         75
  Williams Wm.                        100
  White John                          190
                                    -----
                                    17292


  Y

  Yeoman John                          50
  Yeoell Judith                       150
                                    -----
                                      200

  Quit Rents that hath not been paid this 7 year viz.

  Richarson Matt                      200
  Wm Wheeler                          150
  Coll Parkes                         300
                                    -----
                                      650

  Lands that the Persons lives out of the County viz.

  Coll Lemuell Batthurst              800
  Robt Valkes                         500
  The Heirs of Bray                   500
                                    -----
                                     1800


  A                                  6785
  B                                 21786
  C                                  9251
  D                                  3845
  E                                  2530
  F                                  3447
  G                                  7442
  H                                 11312
  J                                  5838
  K                                  2490
  L                                 14760
  M                                 16149-1/2
  N                                   650
  O                                   630
  P                                 21573
  R                                  8298
  S                                  9813
  T                                  8708-1/2
  V                                  1370
  W                                 17292
  Y                                   200
                                   ------
                                   173870

  James Mosse Sherriff


A full & Perfect Rent Roll of all the Land held of her Majtie in Charles
City County this Present Year 1704 by Patents &c.


  A

  Aliat John                          100


  B

  Bradley Joseph                      200
  Baxter John                         250
  Bishop Robt                         200
  Bedingfield Theo                    110
  Botman Harman                       100
  Burton Henry                        100
  Burwell Lewis                      8000
  Brooks Robt                         150
  Blanks Richard Senr                 250
  Blanks Richd Junr                   125
  Blanks Tho                          125
  Bradford Richd                     1397
  Brown Marmaduke                     100
  Bray David                          230
                                    -----
                                    11337


  C

  Cole Robt                            80
  Codell Richd                        100
  Clark Edwd                          962-1/4
  Clark Daniell                       250
  Clark Joseph                        230
  Christian Tho                      1273
  Cock Edwd                           350
  Cock Richd                          975
                                    -----
                                     3258


  D

  Davis Thomas                        200
  Davis Richd                         118
                                    -----
                                      318


  E

  Edwards John                        287-1/2
  Epes Littlebury                     400
  Epes John                           500
  Ele Samll                           682
  Evans John                          800
                                    -----
                                     2669-1/2


  F

  Floyd Geo                           243
  Fowler Richd                        150
  Flowers Samll                       200
                                    -----
                                      593


  G

  Gunn James                          250
  Grosse Edwd                         100
                                    -----
                                      350


  H

  Hamlin Jno                          143-1/2
  Hill Edwd                          2100
  Haynes Nicho                        125
  Harwood John                        100
  Howood James                        200
  Hattle Shard                        112
  Harwood Joseph                      659
  Harwood Samll                       350
  Harwood Robt                        312-1/2
  Hunt Wm                            3130
  Hunt John                          1500
  Harmon Elizb                        479
  Hyde Wm                             120
  Hamlin Stephen                       80
  Hamlin Tho                          264
                                    -----
                                    16015


  J

  Irby Wm                             103
  Javox James                         100
  Jordin Edwd                         100
  Justis Justinian                    200
                                    -----
                                      503


  L

  Lowlin Danll                        600
  Lawrence James                      100
                                    -----
                                      700


  M

  Manders James                       100
  Minge James                        1086
  Mountford Jeffry                    100
  Marvell Tho                        1238
  Moodie Samll                         82
  Muschamp John                        80
                                    -----
                                     2686


  N

  New Edwd                            100
  New Robt                            300
                                    -----
                                      400


  O

  Owen Wm                             100
  Owen David                          100
                                    -----
                                      200


  P

  Parker Tho                         1667
  Parish Wm                           100
  Parish Charles                      100
  Parker James                        160
  Parish Edwd                         100
  Parish John                         100
                                    -----
                                     2227


  R

  Roach Jno Senr                      630
  Renthall Joseph                     270
  Russell Samll                       253
  Roper John                          220
  Royall Joseph                       262
                                    -----
                                     1635


  S

  Smith Obidiah                       100
  Sampson Widdo                       211
  Stith Drewry                       1240
  Stith John                         1395
  Stockes John                        476
  Stockes Silvanus Senr               250
  Stokes Silvanus Junr                550
  Speares Geo                         225
                                    -----
                                     4447


  T

  Tanner Tho                         2000
  Tarendine John                      150
  Turner Edwd                         195
  Trotman Anne                        120
                                    -----
                                     2465


  V

  Vernon Walter                       240


  W

  Wyatt Widdo                         800
  Woodam Tho                          100
  Waren John                           54
                                    -----
                                      954


  A                                   100
  B                                 11337
  C                                  3258
  D                                   318
  E                                  2669-1/2
  F                                   593
  G                                   350
  H                                 16015
  J                                   503
  L                                   700
  M                                  2686
  N                                   400
  O                                   200
  P                                  2227
  R                                  1635
  S                                  4447
  T                                  2465
  V                                   240
  W                                   954
                                    -----
                                    52059-1/2

  An account of what Land that I cannot get the Quit Rents the Persons
    living out of the County

  Josep Parish at Kiquotan            100
  Richd Smith James City Cty          350
  Danll Hayley                        200
  Wm Lagg Henrico Cty                 100
                                    -----
                                      750

  Tho Parker Sheriff


The Quit Rent Roll of King William County

  Armsby John                         200
  Alvey Robt                          400
  Andrew Wm                           100
  Abbott Robt                         100
  Arnold Anthony                      100
  Arnold Benj                        1000
  Alcock John                         190
  Adam James                          400
  Anderson Wm Capt                    150
  Burwell Majr                       4700
  Bunch Paul                          150
  Baker John                          250
  Burges Edwd                         150
  Buttris Robt                        400
  Bibb Benj                           100
  Browne Joseph                       270
  Bell Edwds                          580
  Burch Henry                         200
  Burrel Suprian                      350
  Baker Tho                           100
  Bobo Elizb                          200
  Bird Wm Maj Qr                     1200
  Burrus John                          60
  Butler Thomas                       150
  Burrus Thomas                        60
  Bassett Coll Qr                    1550
  Bray James Qr                      1400
  Browne Abraham                      250
  Brightwell Elizb                    300
  Bickley Joseph                      150
  Claibourne Wm Coll                 3000
  Claibourne Tho Capt                1000
  Claibourne John                      50
  Coakes Robert                       100
  Cradock Samll                       600
  Cockram Wm                          200
  Cockram Joseph                      600
  Celar John                          100
  Chadwick Wm                         150
  Cathern John                        180
  Carr Thomas                         500
  Chiles Henry Qr                     700
  Craushaw Thomas                     150
  Clark Margarett                     100
  Coates Wm                            50
  Douglas Wm                          200
  Davis Lewis                         200
  Davis Wm                            200
  Downer John                         300
  Downes Elias                        300
  Davenport Davis                     200
  Dorrell Sampson Qr                 5000
  Davenport Martin                    100
  Davis Robert                        200
  Dickason Wm                         100
  Dickason Thomas                     100
  Dillon Henry                        150
  Dabney James                        200
  Dabney George                       290
  Dabney Benj                         200
  Davis John                          200
  Elly Richd                          100
  Egny Elizb                          100
  Elliot Thomas                       480
  Edward James                        350
  Elliott James                      1700
  Fox John Capt.                      600
  Fox Henry                          2000
  Finton Francis                      100
  Fuller Anthony                      150
  Foord John Junr                     300
  Foord Wm                            800
  Fullalove Thomas                    100
  Fleming Charles Qr                 1700
  Graves John Qr                      100
  Garratt Thomas                      200
  Geeres Thomas                       100
  Green John                          100
  Gravatt Henry                       150
  Goodin Majr Qr                      200
  Glover Wm                           100
  Herriott George                     200
  Hollins John                        200
  Higgason John                       350
  Holderbee Wm                        100
  Holliday Wm                         100
  Hayfield Wm                         100
  Hampton John                         50
  Huckstep Edwd                       150
  Hurt Wm Junr                         90
  Hurt Wm Senr                        250
  Hurt John                           500
  Hendrick Hans                       700
  Handcock Thomas                     200
  Hayden John                         150
  Hobday Edwd                         150
  Hill Thomas                         150
  Hutchinson Wm                       600
  Hill Francis                        300
  Hill Gabriell                       250
  Hill Edwd Coll Qr                  3000
  Hayle Joseph                        200
  Johns Jane                          240
  Johnson Wm                          300
  Johnson Coll Qr                     600
  Johns Wm                            100
  Isabell Wm                          150
  James Jonathan                      300
  Inge Vincent                        100
  Jones Frederick Qr                 2850
  Jenings Coll Qr                    4000
  King Robert Qr                      300
  Kettlerise Symon                    200
  Lee John                             20
  Lypscomb Ambrose                    600
  Lasy Wm                             100
  Lypscomb Wm                         300
  Littlepage Richd Capt Qr           2600
  Lypscomb John                       200
  Mallory Thomas                      150
  Mallory Roger                       100
  Miles Daniell                       350
  Mr Gehee Thomas                     250
  Marr John                           200
  Morris Wm                           440
  Maybank Wm                          100
  Mr Donnell John                     150
  Maddison Henry                      650
  Merriweather Nicho Qr               600
  Mullene Matthew                     150
  Madison John Qr                     300
  Norment Joseph                      800
  Norment Samll                       100
  Noyce Wm                            650
  Napier Robert                       100
  Owens Hugh                          300
  Oustin John                         350
  Oakes John                          350
  Oliver John                         140
  Palmer Martin                      1200
  Peek John                           100
  Pynes Nathaniell                   1400
  Pee Thomas                          400
  Purlevant Arthur                    100
  Powers David                        200
  Pollard Wm Qr                       500
  Pemberton Geo                       180
  Page John Qr                       1000
  Pickrell Gabriell                   100
  Parks Coll Qr                      4500
  Quarles John                        100
  Reynolds Wm                         100
  Robert Maurice                      200
  Randall John                        100
  Ray James                           100
  Rhodes Nicholas                     150
  Sandlan Nicholas                    700
  Strutton Thomas                     150
  Streett Wm                          350
  Shilling George                     300
  Satterwhite Charles                 150
  Slaughter Geo                       100
  Slaughter Martin                    130
  Stark John                          500
  Sanders Jushua                      100
  See Mathew                          200
  Sellers Jacob                       350
  Spruse Jeremy                       150
  Smith Edmd                          150
  Spencer Thomas                      600
  Slaughter John                       90
  Smith Christo Qr                    800
  Slaughter Henry                     100
  Toms Wm                             150
  Towler Matthew                      150
  Terry Thomas                        300
  Terry Stephen                       330
  Tomason Thomas                      150
  Terry James                         400
  Traneer John                        100
  Vickrey Henry                       450
  West John Coll                     1800
  Winfree Henry                       300
  West Tho Capt                      1000
  Whitworth John                      200
  Whitlock John                       200
  Willeroy Abraham                    550
  Williams Phillip                    100
  Williams Griffith                   240
  Wood Thomas                         300
  Whitehead John                      100
  Woolsey Jacob                       130
  Williams John                       150
  Williams Samll                      600
  Wright Thomas                       150
  Whitbee Robert                      800
  West Nathanll Capt                 2000
  Waller John Majr                    800
  Willis Wm                           250
  Wheelis Joseph                      130
  Wormley Madam Qr                   3000
  Winston William                     170
  Whitehead Phillip                  3000
  Yancey Charles                      100
  Yarborough John                     150
  Yarborough Richard                  300
                                   ------
                                   100950

  Wm Stanard M.S.                    1000
  James Wood K.Q.                     500
  Zachary Lewis K.Q.                  450
  Peter Kemp G.C.                     600
  Wm Beck N.K.                       1600
  Tho. Hickman K.Q.                   550
  Benj Clement G.C.                   600
  David Bray J.C.C.                  1000
  Job House N.K.                     2000
  Harry Beverley M.S.                 600
  Chillian White G.C.                 300


A True Account of the Lands in King & Queen County as it was taken by
Robt. Bird Sherriff in the year 1704.


  A

  Alford John                         200
  Austin Danll                         80
  Asque John                          320
  Adams Johns                         200
  Arnold Edwd                         150
  Allin Thomas                        100
  Adkinson John                       250
  Austin Thomas                       100
  Adamson David                       100
  Anderson Richd                      650
  Allcock Dorothy                     150
                                    -----
                                     2300


  B

  Baker Wm                            350
  Beverley Robt. Qr.                 3000
  Bennett Alexander                   200
  Breeding Geo                        200
  Bennett Wm                          150
  Bowles Robt                         100
  Bennett Sawyer                      150
  Baylor John                        3000
  Bell Roger                          150
  Burford Wm                          150
  Bray John                           230
  Blake Wm                            290
  Boisseau James Quart                900
  Blake Wm Junr                       210
  Brown Lancelet                      385
  Burch Jno                           100
  Burch Wm                            100
  Brown Tho. Blakes Land              300
  Bridgeforth James                   355
  Bagby Robt                          550
  Banks Wm                           1079
  Bullock John                        200
  Bird Wm                             572
  Broach Jno                         1200
  Braxton Geo                        2825
  Blanchet John                       125
  Bowker Ralph                        330
  Bine Edmd                           111
  Barber James                        750
  Burgess Wm                          100
  Bond Jno                            100
  Breemer John                       1100
  Bland Henry                         150
  Breemer John Junr                   200
  Bowden Tho.                         150
  Barton Andrew                       150
  Barlow Henry                        200
  Baskett John                        150
  Batterton Tho.                      100
  Baker James                         322
  Bill Robt.                          150
  Bocus Reynold                       150
  Bourne George                       200
  Bird Robt.                         1324
                                    -----
                                    22535


  C

  Cane Jno                            300
  Chessum Alexandr                    150
  Cook Benjamin                       200
  Cook Thomas Junr                     50
  Cook Thomas Senr                    100
  Cook Jno                             50
  Cleyton John                        400
  Chapman Mary                        200
  Cleyton Jeremy                      325
  Crane Wm                            120
  Camp Thomas                         250
  Carleton Christo                    200
  Carleton Jno.                       300
  Carter Timo.                        350
  Coleman Tho.                        300
  Coleman Daniell                     470
  Cleyton Susannah Widdo              700
  Collier Robt.                       100
  Crane Wm.                           300
  Crane Tho.                          320
  Chapman John                        200
  Caughlane James                     100
  Cotton Catherine                     50
  Collier Charles                     450
  Collier John                        400
  Collins Wm.                         350
  Cammell Alexandr.                   200
  Chin Hugh                           100
  Conner Timo.                       1410
  Collins James Yard Qr               300
  Corbin Gowin                       2000
  Crisp Tobias                        100
  Carters Qr                          300
  Carlton Tho.                        200
  Carlton Anne                        300
  Clough George Qr                    390
                                    -----
                                    12235

  Clerk and Cordell both in
    Glocester                        1000


  D

  Widdo Durrat                        200
  Day Alexander Maj. Beverley Qr      300
  Doe Wm.                             300
  Dilliard Nicho.                     150
  Dilliard Edwd.                      150
  Dimmock Tho.                        150
  Dismukes Wm.                        200
  Duett Charles                       900
  Didlake James                       200
  Durham John                         100
  Dunkley John                        380
  Duson Tho.                          448
  Davis Nathll.                       300
  Deshazo Peter                       450
  Davis Jno                            90
  Davis Edwd                          100
  Dillard Thomas                      170
  Davis Richd                         250
  Dillard Geo                         325
  Duglas James                        275
  Dayley Owen                         180
                                    -----
                                     5618


  E

  Eachols John                        220
  Ellis John                          400
  Eastham George                      300
  Ewbank Wm                           350
  Eastham Edwd Junr                   800
  Edwds John                          100
  Eastham Edwd                        100
  Eastes Abraham                      200
  Eyes Cornelius                      100
  Emory Ralph                         100
  Ellis Timothy                       350
                                    -----
                                     3020


  F

  Forsigh Thomas                      150
  Farquson James                      300
  Flipp John                           80
  Farish Robt                        1400
  Fielding Henry                     1000
  Farmer John                          50
  Fothergill Richd                    675
  Fortcon Charles                     400
  Forgett Charles                     150
  Robt Fothergill                     150
                                    -----
                                     4355

  Farmer John not paid for            200
  Fox Margarett not pd for            100


  G

  Gadberry Edwd                       100
  Griffin Edwd                        100
  George Richd                        100
  Griffin David                       100
  Graves Robt                         150
  Graves Jno                          150
  Gardner Ringing                     200
  Gray Joseph                         200
  Gilby John                          300
  Gray Samll                           40
  Gresham Jno                         200
  Gresham Edwd                        175
  Good John                           200
  Gresham George                      150
  Garrett Danll                       200
  Gamble Tho. Majors Land             450
  Gresham Tho                         225
  Graves Jno                          150
  Guttery Jno                         230
  Greogory Frances Widdo              700
  Gough Alice Widdo                   800
  Griggs Francis                      250
  Garrett John                        330
  Garrett Humphrey                    200
  Gibson Widdo                        200
  Garrett Robt                        200
                                    -----
                                     6100


  H

  Hand Thomas                         150
  Hayle John Qr                       685
  Honey James                         200
  Holloway Wm                         100
  Herndon James                       100
  Hoomos George                       725
  Hodges Thomas                       250
  Hayle Joseph                        250
  Hayes John                          100
  Haynes Wm                           494
  Holcomb Wm Bradfords Land           700
  Henderson John Thackers Land        200
  Hodgson Widdo                       200
  Henderson Widdo                     300
  Henderson Wm                        162
  Housburrough Morris, Harts Land     200
  Hesterley John                      200
  Hill John                           200
  Hordon Wm                            70
  Harris Wm                           250
  Hart Tho                            200
  Hockley Robt                        100
  Howard Peter                        300
  Hardgrove Wm                        100
  Herring Arthur                       50
  Hickman Thomas                      700
  Hunt Wm                             312
  Hobs Wm                             250
  Hicks Richd                         250
  Howden Wm                           100
  Howerton Thomas                     300
                                    -----
                                     8098

  Holt Joseph lives in Maryland       321
  Mayward Tho in Glocester            600


  J

  Jones Tho                           150
  Jones Robt                          200
  Jeffrys Richd                       337
  Jones Robt Junr                     130
  Johnson James                       200
  Jones Wm                            900
                                    -----
                                     1917


  K

  King John                           150
  Kallander Timo                      100
  Kink Anne                           275
  King Edwd                           200
  Knowles Dorothy Qr                  150
  King Robt                           100
  Kenniff Danby                       100
  King Daniell                        200
                                    -----
                                     1335


  L

  Loveing John                        100
  Lyon Peter                          250
  Leigh John                         6200
  Lumpkin Robt                        400
  Lee Wm                              230
  Loob Wm                             100
  Loft Richd                          320
  Lewis Tachary                       350
  Lumpkin Jacob                       950
  Lewis David                         120
  Lewis John Esq                    10100
  Lewis Edwd                         1400
  Lemon Elizb                         100
  Lynes Rebecca                       405
  Levingstone John                    600
  Levingstone Samll                   100
  Lawrence Matthew                    210
  Letts Arthur                        475
  Langford John                       150
  Levingstone Jno Sowels Land         750
                                    -----
                                    23310

  Leftwich Thomas in Essex             75


  M

  May John                            300
  Musick George                       100
  Major Jno                           250
  Martin John                         300
  More Austines Qr                    200
  May Tho                             300
  Moore Samll                         100
  Maddison Jno                        500
  Morris Wm                           130
  Martin Elizb                        400
  Mackay Sarah                        177
  May John Piggs Land                 200
  Major Francis                       700
  Mansfield Thomas                     60
  Morris Henry                        100
  Major John                          400
  Melo Nicho                          200
  Marcartee Daniell                   200
  Morris Wm                           300
  Mead Wm                             100
  Matthews Edwd                       160
  Martin Cordelia Wido                200
                                    -----
                                     5377


  N

  Nelson Henry                        440
  Neal John                            50
  Nason Joshua                        200
  Norman Wm                           300
  Norris James                        100
                                    -----
                                     1090


  O

  Owen Ralph                          120
  Ogilvie Wm                          300
  Orrill Lawrence                     290
  Orrill Wm                           500
  Orsbourn Michaell                    90
  Overstreet James Qr                 180
  ditto at home                        50
                                    -----
                                     1530


  P

  Powell Robt                         500
  Prewitt Wm                          200
  Paine Bernard                       130
  Pomea Francis                       100
  Philip Charles                      250
  Pettitt Thomas                      548
  Pollard Robt                        500
  Pollard Wm                          100
  Phinkett Elizb                      500
  Pemberton Tho.                      115
  Pickles Tho                          93
  Potters Francis Wido Neals Land     100
  Parks James                         200
  Purchase Geo Qr                     580
  Page Jno                            100
  Pritchett David                     225
  Pigg Henry                           61
  Page John Junr                      300
  Pigg Edwd                           250
  Phelps Tho                          400
  Pendleton Philip                    300
  Pendleto Henry                      700
  Pann John                           200
  Paytons quarts                      500
  Pigg John                           100
  Pamplin Robt                        150
  Pryor Christo                       175
  Paulin Elizb                        175
                                    -----
                                     7552

  Pate John in Glocester             1000


  Q

  Quarles James                       300
  Quarles Dyley Zacha: Lewis Land     300
                                    -----
                                      600


  R

  Richard Robt                        300
  Rings Quarter                      1000
  Robinson Daniel                     100
  Roger Giles                         475
  Rice Michaell                       200
  Richeson Tho                        460
  Richeson Elias                      180
  Read Elizb                          550
  Russell Alexandr Wyatts Land        400
  Robinson Robt                       980
  Rowe John                           100
  Richards John                       914
  Richards Wm                         400
  Richards Oliver                     250
  Riddle Tho Reads Land               700
  Roy Richd                          1000
  Ryley Elias                         200
  Rollings Peter                      150
                                    -----
                                     8359

  John the son of Robt Robinson hold,
    which nobody pays for             750


  S

  Sebrill John                        130
  Stone Mary                          100
  Smiths in Bristoll Qr              2800
  Stone Jno                           295
  Stubbelfield Geo Qr                 400
  Scandland Denis                    1470
  Swinson Richd                       170
  Smith Christo                       200
  Smith Jno Cooper                    273
  Smith Alexander                     275
  Seamour Wm                          268
  Sones Tho                           150
  Shepard Jane                        100
  Southerland Danll                   200
  Shoot Tho                           100
  Shepheard Joseph                    100
  Shea Patrick                        200
  Southerland Danll                   200
  Smith Nicho                         700
  Sanders Nathll                      200
  Smith John Sawyer                    80
  Shuckelford Roger                   250
  Skelton John                        100
  Snell John                          150
  Simpio Charles                      100
  Sawrey John                         113
  Stringer Margt                      175
  Spencer Tho                         300
  Sykes Stephen                        50
  Smith Francis                       100
  Smith Richd                         150
  Sparks John                         200
  Surly Tho                           100
  Stapleton Tho                       200
  Story John                         3000
  Spencer Katherine                   600
                                    -----
                                    14599

  Shippath Sr Wm Which is
    not paid for                      700
  Stark Tho of London which
    is not paid for                   920
  Stubblefield Geo in Glocester       400
  Smith Austin in Glocester          4000


  T

  Turner Richard                      200
  Todd Thomas Quarts                 2300
  Taylor James                       4000
  Toy Thomas                          175
  Taylor Danll                         70
  Thomas Rowland                      610
  Tunstall Tho                        550
  Todd Richd                         1050
  Towley John                         200
  Trice James                         350
  Tureman Ignatius                    100
  Turner Thomas                       267
  Thacker C. C.                      1000
                                    -----
                                    10872


  U

  Vaughan Cornelius                   500
  Vize Nathll                         100
  Uttley John                         200
                                    -----
                                      800


  W

  Wood James                          800
  Wilkinson John                      100
  Wright Tho                          300
  Watkins Wm                          137
  Wiltshier Joseph                     60
  Watkins Edwd                         98
  Watkins Philip                      203
  White Thomas                        200
  Walker John                        6000
  Wilson Benj Wyats Land              420
  Wyat Richd                         1843
  Walton Thomas                       200
  Wyat John                           530
  Withy Thomas                         50
  Williams Thomas                     200
  Watts Tho                           235
  Ward Samll                          160
  Watkins Benj                         60
  Watkins Tho Junr                    125
  Williams Elizb                      900
  Waldin Samll                        275
  Ware Edwd                           735
  William John                        125
  Ware Vallentine                     487
  Willbourn Tho                       250
  Wildbore Wm                         100
  Ware Nicho                          718
  White Jerimiah                      200
  Whorein John                        200
  Wise Richd quarts                   209
  Walker John, Johnsons Land         1000
                                    -----
                                    16920

  Wadlington Paul not paid
    for being                         150


  Y

  York Matthew                        100


  A                                  2300
  B                                 22535
  C                                 12235
  D                                  5618
  E                                  3020
  F                                  4355
  G                                  6100
  H                                  8098
  J                                  1917
  K                                  1335
  L                                 23310
  M                                  5377
  N                                  1090
  O                                  1530
  P                                  7552
  Q                                   600
  R                                  8359
  S                                 14599
  T                                 10872
  U                                   800
  W                                 16920
  Y                                   100
                                   ------
                                   158522

  Lands returned not paid for

  C                                  1000
  F                                   300
  H                                   920
  L                                    75
  P                                  1000
  R                                   750
  S                                  6020
  W                                   150
                                    -----
                                    10215


Glocester Rent Roll

A Rent Roll in Petso Parish

  Capt David Alexander               1050
  James Amis                          250
  John Acre                           100
  Wm Armistead                        430
  Ralph Baker                         150
  Martha Brooken                      600
  Thomas Buckner                      850
  Samll Bernard                       550
  Wm Barnard                          810
  Richd Bailey                        600
  Mary Booker                         100
  Thomas Cook                         350
  Wm Crymes                           400
  Jno Cobson                          100
  Robt. Carter                       1102
  Wm Collone                          400
  Hannah Camell                       100
  Benj Clements                       400
  Jno Cleake                          100
  Wm Cook                             135
  Jno Coleman                         200
  Jno Day                             400
  Jerim Darnell                       150
  Jno Darnell                          60
  James Dudley                        780
  Richd Dudley                        400
  Thomas Dudley                       200
  Thomas Dixon                        300
  Jno Drument                          80
  Samll Fowler                        150
  Wm Fleming                          600
  Wido Forginson                      150
  Wm Fockner                          180
  Jno Grymes                         1400
  Susannah Grinley                    200
  Darcas Green                        400
  Jno Grout                           300
  Jno Harper                          100
  Wm Howard                           300
  Richd Hubard                        100
  Wm Hasford                          500
  Jno Hanes                           150
  Alextnder How                       120
  Richd Hill                           70
  Robt Hall                           100
  Richd Hull                          250
  Sanll Hawes                         200
  Stephen Johnson                     150
  Wm Jones for Northington            530
  Glebe Land                          127
  Jno Kingson                         400
  Capt Edwd Lewis                    1000
  Richd Lee Esq                      1140
  Nicho Lewis orphen                  350
  Wm Milner                           900
  Richd Minor                         250
  Edwd Musgrove                       100
  Hayes an orphan                      60
  Elizb Mastin                        360
  Jno Mackwilliams                     50
  Robt Nettles                        300
  Wm Norman                           150
  Isaac Oliver                        100
  Dorothy Oliver                      130
  Jno Pritchett                       850
  Jno Pate                           1100
  Richd Price                         600
  Madm Porteus                        500
  Madm Page                           550
  Pobt Porteus                        892
  Guy Parish                          100
  Wm Roane                            500
  James Reynolls                      200
  George Robinson                     300
  John Royston                        570
  Thomas Read                        2000
  Wm Richards in Pamunkey             150
  Jno Shackelford                     280
  Edward Symons                       500
  Nicho Smith                         280
  John Stubs                          300
  Thomas Sivepson                     280
  John Smith                         1300
  Augustin Smith                      200
  Augustin Smith Junr                 500
  Wm Starbridge                       159
  Wm Thornton Senr                    525
  Wm Thornton Junr                    800
  Wm Thurston                         200
  Wm Upshaw                           490
  Francis Wisdom                      150
  Thomas West                         112
  Thomas Whiting                      450
  George Williams                     100
  Conquest Wyatt                     2200
  Seth Wickins                         50
  Walter Waters                       200
  Jane Wothem                          60
  Robt Yard                           450
  Robt Hall                           250
  Wm Whittmore Desarted               150
  Wm Parsons Orphen                   100
  Edwd Stephens                        70
  John Kelley Orphen                  150
                                    -----
                                    41132

  Tho Neale


Glocester Rent Roll

A Rent Roll of Kingston Parish

  Rose Curtis                         400
  Robt Peyton                         680
  Richd Perrott                        35
  Henry Preston                      1500
  Sarah Green                         200
  Robt Cully                          200
  Thomas Hayes                        140
  Andrew Bell                         128
  Humphry Toy                        1100
  Anne Aldred                         350
  Dunkin Bahannah                     113-1/2
  Richd Hunley                         50
  Capt Gayle                          164
  Math. Gayle Junr                    250
  James Hundley                       100
  John Hundley                        130
  Philip Hundley                      660
  Tho Cray                            200
  Hen. Knight                         240
  John Williams                        50
  Richd Beard                         380
  Timothy Hundley                     300
  Thomas Bedford                       50
  Jno Floyd                           250
  John Bohannah                       113-1/2
  Capt Armistead                     3675
  Christopher Dixon                   300
  Robt Bristow Esqr                   900
  Edwd Gowing                         100
  Tho Ryland                          272
  John Nevill                         100
  Lawrence Parrott                    340
  Wm Brooks                           720
  Joseph Bohannah                     148
  Wm Hampton                          348
  Widdo Green                         150
  Capt Dudley                         650
  Capt. Knowles                       575
  Capt. Tho. Todd                     775
  Wm Beard                            100
  Wm. Tomkins                         100
  Henry Bolton                         50
  Wm Eliott                          1060
  Humphrey Tompkins                   100
  Daniel Hunter                       200
  Thomas Peyton                       684
  Richd Dudley                        350
  James Ransom Junr                   310
  Tho. Peters                          30
  Robt. Elliott                      1247
  Mich. Parriett                      100
  Jno. Meachen Junr                   600
  Caleb Linsey                        140
  Alexandr Ofield                      23
  Mark Thomas                         300
  Jno. Garnet                         250
  Wm. Plumer                          510
  Wm. Brumley                         750
  Wm. Credle                           50
  Charles Jones                       225
  Robt. Sadler                         50
  Edwd Sadler                          20
  Geo Roberts                         170
  Richd Longest                       600
  Tho. Fliping                        300
  Charles Watters                     100
  Wm. Grundy                          200
  Thomas Kemp                         200
  Tho. Allaman                        842
  Coll Kemp                           200
  Ralph Shipley                       430
  George Turner                        50
  Coll. James Ransom                 1400
  Thomas Putman                       300
  Richd Marchant                      180
  Widdo Sinoh                         300
  Christopher Rispue                  200
  Benj. Read                          550
  Walter Keble                        550
  Joseph Brooks                       500
  Capt. Gwin                         1100
  Lindseys Land                       390
  Thomas Garwood                       77
  John Callie                        1000
  Tho. Miggs                          100
  Richd Glascock                      500
  Jno Lylley                          584
  Geo. Billups                       1200
  Robt. Singleton                     650
  James Foster                        225
  John Andrews                         50
  Thomas Rice                          34
  John Martin                         200
  Capt. Smith                         550
  Capt. Sterling                     1100
  John Diggs                         1200
  Wm. Howlett                         300
  Jno. Miller                         100
  Andrew Ripley                        40
  Francis Jarvis                      460
  Wm. Armistead                       300
  John Banister                       650
  Tho. Plumer                         400
  Isaac Plumer                        200
  James Taylor                         50
  Edwd Borum                          360
  Widdo Davis                         300
  Sam. Singleton                      300
  Wm. Morgan Senr                      50
  Wm. Morgan Junr                     200
  John Bacon                          825
  Henry Singleton                     600
  John Edwards                        534
  Patrick Berry                       250
  Anne Forest                         500
                                    -----
                                    46537

  Ambrose Dudley
  1705


Glocester Rent Roll

A Rent Roll in Ware Parish

  Thomas Poole                        600
  Anne Croxson                        300
  Thomas Purnell                      163
  Nocholas Pamplin                    210
  Simon Stubelfield                   200
  Jno. Price                          600
  Saml. Vadrey                        400
  Samll Dawson                        350
  Nathan: Burwell                     600
  John Dawson                         780
  Tho. Bacop                          200
  Robt. Francis                       400
  Walter Greswell                      50
  Tho. Read                           400
  James Shackelfield                   35
  Robt. Freeman                       135
  Jno. Marinex                        100
  Isaac Valine                        100
  Tho. Haywood                         70
  Hugh Marinex                         50
  Leonard Ambrose                     200
  Philip Grady                        200
  Capt. Wm. Debnam                   1250
  James Burton                        100
  Jno. Spinks                         300
  Wm. Hurst                           200
  Sarah More                           67
  John Ray                            100
  Robt. Pryor                         300
  Christo. Greenaway                  270
  Capt. Throgmorton                   500
  James Clark                         250
  Philip Cooper                       200
  Jno. Kindrick                       100
  Samll. Simons                       120
  Wm. Radford                         200
  John Robins                         900
  Alice Bates                         200
  Jno. Easter                         350
  James Davison                       100
  Robt. Morrin                        200
  Anne Bray                           100
  Grace Easter                        200
  Sampson Dorrell                     300
  Capt. Francis Willis               3000
  Thomas Powell                       460
  Wm. Holland                         300
  Capt. Cook                         1500
  Giles Cook                          140
  Wm. Jones                           120
  Tho. Collis                         100
  Philip Smith                        700
  Tho. Cheesman                       650
  Geo. More                            40
  James Morris                        250
  Abraham Iveson Senr.               1000
  Robert Bristow Esqr.               2050
  Anthony Gregory                     700
  Richd. Bailey                       800
  Wm. Foulcher                        100
  Widdo. Jeffes                       216
  Richd. Dudley Junr.                 300
  John Buckner                        900
  Thomas Todd                         884
  John and Peter Waterfield           143
  Henry Whiting                       800
  Madm. Whiting                       950
  Jno. Goodson                        150
  Wm. Morris                          350
  Mary Lassells                       200
  Peter Ransone                       220
  Charles Waters                      200
  Dorothy Kertch                      220
  Dorothy Boswell                    1600
  Richd. Cretendon                    280
  Elizb. Anniers                      250
  Elizb. Snelling                     250
  Joseph Boswell                      230
  John Bullard                        100
  Anthony Elliot                      100
  Wm. Armistead                       100
  Peter Kemp                          650
  Majr. Peter Beverley                800
  Ditto per Tillids Lands             150
  Dudley Jolley                       100
  Robt. Couch                         100
                                    -----
                                    31603


Glocester Rent Roll

A Rent Roll of Abbington Parish

  Mr. Guy Smith                        30
  James Cary                           50
  Wm. Sawyer                          150
  Edwd. Cary                          100
  Robt. Barlow                         62
  Tho. Cleaver Sworne                 200
  Edwd. Stevens                        80
  Henry Stevens                        60
  Chillion White                      100
  Jerimah Holt                        350
  of Ditto for the Widdo Babb         150
  Robt. Yarbborrow                    100
  Robt. Starkey                       100
  Henry Seaton                        170
  Hugh Howard                         200
  Capt. Booker                       1000
  Jno. Stoakes                        300
  Jno. Dobson                         400
  Wm. Dobson                          950
  Edmd. Dobson                        350
  Hugh Allen                         1250
  George Jackson                      117
  Jno. Teagle                          30
  Widdo Jones                          45
  Mary Thomas                         100
  Thomas Seawell                      200
  Benj. Lane                           50
  Valentine Lane                       80
  Jeffry Garves                        33
  Thomas Coleman                      250
  Johanna Austin                       40
  Majr. Burwell                      3300
  Jno. Satterwight                     50
  Jerimiah Holt Junr                  150
  Charles Stevens                      75
  Richd. Roberts for wife             300
  Jno. Sadler                         125
  James Steavens                      100
  Susannah Stubbs                     300
  Richd. Foster                       150
  Henry Mitchell                       50
  Nathanll. Russell                   550
  Elizb. Richardson                   500
  Wm. Camp                            175
  James Row                           300
  John Butler                         100
  John Smith Esqr.                   2000
  Ditto for Robt. Byron               400
  Capt. Blackbourne                   550
  Peter Richeson                      250
  Benja Clements                      500
  Thomas Graves                        70
  Robt. Page                           75
  Joseph More                         150
  Richard Dixon                       200
  Elizb. Turner                       150
  Owen Grathmee                       250
  Richd. Woodfolk                     125
  Jno. Waters                          50
  Wm. Hilliard                         80
  Richd. Heywood                      100
  Mary Hemingway                      150
  Wm. Kemp                             75
  Robt. Francis                       104
  Joshua Broadbent                    200
  Joseph Coleman                      200
  Grustam Clent                       100
  Philip Grady                        150
  Jno. Hall                           125
  Tho. Walker                         300
  Jno. Mixon                          400
  Tho. Sanders                        450
  Wm. Smith for Kittson                50
  John Banister                      2750
  Madm. Mary Page                    3000
  Jno. Lewis Esq.                    2000
                                    -----
                                    28426

  Richd. Cordell
              Ware                  31603
              Petso                 41123
              Kingston              46537
                                   ------
                                   147698


A Perfect Role of the Land in Middlesex County Anno Dom. 1704

  Richard Atwood                      100
  Richard Allin                       150
  Tho. Blewford                       100
  Mrs. Blaiss                         300
  John Bristow                        140
  Robt. Blackley                      100
  Coll Corbin                        2260
  Coll Carter                        1150
  John Cheedle                         50
  Wm. Carter                          170
  Widdo Chaney                        800
  Nath. Cranke                         50
  Tho. Dyatt                          200
  John Davie                           75
  Wm. Daniell                         150
  Robt. Daniell                       225
  Henry Freeman                       200
  John Goodrich                        50
  Geo. Goodloe                         50
  Geo. Guest                           50
  Richd. Gabriell                      30
  Wm. Finley                           50
  Wm. Gardner                         100
  Robt. George                        180
  David George                        150
  Widdo. Hazellwodd                   200
  John Hoare                          100
  Richd. Reynolds                      50
  Jno. Southerne                      100
  Richd. Shurly                       200
  Tho. Hapleton                       200
  Wm. Southworth                       50
  Wm. Jones                           300
  Evan Jones                           50
  Esqr. Wormley Estate               5200
  Wm Churchhill                      1950
  Jacob Briston                       100
  Jno. Pace                           200
  John Logie                          300
  John Price                          519
  Henry Perrott                      1100
  Richd Kemp                         1100
  Tho Kidd                            250
  Francis Weeks                       225
  Widdo Weeks                         225
  Henry Webb                          100
  Tho Wood                             70
  Robt. Williamson                    200
  Tho Lee                             100
  Edmd. Mickleburrough                200
  Valentine Mayo                      100
  Wm. Mountague                       500
  Garrett Minor                       225
  Marvill Mosseley                    225
  Joseph Mitcham                       75
  Minie Minor                         225
  Humphrey Jones                      150
  Jno. North                          200
  Henry Tugill                        200
  Henry Thacker                      1875
  Thomas Tozeley                      500
  Charles Moderas                     100
  Wm. Mullins                         150
  John Smith                          700
  James Smith                         400
  Harry Beverley                     1000
  George Wortham                      400
  Capt. Grimes                        900
  Sarah Mickleborough                1000
  Christo. Robinson                  4000
  John Vibson                         100
  James Daniell                       150
  James Curtis                        300
  Tho. Cranke                          54
  Phil. Calvert                       200
  John Hipkins                        100
  Richd. Daniell                      210
  Geo. Blake                          100
  Edwd Williams                       100
  Pat Mammon                          100
  Alexander Murray                    250
  Poplar Smith                        550
  Olixer Seager                       380
  Edwd Gobbee                          90
  Henry Barnes                        200
  John Davis                          100
  Paul Thilman                        300
  Hugh Watts                           80
  Edwd Clark                          300
  Charles Williams                    100
  Edwin Thacker Estate               2500
  Thomas Dudly                        200
  Thomas Mackhan                      200
  Richd. Paffitt                      200
  Tho. Hiff                           100
  Peter Bromell                       100
  Tho Blakey                          100
  John Robinson                      1350
  Roger Jones                         100
  John Nicholls                       200
  George Berwick                      100
  Widdo Hurford                        50
  Widdo Hackney                       300
  Wm. Kilbee                          600
  Ezikiah Rhodes                      300
  John Handiford                      100
  John Miller                         200
  Wm. Scarborow                       200
  Wm. Herne                            75
  Robt. Dudley                        300
  Widdo Mason                         100
  Peter Chilton                       100
  Francis Dobson                      150
  James Dudley                        200
  Capt. Berkley                       750
  Wm. Sutton                          150
  Sr. Wm. Skipwith                    350
  Coll Kemp                           900
  Wm. Barbee                          150
  Wm. Wallis                          300
  Adam Curtin                         200
  Capt. Wm Armistead                 2325
                                    -----
                                    49008


A True & Perfect Rent Roll of all the Lands held in Essex County this
present year 1704


  Abbott Wm.                          150
  Andrews Geo                         200
  Adcock Edwd                         230
  Adcock Henry                        250
  Acres James                         100
  Arving Wm.                          100
  Allin Erasmus                       100
  Allin Wm.                           100
  Ayres Wm.                           200
  Acres Wm.                           200
                                    -----
                                     1630


  Baulwar James                       800
  Bendall John                        135
  Butler John                         125
  Bowers Arthur                       600
  Baulwar James                       200
  Beesley Wm.                         100
  Barron Andrew                        50
  Bartlett Tho.                       100
  Brown Buskinghan                    400
  Beeswell Robt.                      100
  Beeswell Robt. Junr.                150
  Brown Wm.                           420
  Brown Charles                      1000
  Buckner Richd.                     1200
  Buckner Tho.                       1000
  Brice Henry                         400
  Bourn Jno.                          100
  Beverly Harry                      1000
  Battail John                       1100
  Baulwar John                         50
  Booth Widdo                         800
  Butler Jno.                         100
  Butcher Jno.                        150
  Bendrey Widdo                       700
  Bird Widdo                          100
  Beckham Symon                       100
  Brutnall Richd.                     100
  Brook Robt.                         400
  Ball Jno.                           150
  Brooks James                        100
  Billington Mary                     200
  Brooks Peter                        275
  Bowman Peter                        400
  Brooks Robt.                        150
  Brasur Jno.                         300
  Brush Richd.                        250
  Baker Henry                         350
  Bradburn Richd.                     100
  Brown Francis                       150
  Brown Danll. Junr.                  150
  Bryom Henry                         100
  Burnett Tho. Junr.                 1000
  Baughan James Senr.                 600
  Baughan James                       150
  Baughan Henry                       100
  Brown Danll. Senr.                  450
  Brown Tho.                           50
  Blackiston Argail                   200
  Burnett John                        365
  Burnett Tho. Junr.                  130
  Bailer Jno.                         800
  Brakins Qrtr.                       250
  Bell Thomas                         100
                                    -----
                                    19980


  Condute Nathll.                      20
  Cary Hugh                            50
  Connoly Edwd.                       200
  Cogwell Fredirick                   250
  Copland Nicho.                      300
  Cattlett Jno.                      1800
  Covengton Richd.                   1000
  Cook John                           112
  Chew Larkin                         300
  Crow Tho.                           300
  Covington Wm.                       400
  Cheney John                         200
  Cole Wm.                            200
  Cheney Wm.                          700
  Corbin Tho. Qr                      440
  Cockin Tho.                         120
  Coates Samll                        300
  Cooper Richd.                       100
  Cooper Tho.                         100
  Copland Jno.                        175
  Crow Jno.                           440
  Chew Larkin                         550
  Cooper Wm.                           50
  Compton Wm.                          50
  Cox Wm.                             500
  Callaway Jos.                        87
  Coleman Robt.                       450
  Cobnall Symon                       100
  Chamberlain Leond.                  350
                                    -----
                                     9764


  Daniell James                       100
  Devillard Jacob                      80
  David Tho.                          150
  Dudding Andrew                      230
  Davis Evans                         150
  Dobbins Danll.                      550
  Dressall Timo.                      175
  Daughty John                        200
  Dyer Wm.                            100
  Daingerfield Jno.                   270
  Daingerfield Wm.                    270
  Dunn Wm.                            220
  Dyer Jeffrey                        100
  Day Richd.                          100
  Dicks Thomas                        500
                                    -----
                                    12959


  Evans Rice                          200
  Edmondson James                     500
  Elliott Alice                        75
  Evitt Tho.                          100
  Emondson Tho.                       700
  Flowers Isaac                       250
  Faulkner Nicho.                     100
  Farrell Charles                      50
  Franklin Nicho.                     130
  Foster Robt.                        200
  Foster Jno.                         200
  Fisher Jonathan                     250
  Fisher Benja.                       150
  Frank Tho.                          175
  Fullerton James                     400
  Fossett Wm.                         100
  Ferguson Jno.                       150
  Faulkner Edwd.                      530
                                    -----
                                    17219


  Green George                        300
  Gray Abner                          350
  Goulding Wm.                        200
  Gannock Wm.                        2100
  Gaines Barnerd                      450
  Griffin Tho.                        200
  Gibson Jonathan                     700
  Grigson Tho.                        300
  Gouldman Francis                    300
  Goulding John                       200
  Goulding Edwd.                      380
  Good Richd.                         200
  Garnett John                        150
  Glover John                         100
  Hawkins John                       1066
  Hinshaw Samll.                      200
  Hutson Tho.                         100
  Harrison James                      400
  Harrison Andrew                     300
  Hilliard Thomas                     100
  Harper Wm.                          240
  Harmon Henry                         75
  Hoult Richd.                        100
  Humphrie Joe                        100
  Hail Jno.                           900
  Harper John                         748
  Harper Tho.                         350
  Hould David                         100
  Hudson Wm.                          100
  Hinds Thomas                        100
  Howerton Thomas                     175
  Hodges Arth                         100
  Hows Qrtr                           300
  Harwood Peter                       125
  Harway Tho.                        1000
  Hudson Tho.                          50
  Hudson Wm.                          300
  Hill Leond.                         300
  Harwar Samll.                       300
  Jamison David                       250
  Jones Wm.                           165
  Jenkins David                        50
  Jewell Tho.                         100
  Johnson Widdo.                      300
  Jones Walter                        100
  Johnson Richd.                       50
  Johnson Wm.                         650
  Jones John                          300
  Jones Richd.                        350
  Jenkins John                         93
  Jones Wm.                           300
  Journey Wm.                         243
  Johnson Thomas                      500
  Jones Rice                          500
  Key Robt.                           209
  Kerby Henry                          60
  Landrum John                        300
  Landrum James                       100
  Long Richd.                         300
  Lomax John                         2000
  Loyd George                         800
  Lawson Claudy                       100
  Little Abraham                       60
  Lacy John                           100
  Law John                            300
  Lattaine Lewis                      250
  Leveritt Robt.                      100
  Micou Paul                           15
  Martin John                         400
  Morgain John                        100
  Miller John                         150
  Medor Tho.                          300
  Moseley Benja.                     1100
  Mottley John                        100
  Morris John                         200
  Moss Robt.                          180
  Merritt Tho.                        124
  Merritt John                        100
  Munday Tho.                         500
  Magcon David                        400
  Mice Hno.                           200
  Mosseley Robt.                      100
  Mayfield Robt.                      100
  Matthews Richd.                     250
  Moseley Edwd.                       550
  Merriweather Francis               3200
  Mefflin Zach                        400
  Michaell Jno.                       200
  Merriweather Tho.                  2100
  Mefflin Lath                        400
  Medor John                          100
  Morse John                          400
  Matthews Benja.                     200
  Mountegue Wm.                       850
  Newbury Nathll.                     200
  Nixson Henry                        500
  North Wm                            900
  Newton Nicho.                       100
  Nightingall John                    100
  Osman James                         300
  Presser John                        450
  Poe Samll.                          800
  Pley Widdo.                         800
  Parker Jno.                         250
  Pitts Jon.                          200
  Piskell Jno.                        300
  Pain Jno.                           135
  Price Wm.                           100
  Peteras Tho.                        200
  Powell Honor                         72
  Powell Wm.                           72
  Powell Place                         72
  Powell Tho.                          72
  Payne Widdow                       1000
  Perkin Henry                        300
  Prichett Roger                      167
  Paggett Edmd.                       700
  Price John                         1100
  Pickett John                        800
  Perry Samll.                        225
  Price Wm.                           100
  Quarter Xtpher Robinson            2200
  Quartr Tho. Corbin                 4000
  Qrtr Robt. Thomas                   200
  Quartr John Hay                    1000
  Quartr Wm. Smith                   3000
  Quartr Gawen Corbin                2000
  Quartr Peter Ransom                 300
  Quartr David Gwin                   950
  Quartr Wm. Upshaw                  1000
  Quartr Leversons                    600
  Quartr Tho Todd                     550
  Ridgdall John                       300
  Ramsey Tho.                         550
  Rowze Ralph                         610
  Rucker Peter                        500
  Rowze Edwd.                         300
  Royston John                       1000
  Roberts Edmd.                       300
  Rebs Henry                          400
  Reeves Joseph                       200
  Reeves James                        200
  Roberts John                         50
  Richardson Robt.                    200
  Reynolds James Senr.                500
  Reynolds James                      500
  Ransom Peter                       1200
  Strange Jno.                        100
  Stepp Abra.                         390
  Samll. Antho.                       300
  Sail Cornelius                       73
  Salmon John                          60
  Spiers Jno.                         160
  Smith Wm.                           150
  Stokes Richd.                       500
  Smith Charles                      3000
  Sullenger Peter                     400
  Sales Widdo                        1150
  Shipley Jno.                        200
  Spearman Job                        300
  Smith Francis                       500
  Stallard Samll.                     100
  Ship Jos                            350
  Short Tho.                          150
  Scott Wm.                          1100
  Stogell Jno.                        100
  Stephens Jno.                       100
  Slaughter Phebe                     352
  Smith Jno.                           75
  Smith Jonas                         100
  Sanders John                        300
  Stanton Jno.                         95
  Shepherd Jeremiah                   300
  Smith Tho.                           50
  Shackelford Francis                 300
  Sthrashley Tho                      200
  Staners Tho                         500
  Snead Tho                           950
  Shackelford Henry                    50
  Thorp Widdo                         400
  Tinsley Tho.                        111
  Thacker Samll.                      110
  Tomlin Widdo                        400
  Taliaferro Francis                 1300
  Thornton Fran.                      700
  Tomlin Wm.                         1600
  Thomas John                         100
  Taliaferro Charles                  300
  Thomas Wm.                          200
  Taliaferro John                    2000
  Turner George                       200
  Tomlin Wm                           950
  Trible Peter                        100
  Taylor Richd.                       650
  Tilley Matthew                      200
  Vanters Bartho                      400
  Virget Job                           50
  Vincent Vaus                        450
  Wakeland Wm.                        100
  Wood Tho.                            50
  Winslow Tho.                        150
  Winslow Henry                       100
  Williams John                       450
  Williams Wm.                        100
  Wilson David                         50
  Wilton Richd.                       150
  Wheeden Edwd.                        50
  Ward Widdo.                         200
  Whitehorn Widdo.                    260
  Wms. Emanuell                       100
  Watkins Thomas                      400
  Waters John                         150
  Webb James                          200
  Webb John                           200
  Wead Wm.                            200
  Wood Tho                            300
  Williamson Tho                      100
  Williamson Wm.                      100
  Williamson John                     100
  Webb Robert                         375
  Webb Isaac                          200
  Woodnatt Henry                      300
  Waginer John                        400
  Ward Geo.                           350
  Wheeler Tho                         250
  Young Wm.                          1000
  Young Giles                         100
  Muscoe Salvator                     100
  Moody John                          150
  Maguffe John                        100
  Brookins Quartr.                    250
  Smith Jno. Quartr                  1000
  Newton Henry                        100
  Newton Henry                        175
  Nowell Dall                         400
  Nowell Widdo                        300
  Garrett Tho                        1000
  Gould Price                         200
  Green Samll.                         97
  Gouldman Fran.                      300
  Gawdin Wm.                          100
  Grimmall Wm.                        100
  Gaitwood John                       400
  Games John                          475
  Samll. Thompson                    1000
                                   ------
                                   140580

  Lands held in the above said County the Rents not paid and held by
    the severall Gentlemen as followth vizt.

  John Smith Esqr. of Glocester
    County                            800
  Wm. Buckner of Glocester
    by information                   1500
  Jno. Lightfoot Esqr. New
    Kent County                       900
  Jno. Bridgate in Engld              700
  Richd. Wyatt & Jno. Pettus
    of King & Queen Cty               800
  Wm. Berry of Richmond County        400

  Richard Covington


Accomack Rent Roll


  A

  Alexander Richards                  150
  Arthur Upshot                      2020
  Antho. West                         700
  Ann Simkins                        1000
  Arthur Donas                        100
  Arnoll Harrison                     630
  Alex. Harrison                      400
  Alex. Bagwell                       413
  Anne Chase                          200
  Arthur Frame                        500
  Alexdr West                         550
  Abraham Lambedson                   100
  Alex Benstone                       270
  Anne Blake Widdo.                   120
  Anne Bruxe                          180
  Ar. Arcade Welburn                 1854
                                    -----
                                     9187


  B

  Burnell Niblett                     100
  Majr. Bennit Scarbrough             521
                                    -----
                                      621


  C

  Corneline Hermon                    321
  Christo Stokly                      200
  Charles Scarbrough                 1000
  Charles Leatherbeny                1100
  Charles Bally                       959-1/2
  Charles Pywell                      150
  Churchhil Darby                     125
  Charles Evill                       550
  Charles Champison                   270
  Christo Hodey                       500
  Cornelius Lofton                    166
  Charles Stockley                    170
  Charles Taylor                      580
  Catherine Gland                     217
                                    -----
                                     6312-1/2


  D

  Dorman Derby                        225
  Daniell Derby Senr.                 300
  Dorothy Littlehouse                 250
  David Watson                        200
  Delight Shield                      300
  Daniel Derby Junr.                  125
  Daniel Harwood                      100
  Dennis Mores                        200
  Daniel Gore                        3976
                                    -----
                                     5676


  E

  Coll Edmd Scarbrough               2000
  Edwd Hitchins                       170
  Edwd Turner                         750
  Edwd Killam                         720
  Edmd Allin                          200
  Edwd Bagwell for Coll Wm. Custis    200
  Edmd. Jones                         800
  Elizb. Tinley                       200
  Edwd Taylor                         300
  Edmd Tatham                         200
  Edmd Bally                          800
  Edmd Ayres                         1000
  Edwd. Miles                         413
  Elizb. Mellchop                     210
  Edwd. Bell                          101
  Edwd. More                          500
  Edwd. Gunter                        600
  Edwd Brotherton                     600
  Elias Blake                         430
  Edwd Robins                         782
  Edwd Bally                          300
  Elias Taylor                       1500
  Elizb. Wharton                      200
  Mrs. Elizb Scarbrough              4205
                                    -----
                                    17181


  F

  Mr. Francis Mackenny               5109
  Francis Robts.                      200
  Francis Wainhouse                   700
  Francis Crofton                     200
  Francis Young                       100
  Finley MackWm                       100
  Francis Ayres                       300
  Francis Jester                      200
  Francis Benstone                    400
  Francis Wharton                     600
                                    -----
                                     7909


  G

  Geo. Anthony                        100
  Geo. Hastup                         300
  Coll Geo Nicho Halk                2700
  Capt. Geo Parker                   2609
  Gervis Baggally                     700
  Garrat Hictlims                     170
  Geo Parker Sco. Side               1200
  Griffin Savage                      650
  Geo Middleton Senr.                 588
  Geo Trevit                          400
  Geo. Pounce                         400
  Geo Middleton Junr.                 150
  Geo Johnson                         200
  Capt. Geo Hope                      900
                                    -----
                                    11067


  H

  Henry Armtrading                    175
  Henry Chance                        445
  Henry Selman                        180
  Henry Ubankes                       400
  Henry Lurton                        363
  Henry Stokes                        208
  Henry Custis                        774
  Henry Bagwell                       412
  Henry Read                          350
  Henry Ayres                         250
  Hill Drummond                       483
  Henry Toules                        300
  Henry Hickman                       135
  Henry Gibbins                       250
  Henry Truett                        240
                                    -----
                                     4965


  J

  John Tounson                        200
  Joseph Stokley                      664
  Jno. Read                           200
  Jno. Blake                          310
  Joseph Ames                         375
  Joseph Clark                        200
  Jno. Fisher                         200
  James Gray                          900
  Jno. Huffington                     240
  Jno. Legatt                         300
  James Lary                          100
  James Longoe                        200
  Jno. Merrey                         350
  Jno Milloy                          500
  Jno. Pratt                           50
  Jno. Revell                        1450
  Jno Road                            110
  Jno. Rowles                         650
  Jno. Savage Senr                    350
  Jno Charles                         480
  Jno Willis Senr                     430
  Jno Willis Junr                     350
  James Fairfax                       900
  Joseph Milby                        830
  John West Junr                      500
  Jno Jenkins                         400
  Jonathan James                      150
  John Rodgers                        100
  Jno Collins                         100
  Jno Sincocke                        125
  Jno Metcalfe,
    Isaac Metcalfe
    and Samll. Metcalfe               600
  Joseph Touser                       200
  Jno Stanton                         200
  Jno Bally                          1000
                                    -----
                                    13715

  Jno Melson                          180
  Jno Bernes Senr                     657
  Jno Littletone                      200
  John Nock                           300
  Jno Killy                           100
  Jacob Morris                        200
  Jno Morris                          640
  Jona. Aylworth                      200
  James Davis                        1000
  Jno Parkes                          200
  Jno Evans                           200
  Jno Hull                            100
  Jno Blocksom                        700
  Jno Abbott                         1170
  Jno Arew                            234
  Jno Grey                            116
  Jno Baker                           400
  Jno Wharton                         150
  James Taylor                        100
  Jno Glading                         207
  Jno Loftland                        167
  James Smith                         756
  Majr Jno Robins                    2700
  Jno Collins for Asban              1666
  James Walker                        525
  Jno Whelton                          90
  Jno Marshall                       1666
  Jona Owen                           230
  Jacob Wagaman                       150
  Capt John Broadhurst               1100
  Jno Dyer                            200
  Mr. John Watts                     2450
  Jno Booth                           300
  John Bradford                       364
  Ingold Cobb                         150
  Jno Griffin                         150
  Jno Mitchell                        400
  John Parker                         970
  James Alexander                    1250
  Jno Burocke                         200
  James Sterferar                      50
  Jno Perry                           217
  Jno Drummond                       1550
  Jno Carter on Foxs Island           203
  Jno Warington                       100
  Jno Bagwell                         465
  Jno Wise Senr                       800
  Jno Wise Junr                       400
  Jno Dix                             500
  Isaac Dix                           500
  Jno Hickman                         454
  Jno Onians                          200
  Coll Jno Custis Esqr               5950
  John Coslin                          50
                                    -----
                                    46692


  M

  Michaell Recetts                    300
  Mrs. Mattilda West                 3600
  Marke Evell                         250
  Mary Wright                         200
                                    -----
                                     4350


  N

  Nicholas Mellchops                  285
  Nathaniel, Williams                  64
  Nathaniell Rattcliff                300
                                    -----
                                      649


  O

  Owen Collonell                      500
  Overton Mackwilliams                200
  Obedience Pettman                   115
                                    -----
                                      815


  P

  Peter Major                         113
  Philip Parker                       150
  Peter Rogers                        167
  Perry Leatherbury                  1750
  Peter Turlington                     79
  Peter Ease                          250
  Philip Fisher                       433
  Peter Chawell                       250
                                    -----
                                     3192


  R

  Robt. Bell                          650
  Richd Bally Senr.                  2100
  Richd Bally Junr                    180
  Richd Garrison                      468
  Roules Major                        157
  Rouland Savage Senr                 950
  Robt. Taylor                         95
  Richd. Rodgers                      450
  Richd Killam                       1900
  Robt. Wattson                       425
  Richd Jones                         500
  Robt. Hutchinson                    934
  Reynold Badger                      150
  Robt. West                          400
  Richd Cuttler                       450
  Robt. Cole                          125
  Richd Drummond                      600
  Robt. Stocomb                       300
  Robt Norton                        1050
  Richd Grindall                      350
  Roger Hickman                       135
  Robt Lewis                          200
  Roger Abbott                        450
  Richard Hill                        350
  Ralph Justice                      1050
  Richd Hinman                       1800
  Robt Davis                          384
  Ragnall Aryes                       300
  Roger Miles                         200
  Richd Bundike                       773
  Richd Kittson                      1300
  Robt. Bally                         100
  Richd Starlin                       150
  Richd Flowers                       200
  Richd Price                         100
  Robt. Pitts                        2300
  Robt Adkins                         200
  Rebeckha Benstone                   270
  Richd Hillayres                     300
                                    -----
                                    22816


  S

  Samuell Benstone                    300
  Sarah Beach                         300
  Sillvanus Cole                      250
  Symon Sosque                        325
  South Littleton Widdo              2870
  Stephen Woltham                     244
  Steph. Warrington                   400
  Symon Mitchell                      300
  Stephen Drummond                    300
  Selby Harrison                       50
  Sollomon Evell                      125
  Samll Young                          50
  Sarah Reyley                        150
  Sebastian Dellistations Senr        500
  Sebastian Dellistations Junr        400
  Skinner Wollope                    2485
  Samll. Sandford                    3250
  Sebastian Silverthorn               150
  Symon Smith                         200
  Sarah Coe                           900
  Samll Taylor                       1232
  Sarah Evins                         150
  Sebastian Croper                    600
  Samuell Jester                      200
                                    -----
                                    15731


  T

  Tho Burton                          600
  Tho Bud                             500
  Tho Boules                          300
  Tho Clark                           100
  Tho Middleton                       350
  Tho Stringer                        600
  Tho Haule                           500
  Tho Taylor                          100
  Tho Fockes                          300
  Tho Bagwell                         465
  Madm Tabitha Hill                  3600
  Tho Rose                              7
  Tho Webb                             50
  Tho Savage                          450
  Tho Jones                           100
  Tho Scott                           100
  Tho Reyley                          225
  Tho Ternall                         150
  Tho Simpson                         520
  Tho Coper                           711
  Tho Miles                           202
  Thomas Bonwell                      300
  Tho Bell Senr.                      100
  The Bell Junr                       100
  Tho Touson Kiquotan                 800
  Tho Stockley                        363
  Tho Jester                          100
  Tho Smith                           300
  Thomas Crippin                      648
  Tho Wilkinson                        50
  Tho Jenkinson                       374
  Tho Moore                           166
  Tho Allen                           700
  Tho Smith Savannah                  200
  Tho Perry                           232
  Tho Tonnson                         400
  Tho Smith Gingateague               693
  Lieut Coll Robinson                 600
                                    -----
                                    15956


  W

  Wm. Robins                          200
  Wm Patterson                        200
  Wm Bevens                           400
  Wm Matthews                         400
  Wm Shepherd                         200
  Wm Whett                            400
  Winfred Woodland                    333
  Wm Andrews                          300
  Wm Custis                          1500
  Wm Darby                             83
  Wm Fletcher                         200
  Wm Killam                           450
  Wm Lingoe                           300
  Wm Major                            130
  Wm Meeres                           150
  Wm Mack Sear                        800
  Wm Savage                           150
  Wm Waite                            110
  Wm Sill                             200
  Wm Waite Junr                       600
  Wm Bradford                        3500
  Wm Rogers                           200
  Wm Wise                             400
  Wm Finey                            800
  Wm Consalvins                       100
  Wm Phillips                         200
  Wm Parker                           362
  Wm Cole                             375
  Wm Merill                           150
  Wm Johnson                          150
  Wm Lewis                            150
  Walter Hayes                        130
  Wm Chance                           450
  Wm Milby                            250
  Wm Nicholson                        600
  Wm Burton                           500
  Wm Willett                          842
  Wm Hudson                           270
  Wm Lewis                            300
  Wm Young                            144
  Wm Liechfield                       154
  Wm Bunting                          150
  Wm Nock Junr                        400
  Wm Lucas                            300
  Mary Mellechop                      498
  Wm Daniell                          200
  Wm Silverthorn                      160
  Wm Garman                           475
  Wm White                            600
  Wm Broadwater                       500
  Wm Taylor                           100
  Wm Williamson                       600
  Wm Brittingham                      538
  Wm. Benstone Jun.                   270
  Wm Dickson for Mr. Littleton       1050
  Wm Waite Senr                       225
  Wm Taylor                          1400
                                    -----
                                    24599

                                   196899-1/2

  Added to this Rent Roll the following Lands of which the Quit Rents
    may possibly be recovered tho the Owners live out of the Country
    Viz.

  Jonas Jackson                       500
  Robt. Andrews                       500
  Joseph Morris                       200
  Robt. Meros                         200
  Hillory Stringer                    950
  Tho Fisher                          133
  Jno Fisher                          133
  Timo Coe                           4100
  David Hagard                        130
                                    -----
                                     6846

  An Account of what Land in Accomack County the owners whereof are not
    dwellers.

  Tho Preson of Northampton           200
  Geo Corbin Ditto                    150
  Joshua Fichett Ditto                200
  Alexdr Merey Maryld                 200
  Tho Dent                            500
  Mr. Wm Kendalls orphans
    of Northampton County            2850
  Mr Hancock Lee dividing Creeks     4050
  Richd Watters in Maryland          1057
  Francis Lailor Northamp             100
  Obedience Johnson Qtrs              300
  Henry Smith at the Southerd        1000
  Grattiance Michell North            200
  Matt. Tyson Southerd                300
  Teagle Woltham Maryld               200
  Peter Waltham New Engld             200
  Jno Waltham Maryld                  200
                                    -----
                                    11707

  Jno Wise Sheriff


The Rent Roll of Northampton County for the Year of our Lord God 1704


  A

  Andrews Robt.                       300
  Andrews Andrew                      100
  Addison John                        350
  Abdell Tho                          125
  Abdell Jno                          200
  Abdell Wm                           125
  Alligood John                       300
  Angell James                        100
  Alligood Henry                      100


  B

  Bullock Geo                         100
  Boner Geo                           150
  Brown Tho                          1862
  Benthall Joseph Senr                793
  Benthall Joseph Junr                150
  Branson Francis                     100
  Bateson                             200
  Billot Jno                          400
  Bell Geo                            400
  Billott Wm                          100
  Brewer Jno                           50
  Blackson Jno                        100
  Brooks Jeane                        100
  Beadwine Jno                        200
  Berthall Danll                      258
  Baker John                          400
  Brickhouse Geo                     2100


  C

  Cob Samll                           130
  Coape Wm                            200
  Custis Jno Coll                    3400
  Collier Bartho.                     150
  Carpenter Charles                   240
  Cox Jno                             500
  Church Samll                        143
  Cleg Jno. Senr                      204
  Clog Henry                          204
  Carvy Richd                         100
  Cowdry Josiah                       167
  Cormeck Mich                        100
  Clerk Jno                           100
  Corban Geo                          250
  Clerk Geo                           833
  Caple Nath                          100
  Callinett Jno                       100
  Crew John                           300
  Costin Francis                      275
  Custis Majr John                   3250
  Custis Hancock                       50
  Chick Tho.                          100


  D

  Downing Jno.                         70
  Dewy Geo                            300
  Dewy Jacob                          100
  Delby Margery                       450
  Dowty Rowland                       150
  Dunton John                         170
  Dunton Tho                          400
  Dowman John                         100
  Dullock John                        100
  Denton Tho                          400
  Dunton Tho Junr                     120
  Dunton Wm                           420
  Dunton Benj                         220
  Duparks Tho                          90
  Davis Jno                           850
  Dunton Joseph                       120
  Dixon Michaell                      460


  E

  Eshon Jno                           600
  Evans John                          200
  Edmunds David                       500
  Evans Tho                           300
  Esdoll Geo                          100
  Eyres Tho                          1133
  Eyres Nich                          325
  Eyres Capt Jno                      774
  Eyres Anne Wido.                    733
  Esdoll Edwd.                        100


  F

  Fisher John                         637-1/2
  Francisco Dan                       150
  Fisher Tho                          637-1/2
  Foster Robt.                        150
  Fabin Paul                           60
  Frost Tho                           100
  Frank Jno                           500
  Floyd Charles                       378
  Freshwater Geo                      200
  Frizell Geo                         140
  Freshwater Wm                       200
  Fitchett Joshua                     100
  Floyd Berry & Matthew               555


  G

  Gogni David                         150
  Gill Robt.                          200
  Gascoyne Robt.                      125
  Gascoyne Wm                         525
  Greene Jno Senr                    2200
  Giddens Tho                         227
  Grice Peter                         200
  Godwin Devorix                      600
  Goffogan Tho                        100
  Guelding Charles                    200
  Griffith Jerimiah                   345
  Griffith Benja                      200


  H

  Hill Francis                        100
  Henderson John                      250
  Haggaman Isaac                      750
  Harmonson Jno                      1600
  Harmonson Henry                    1250
  Hanby Charles                        25
  Hanby Richd                          75
  Hanby Danll                          50
  Hanby John                          150
  Harmonson Capt Wm                   308
  Harmonson Geo                      1586
  Harmonson Tho                       400
  Hawkins Jno Senr                     66
  Hawkins Jno Junr                     66
  Hawkins Gideon                       66
  Hunto Groton                        485
  Hunt John                           440
  Hunt Tho                            290
  Hall Francis Widdo                  340


  J

  Johnson John Senr                   250
  Johnson John Junr                   100
  Johnson Jacob                       350
  Isaacs John Jnr                     100
  Joynes Major                        150
  James Joan Widdo                    250
  Johnson Obedience Capt              400
  Johnson Tho Junr                     75
  Johnson Thomas Senr                 400
  Jackson Jonah & John                625
  Joynes Edmd                         200
  Joynes Edwd                         200
  Johnson Jeptha Senr                  50
  Jacob Phillip Senr                  350
  Johnson Jepha Junr                  200
  Johnson Obedience & Jepha Sen       250
  Johnson Edmd                        400
  Jacob Richd                         200
  Jacob Abraham                        50


  K

  Kendall Wm                         2410
  Knight John                         100


  L

  Lawrence John                       120
  Lailler Luke                        100
  Lucas Tho                           100
  Lewis Robt                          100
  Littleton Susannah Wido            4050
  Luke John                           400


  M

  Marshall Geo                        250
  Farshall Jno                        250
  Maddox Tho                         1500
  Michaell Yeardly                    400
  Matthews John                       275
  Major John                          390
  Map John                             50
  Moore Matthew                       175
  Mackmellion Tho                     300
  More Gilbert                        225
  Morraine John                       119-1/2
  More Jno                            545
  More Eliner                         175


  N

  Nicholson Wm                        600
  Nottingham Wm                       150
  Nottingham Joseph                   150
  Nottingham Richd                    350
  Nottingham Benja                    300
  Nelson John                         100


  O

  Only Clement                        200
  Odear John                          100


  P

  Parramore Tho                       400
  Preson Tho                          610
  Powell Frances Widdo               1225
  Palmer Samll                       1562
  Pyke Henry                          150
  Powell John                         636-1/3
  Pittett Tho                         300
  Pittet Justian                      200
  Pittett John                        275
  Powell Samll                        200
  Paine Daniell                       150
  Piggott Ralph                      1368


  R

  Read Thomas                         150
  Rascow Arthur                       100
  Ronan Wm                            150
  Roberts Jno                         200
  Richards Lettis                     150
  Robins Jno Majr                    1180
  Robins Littleton                   1000
  Rabishaw Wm                          55
  Roberts Obedience                   260
  Robinson Benjamin                   250


  S

  Shepherd Jno                        200
  Smith Joseph                        250
  Smith Samll                         150
  Smith Jno                           200
  Savage Tho                          450
  Smith Tho                           400
  Smith Abrah                         300
  Seady Antho                         120
  Sott Widdo                          750
  Smith Richd minor                   300
  Scot Geo                            100
  Smith Richd                          99
  Scot Jno                            100
  Scott Henry                         800
  Scot David                          300
  Smith Peter                         450
  Sanders Richd                       100
  Smaro John                          800
  Shepherd Tho                        140
  Sanders Eustick                     100
  Sanderson John                      636
  Savidge John                        410
  Stringer Hillary                   1250
  Savidge Capt Tho                   1600
  Savidge Elkington                   750
  Scot Wm Senr                        153
  Straton Benja                       745
  Smith Geo                           133
  Stockley Jno Senr                   370
  Shepheard Widdo                     830
  Seamore John                        200


  T

  Tilney John                         350
  Tryfort Barth                       147
  Teague Simeon                       100
  Turner Richd                         50
  Teague Tho                          200
  Tankard Wm                          450
  Tanner Paul                         148


  W

  Webb Henry                          100
  Wills Thorn                         300
  White John                          400
  Wilson Tho                          250
  Westerhouse Adryan Senr             200
  Walker John                         300
  Ward Tho                            120
  Walter John                         400
  Waterfield Wm                       200
  Warren John                         525
  Warren Argoll                       350
  Widgeon Robt                        100
  Wilkins Jno                         150
  Webb Edwd                           200
  Wilcock Jno                         200
  Warren James                         50
  Waterson Wm                         855
  Warren Robt.                        190
  Water Lieut-Coll Wm                 700
  Webb Charles                        133-1/4
  Willett Wms                        2650
  Waterson Richd                      150
  Wilkins Argoll                      150
  Walter Elizb Widdo                  100
  Warren Joseph                        50
                                    -----
                                    99671

  Lands not paid for vizt

  Gleab formerly Capt Foxcrofts      1500
  John Majr at Occahannock            200
  Hogbin not being in Virginia        100
  Tho Smith                           300
  Tho Marshall orphan                  75
  Jno Rews not in Virginia            100
                                    -----
                                     2275

  The total on the other side is    99671 acres
  Added to it ye Glebe land          1500
                                   ------
                                   101171 acres


The preceding Sheets are true copys of the Rentrolls for the year 1704
given in and accounted for by the several Sherifs in April 1705 and
sworne to before his Excellcy according to which they made up their
accounts of the Quitrents with

  Will Robertson Clerk.




_INDEX_




INDEX


  Accomac,
    farms and tithables of, 58; 79.

  Allen, Arthur,
    six tithables, 57.

  Allen, William,
    _Burgess_ in 1629, 73.

  Allerton, Isaac,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Ambrose, Robert,
    deals in servants, 49.

  Anbury, Major,
    describes Virginia upper class, 158.

  Andros, Sir Edmund, 29; 35; 52;
    hesitates to deprive wealthy of land holdings, 143-144.

  Archer, George,
    deals in servants, 49;
    extensive landowner, 79.

  Armetrading, Henry, 79.

  Artisans,
    became planters in Virginia, 27;
    called for in broadside of 1610, 28;
    on the plantations, 156-157.

  Ashton, Peter,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Austin, James,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Avery, Richard,
    his cattle, 101;
    inventory of, 106.


  Bacon Nathaniel, Sr., 109; 110.

  Bacon, Nathaniel, Jr.,
    describes poverty in Virginia, 91;
    rebellion of and _Navigation Acts_, 92-93;
    says peoples hoped in _Burgesses_, 109; 113.

  Baker, John,
    buys _Button's Ridge_, 49.

  Baldwin, William,
    landowner, 79.

  Ballard, Thomas, 109.

  Ball, William,
    has 22 slaves.

  Baltic,
    English trade of, 8;
    Denmark controls entrance to, 9;
    wars endanger trade to, 9;
    cheap labor of, 16; 17;
    tobacco trade to, 118-119;
    trade to injured by wars, 131, 148.

  Banister, John,
    has 88 slaves, 158.

  Barbadoes,
    complain of _Navigation Acts_, 94.

  Barnett, Thomas,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1629, 74.

  Bassett, William,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Beer, George Lewis,
    defends _Navigation Acts_, 86-87;
    says trade restrictions did not cause _Bacon's Rebellion_, 92;
    statement of concerning county grievances, 93;
    denies that serious opposition existed to _Navigation Acts_, 93-94.

  Bell, Richard,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Bennett, Richard,
    estate of described, 108.

  Bennett, Samuel,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Berkeley, John,
    conducts iron works in Virginia, 18.

  Berkeley, Lord John, 90.

  Berkeley, Sir William,
    describes servants, 34;
    describes early mortality among servants, 39;
    estimates servants at 6,000 in 1671, 41;
    instructed to prohibit foreign trade, 69;
    permits foreign trade during _Civil War_, 69;
    calls Virginia land of opportunity, 75;
    proclaims Charles II, 84, 111; 89;
    describes poverty of Virginia, 90, 91, 92, 93;
    controls Assembly, 94;
    goes to England to combat _Navigation Acts_, 94-95;
    plans to establish manufactures, 95;
    denounces _Navigation Acts_, 95-96; 98;
    secures body guard, 111;
    elected Governor prior to Restoration, 112;
    fears King's resentment, 113;
    small planters turn against in _Bacon's Rebellion_, 113;
    estimates slaves at 2,000 in 1670, 124; 125; 160.

  Beverley, Robert, Sr.,
    extensive dealer in servants, 48, 109; 113.

  Beverley, Robert, Jr., 61;
     imports slaves, 130;
    describes pride of poor whites, 155.

  Bibbie, Edmund,
    deals in servants, 49.

  Binns, Thomas,
    eight tithables, 57.

  Bishop, John,
    _Burgess_ and landowner, 78.

  Blackstone, John,
    patents land, 74.

  Bland, John,
    remonstrates against _Navigation Acts_, 88-89; 93.

  Blair, Rev. John,
    asks funds for college, 50, 136.

  Blewit, Capt.,
    sets up iron works in Virginia, dies, 181.

  Board of Trade,
    arrears of quit rents reported to, 51;
    _Nicholson_ writes to concerning rent roll, 52;
    says servants not slaves, 60;
    _Berkeley_ protests to, 95, 119;
    asks reasons for emigration of _Virginia_ whites, 140;
    seeks to limit size of land grants, 143;
    again alarmed at emigration from Virginia, 145, 147, 157.

  Bolling, Mrs. Mary,
    has 51 slaves, 158.

  Brent, Giles,
    deals in servants, 48; 109; 113.

  Bridger, Joseph,
    deals in servants, 48; 109.

  Briggs, Gray,
    has 43 slaves, 158.

  British Empire,
    beginnings of misunderstood, 14;
    begun, 19;
    important rôle of tobacco in, 27.

  Broadnat, John, 128.

  Broadside,
    in 1610 calls for settlers for Virginia, 28.

  Browne, Robert,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Browne, William,
    nine tithables, 57.

  Bruce, Philip Alexander,
    describes small planters, 54.

  Brunswick,
    land patents in small, 145.

  Bullock, William,
    denies that servants are slaves, 60.

  Burgesses, 54,
    petition King, 65;
    complain of high freight rates, 72;
    freedmen among, 73-75;
    _Navigation Acts_ and, 94-95;
    represent interest of small planters, 109;
    defy the king, 110;
    petition of, 110;
    rule Virginia, 1652-1660, 112;
    growing influence of, 109.

  Burwell, Francis,
    patents land in _James City_, 77.

  Burwell, John,
    has 42 slaves, 158.

  Burwell, Lewis,
    deals in servants, 48; 109.

  Burcher, William,
    patents land, 79.

  Bushood, John,
    sells land, 49.

  Butt, Thomas,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Button, Robert,
    receives estate, 49.

  Button, Thomas,
    owner of _Button's Ridge_, 49.

  Byrd, William I,
    says rent rolls inaccurate, 52; 109;
    uses slaves, 130.

  Byrd, William II,
    gives reasons for emigration to _Carolina_, 146.


  Carter, John, 109.

  Carter, Robert,
    has 126 slaves, 153.

  Carleill, Capt. Christopher,
    urges trade with America, 11.

  Carolina,
    emigration to from Virginia, 99-100; 139-146.

  Cattle,
    plentiful in Virginia, 101.

  Chambers, William,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Chandler, John,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Charles I,
    considers smoking harmful, 26;
    tries to limit tobacco planting in Virginia, 27;
    tries to limit English tobacco crop, 63;
    limits price of tobacco, 65;
    regulates tobacco trade, 67-69; 70;
    defied by _Assembly_, 110; 111.

  Charles II, 33;
    proclaimed in Virginia, 84; 111; 93; 96;
    not restored in Virginia before Restoration in England, 112;
    tyranny of, 114.

  Charles City,
    plantations small, 53; 54;
    farms and tithables of, 58; 79; 81.

  Chastellux,
    describes poor whites of Virginia, 152;
    notes indolence of poor whites, 155.

  Chew, Larkin,
    dealer in _Spotsylvania_ land, 154.

  Claiborne, William,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Clayton, Thomas, 80.

  Clergy,
    many plant tobacco, 28.

  Clothing,
    want of felt in Virginia, 103.

  Cloyse, Pettyplace,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Cole, Edward,
    patents land in _James City_, 77.

  Colonial expansion,
    sought as remedy for British economic dependence, 10;
    urged by economists, 11; 12; 13.

  Colonial system, 68;
    imperfectly enforced prior to 1660, 67-69; 85-86;
    embodied in _Navigation Acts_, 85;
    colonies to supplement England, 86;
    workings of at end of 17th century, 120;
    British conception of, 136.

  Commerce,
    of England with Baltic, 8;
    principles of long known, 11;
    of England with Europe and East, 12;
    of England with France declines, 13;
    affords key to history, 22;
    in reëxported tobacco, 70;
    in tobacco revives after 1683, 114-115;
    in reëxported tobacco, 116-120;
    importance of in tobacco for England, 119, 122.

  Commonwealth,
    tobacco high under, 66;
    Virginians trade abroad under, 69; 98;
    attitude of Virginia under, 110-11.

  Constable, John,
    trades illegally, 69.

  Cooke, John,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Cornell, Samuel,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Council, 65;
    complains of high freight rates, 72; 90;
    describes poverty in Virginia, 91;
    says Virginia ready to revolt to Dutch, 96; 109; 110;
    members of hold land illegally, 143;
    gives reasons for immigration out of Virginia, 145;
    describes misery in Virginia, 150;
    declining influence of, 159.

  Creighton, Henry,
    sells 100 acres, 50.

  Criminals,
    few sent to Virginia, 32, 33;
    make no imprint on social fabric, 33.

  Crocker, Wm.,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Cromwell, Oliver,
    sends Irish servants to Virginia, 33.

  Crump, Thomas,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1632, 74;
    landowner, 75.

  Culpeper, Lord,
    fears ruin of Virginia, 91, 114.

  Custis, John, 109.


  Daingerfield, William,
    has 61 slaves, 157.

  Dawson, William,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Day, John, 80.

  Delaware,
    manufactures of lure poor Virginia whites, 141;
    migration to, 139-146.

  Delk, Roger,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Dicks, John,
    purchases land, 49.

  Digges, Dudley, 109.

  Diggs, William,
    has 72 slaves, 158.

  Dinwiddie county,
    poor whites in, 151;
    small slave holders of, 153;
    large slave holders of, 158.

  Dodman, John,
    landowner, 79.

  Dorch, Walter,
    inventory of, 106.

  Duties,
    French put on English woolens, 13;
    on reëxported tobacco partly refunded, 70;
    on reëxported tobacco, 117;
    on tobacco yield grown large revenue, 120.


  Edwards, John,
    slaves of in plot, 128.

  Edwards, William,
    has six tithables, 57;
    slaves of in plot, 128.

  Effingham, Lord,
    tyranny of in Virginia, 114.

  Elizabeth City,
    plantations of small, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58;
    servants and slaves in, 59.

  Emigration,
    from Virginia in years from 1660 to 1725, 40, 62, 139-146;
    not caused by large land grants, 144-145;
    extent of, 146.

  England,
    colonial expansion necessary for, 7;
    forests depleted, 7;
    industry declining, 8;
    Baltic trade of, 8;
    future depends on colonies, 13; 14;
    joy of at founding of Virginia, 15;
    disappointed in Virginia, 19;
    tobacco bill of, 26;
    supplies Virginia with labor, 31;
    poverty in, 31;
    cannot consume entire colonial tobacco crop, 86;
    tobacco planting in prohibited, 87;
    glut of tobacco in, 68-89;
    adheres to colonial policy, 95.

  Epes, Francis, 79, 127.

  Essex,
    land transfers in, 46;
    plantations of small, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58.


  Falling Creek,
    iron works at, 17;
    destroyed in 1622, 18.

  Fane, Francis,
    says slave labor cheapens tobacco, 132.

  Fish,
    plentiful in Virginia, 15.

  Fithian, Philip,
    describes poor whites of Virginia, 152, 155.

  Fitzhugh, William, 109;
    refers to slave imports, 130.

  Flax,
    in Virginia, 15.

  Fleet, tobacco,
    brings servants, 35;
    size of in 1690 and 1706, 122.

  Foster, Armstrong, 79, 80.

  Foster, Robert,
    buys 200 acres, 50.

  Fowl, wild,
    abundant in colonial Virginia, 102.

  Fox, William,
    has 25 slaves, 153.

  France,
    exports wine and silk, 12;
    British trade with declines, 13;
    tobacco trade to, 119;
    trade to injured by war, 131.

  Freedmen,
    80 per cent of servants become, 40;
    prior to 1660 remained in Virginia, 40;
    form large part of population, 41;
    annual recruits of, 41;
    usually young, 42;
    might acquire property, 43;
    perform bulk of work, 43;
    what became of, 43;
    become small planters, 60;
    outfit of, 61;
    not entitled to land, 61;
    prosperity of hinges on tobacco, 62;
    Virginia land of opportunity for, 71;
    profits of from tobacco, 71-72;
    in _Burgesses_, 73-74;
    prosperous, 74-80;
    little hope of advancement for after 1660, 97-100;
    few in rent roll of 1704, 122-123.

  Freemen,
    entitled to headrights, 35;
    many come to Virginia, 36;
    become small planters, 60-75;
    many pay own passage, 81-82.

  Freight rates,
    high from England, 71-72;
    excessive, 90.

  Fruit, 12,
    abundant in Virginia, 102.

  Fuel,
    abundant in Virginia, 105.


  Gardens,
    common in Virginia, 102, 105.

  Garnet, John,
    buys 600 acres, 50.

  George, The,
    takes cargo of tobacco to England, 25; 64.

  Gilbert, George,
    patents land in _James City_, 77, 79.

  Gilbert, Sir Humphrey,
    voyage to America, 11.

  Glass,
    possibilities for in Virginia, 15;
    beginning made of in Virginia, 17;
    early history of in Virginia, 18-19.

  Gloucester,
    average plantation in, 54;
    farms and tithables of, 58; 80; 113;
    poor whites of, 151;
    small slave holders in, 154;
    large slave holders in, 157; 159.

  Good, John,
    describes poverty in Virginia, 91.

  Gooch, Governor,
    says large holdings no impediment to settlement, 145;
    says poor whites make best tobacco, 147.

  Governor,
    plants tobacco, 28;
    appoints sheriffs, 51;
    makes efforts to collect quit rents, 51; 65;
    neglects servants, 73; 90; 109;
    elected by burgesses, 1652-1660, 112.

  Goring, John,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Grain,
    abundance of in Virginia, 102.

  Graves, Ralph,
    his servant valued at £10, 127.

  Grey, James,
    buys 200 acres, 49.

  Grey, John,
    his cattle, 101;
    inventory of, 106.

  Grey, Francis,
    Burgess and landowner, 78-79.

  Grey, Thomas, 78.


  Hakluyt, Richard,
    advises colonial expansion, 11;
    shows British dependence on Spain, 12;
    expects surplus of population in England to emigrate to America,
      16; 19.

  Hammond, John,
    advice to servants, 61;
    describes Virginia residences, 104.

  Harmar, Charles,
    imports slaves, 124.

  Harris, John,
    _Burgess_ in 1629, 73.

  Harrison, Benjamin, 109.

  Hart, Henry,
    his slave in plot, 128.

  Hartwell, Henry,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Harvey, Sir John,
    complains of low prices for tobacco, 65;
    asks freedom of trade for Virginia, 68;
    testifies to illegal foreign trade, 68-69;
    complains of high freight rates, 72;
    ejected by people, 110.

  Hatfield, James,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Headrights,
    described, 34; 35;
    averaged about 1750 a year, 41;
    determine size of land grants, 47;
    brought in by well known planters, 48;
    do not belong to servant, 61;
    appear in wills, 76;
    transfer of by sale, 76;
    become landowners, 77;
    not all servants, 77;
    compared with rent roll, 97-99.

  Hemp,
    in Virginia, 15.

  Henrico,
    false returns in, 55;
    farms and tithables of, 58;
    servants and slaves in, 59; 79.

  Hill, Edward, 109.

  Hill, John,
    landowning freedman, 75;
    book binder at _Oxford_, 75.

  Hodge, John,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Holding, John,
    landowner, 79.

  Holland,
    exports fish, 12;
    trade of declines, 13;
    controls slave trade, 31; 125;
    tobacco exports to, 86-89;
    _Navigation Acts_ cut exports to, 87;
    distributor of English colonial tobacco, 88;
    plants own tobacco, 88;
    wars with, 89;
    Virginians threaten to revolt to, 91, 96; 116;
    tobacco exports to, 120;
    fights to preserve her monopoly of slave trade, 126;
    seeks to control tobacco trade on continent, 149-150.

  Honey,
    produced in Virginia, 102.

  Hotten's Emigrants to America,
    gives lists of servants, 42; 73.

  Houses,
    comfortable in Virginia, 103-104.

  Howlett, William,
    buy 200 acres, 50.


  Immigration,
    volume of in 17th century, 35-36;
    fixes character of eastern Virginia, 36;
    not restricted to servants, 36.

  Indentures,
    system of, 32;
    terms of, 61.

  Indians,
    desire to convert, 14;
    revere tobacco, 24;
    unsuited for laborers, 30.

  Industry, 22;
    pictured in Virginia, 28;
    Virginia not suited for, 29.

  Inventories,
    throw light on distribution of servants and slaves, 59; 73;
    typical examples of, 106-107.

  Iron,
    smelting of exhausts forests, 8;
    could be smelted in Virginia, 15;
    early manufacture of in Virginia, 17-18.

  Isle of Wight county,
    farms and tithables of, 58; 79.


  Jackson, William,
    has 49 slaves, 158.

  James I,
    forced to use tobacco, 25;
    considers smoking harmful, 26;
    regulates tobacco trade, 67.

  James II,
    tyranny of, 114.

  James City county,
    plantations and tithables of, 58;
    landowners listed as headrights in, 76-77; 79;
    slave plot in, 128.

  James River,
    iron works on, 17; 39; 70; 148.

  Jamestown, 14;
    glass furnace at, 18;
    streets of planted with tobacco, 25; 86; 111; 112.

  Jefferson, Thomas,
    says slavery made whites lazy, 155.

  Jeffreys, Jeffrey,
    imports slaves, 131.

  Jennings, Edmund, 109;
    describes slave plot, 128-129;
    says slaves injure credit of Virginia, 130;
    says few servants in 1708, 130-131;
    describes slave trade, 130-131;
    describes migration of poor whites, 145-146.

  Johnson, John,
    sells land, 49.

  Johnson, Joseph,
    transports servants, 78-79.

  Jones, Anthony,
    servant, becomes landowner, 74.

  Jones, Hugh,
    says tenants small part of population, 45; 155;
    says negroes make poor artisans, 156.

  Jordan, Lt. Col.,
    pays taxes on seven tithables, 56.


  Kemp, Richard,
    says immigrants mostly servants, 82.

  King William county,
    farms and tithables of, 58.

  King and Queen county,
    farms and tithables of, 58.

  Kinsman, Richard,
    makes _perry_, 108.

  Knight, Sir John,
    says Virginia ready to revolt to Holland, 96.


  Labor,
    lack of in Virginia, 16;
    foreign at Jamestown, 18;
    lack of handicaps industry, 19; 20;
    in Virginia determined by tobacco, 23;
    cheap needed in Virginia, 29;
    serious problem, 29;
    Indians unsuited for, 30;
    slave, 30;
    England supplies, 31;
    indenture system to supply, 32;
    influx of, 35.

  Lancaster, 79;
    poor planters in, 151;
    small slave holders of, 153.

  Land,
    cheap in Virginia, 29; 45;
    transfers of in Surry county, 46;
    in York, 46;
    in _Rappahannock_, 46;
    listed in rent roll of 1704-5, 53;
    monopoly of said to cause migration from Virginia, 141-143;
    large tracts granted, 142-144.

  Land grants,
    average extent of, 47;
    determined by method of transporting immigrants, 47;
    vary greatly in size, 47;
    not index to size of plantations, 49.

  Landowners,
    few large in 17th century, 43;
    glad to sell in small parcels, 45;
    chiefly small proprietors, 46;
    in census of 1626, 46;
    in York county, 46;
    in Essex, 46;
    often avoid quit rents, 51;
    listed in rent roll of 1704-5, 53;
    small proprietors neglected in history, 54;
    often poor men, 55;
    many work farms with own hands, 57;
    _Government_ expects servants to become, 62;
    profits of from tobacco, 71-72.

  Larkin, George,
    describes large land holdings, 144.

  Lawrence, Richard,
    landowner, 79.

  _Leah and Rachel_, 61.

  Lee, Richard,
    imports 80 slaves, 125.

  Leightenhouse, Thomas, 127.

  Linton, John,
    estimates colonial tobacco, 115;
    estimates amount of reëxported tobacco, 118;
    declares Baltic tobacco trade ruined, 148;
    describes tobacco raising in Holland, 149.

  London Company,
    national character of, 13;
    plans manufactures for Virginia, 15;
    cannot secure laborers for Virginia, 16;
    sets up iron works at Falling Creek, 17-18;
    displeased at tobacco culture in Virginia, 25;
    tobacco only hope of, 26;
    expects Virginia to duplicate England, 28;
    high price of tobacco pleases, 64; 73; 75.

  Ludwell, Philip, 109; 113.

  Ludwell, Thomas,
    places average tobacco crop at 1200 pounds, 64; 90;
    says tobacco worth nothing, 90; 91; 96.


  Manufactures,
    attempts to establish in Virginia, 15-19;
    cause of failure, 19;
    purchased from Dutch, 68-69;
    colonial system based on expectation of, 86;
    Berkeley tries to establish, 95;
    local in Virginia, 103;
    of tobacco in England, 119, 122;
    exports of to tobacco colonies, 120;
    in northern colonies lure Virginia whites, 140; 141;
    on plantations, 108; 156-157.

  Market,
    not free for tobacco, 66;
    tobacco sent to foreign, 67-70;
    Navigation Acts cut of foreign, 87;
    tobacco reëxported to continental, 116-120;
    Virginia and Maryland furnish for England, 120.

  Maryland,
    emigration of whites from, 140;
    House of Delegates of explains migration, 191.

  Mason, Francis,
    seven tithables, 57.

  Mason, Winfield,
    has 40 slaves, 158.

  Massacre,
    iron works destroyed during, 18.

  Matthews, Samuel,
    his estate described, 108.

  Merchant marine,
    threatened in England by lack of shipbuilding materials, 9;
    part of sea defense, 10;
    depleted at end of 16th century, 10;
    tobacco exports aid British, 26, 119, 122.

  Menefie, George,
    his estate described, 108.

  Middlesex,
    plantations small, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58.

  Milner, Thomas,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Moseley, Capt. William,
    buys part of _Button's Ridge_, 50, 109.

  Muir, Francis,
    has 47 slaves, 158.

  Muscovy Company,
    Baltic trade of, 8;
    not exempt from customs, 9;
    urged to trade with America, 11.


  Nansemond,
    plantations of small, 53;
    plantations and tithables in, 58.

  Navigation Acts, 69;
    described, 84-86;
    resented in Holland, 88-89;
    _Bland's_ remonstrance against, 88;
    cause of war with Holland, 89;
    cause extreme poverty in Virginia, 90-92;
    connected with _Bacon's Rebellion_, 92-93;
    why Virginia _Assembly_ did not protest against, 94-95;
    _Berkeley_ protests against, 94-95; 98;
    retard growth of population, 98-99;
    design of, 116.

  _New Albion_,
    describes abundance of food in Virginia, 103;
    advises settlers in Virginia as to clothing, 104.

  _New Description of Virginia_,
    presents optimistic picture of Virginia, 63;
    puts price of tobacco at 3d a pound, 66;
    describes foreign tobacco trade, 69;
    describes Virginia houses, 104;
    cites cases of wealth in Virginia, 107.

  New Kent,
    farms and tithables of, 58.

  Newport, Capt. Christopher,
    returns to England in 1607, 15;
    brings iron ore to England in 1607, 17.

  New Jersey,
    manufactures of lure Virginia whites, 141.

  Nicholson, Sir Francis, 29; 50;
    orders accurate rent roll in 1690, 51;
    again attempts rent roll in 1699, 52;
    completes rent roll, 52; 54;
    makes rent roll accurate, 55, 97; 114;
    gives reason for migration from Virginia and Maryland, 140, 141;
    sues Col. Lawrence Smith for arrears of quit rents, 143;
    testifies to large land grants, 144.

  Norfolk,
    plantations of small, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58;
    slave plot in, 129.

  Northampton,
    farms and tithables of, 58; 79.

  North Carolina,
    servants flee to, 83.

  Northern Neck,
    omitted in rent roll, 50; 54; 55.

  Norton, Capt. Wm.,
    brings glass workers to Virginia, 19;
    dies, 19.


  Page, Matthew, 109.

  Page, Mann,
    has 157 slaves, 157.

  Pagett, Anthony,
    _Burgess_ in 1629, 73.

  Parke, Daniel, 109.

  Patent Rolls,
    in Virginia Land Office, 34;
    average grants in, 47;
    show large dealers in servants, 48; 73;
    reveal names of freedmen, 74-75.

  Pattison, Thomas,
    landowner, 79.

  Pearson, Christopher,
    inventory of, 107.

  Pelton, George, 102.

  Pennsylvania,
    manufactures of lure Virginia whites, 191;
    migration to, 139-146.

  _Perfect Description_,
    numbers cattle in Virginia, 101.

  Perry Micajah,
    reports on tobacco trade, 119.

  Plantations,
    Virginia made up of, 29;
    cheap in Virginia, 29;
    labor for, 29-37;
    unhealthful sites for, 39;
    few large, 43;
    small hold own with large, 44;
    small outnumber large, 45; 46;
    transfers of in Surry county, 46;
    patents not index to size of, 49;
    tendency to break up large into small, 49;
    listed in rent roll of 1704-5, 53;
    largest in various counties, 53;
    average size of, 53;
    accurately listed in rent roll, 55;
    comparison of number of with workers, 55;
    number in each county, 58;
    settlers buy on frontier, 76;
    part only of each cultivated, 105.

  Popleton, William,
    _Burgess_ in 1629, 73.

  Population, 28; 29;
    growth of from 1649 to 1675, 98;
    growth of slow, 99, 142.

  Potash,
    England's need for, 8;
    found in Virginia, 15;
    first efforts to produce in Virginia, 17.

  Pott, Dr. John,
    incites people against _Sir John Harvey_, 110.

  Poultry,
    plentiful in Virginia, 102.

  Poverty,
    in England, 31;
    Navigation Acts cause in Virginia, 91;
    one cause of _Bacon's Rebellion_, 92-93.

  _Present State of Tobacco Plantations_,
    describes tobacco trade to France and Spain, 119;
    puts tobacco duties at £400,000, 121;
    describes ill effects of wars on tobacco trade, 148.

  Prince George county,
    plantations and tithables of, 58.

  Princess Anne county,
    plantations of small, 53; 54;
    farms and tithables of, 58;
    slave plot in, 129;
    small slave holders in, 154.

  Public Record Office,
    has copy of rent roll of 1704, 52.


  Quary, Colonel,
    says wars ruin tobacco trade, 148; 157.

  Quit rents,
    collected by Crown on land, 50;
    revenue from considerable, 50; 51;
    often in arrears, 51;
    roll of in 1704, 51-55.


  Ramshaw, William,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Randall, Robert,
    seven tithables, 57.

  Randolph, Edward,
    remarks on slow growth of Virginia population, 99;
    says holdings of large tracts of land causes migration from
      Virginia, 141-143;
    says quit rents avoided, 142;
    suggests limiting size of grants, 143.

  Randolph, William,
    imports slaves, 130.

  Rappahannock county,
    land transfers in, 46;
    landowners of listed as headrights, 76; 79.

  Rent Roll,
    Nickolson orders, 51;
    attempted in 1699, 52;
    completed in 1704-5, 52;
    shows small plantations, 53;
    accuracy of, 54-55;
    5,500 farms listed in, 55;
    compared with tithables of 1702, 57-58;
    compared with headrights, 97-99;
    contains names of few freedmen, 122-123.

  Restoration Period,
    brings suffering to Virginia, 84; 97; 104; 115; 116.

  Rich, Nathaniel,
    buys tobacco at 2s a pound, 64.

  Roberts, Robert,
    buys land, 49.

  Robertson, William,
    makes copy of rent roll of 1704, 52.

  Robins, Sampson, 79;
    patents land, 80.

  Robinson, John,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Rolfe, Capt. John,
    first to cure Virginia tobacco, 24; 25.

  Rooking, William,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Rowlston, Lionell,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1629, 73;
    _Burgess_ in 1632, 74;
    landowner, 74.

  Russell, John,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Russia,
  tobacco trade to, 118-119; 148.


  Samuel, Anthony,
    buys 300 acres, 50.

  Sandys, George,
    selects site for iron works, 17;
    describes failure of glass works in Virginia, 19;
    writes for servants, 30;
    gives wages of laborers, 44.

  Sandys, Sir Edwin,
    expects Virginia to duplicate England, 28.

  Savadge, Thomas,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Scotchmon, Robert,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1632, 74.

  Scott, Thomas,
    has 57 slaves, 158.

  Scruely, Richard,
    patents land, 79.

  Servants,
    _London Company_ sends to Virginia, 16;
    Indian children as, 30;
    system of indentures for, 32;
    not criminals, 32;
    political prisoners among, 33;
    Irish among, 33;
    _Oliverian_ soldiers among, 33;
    they plot against _Government_, 33;
    Scotchmen among, 33;
    _Sedgemour_ prisoners among, 33;
    chiefly Englishmen, 34, 36;
    list of preserved, 34;
    headrights from, 35;
    influx of, 35;
    four or five years of service for, 38;
    become part of Virginia social fabric, 39;
    hardship and perils encountered by, 39;
    80 per cent. become freedmen, 40;
    prior to 1660 remained in Virginia, 40;
    length of service for, 40;
    usually young when freed, 41, 42;
    estimated at 6,000 in 1671, 41;
    "seasoned," 42;
    become small part of population, 43;
    merchants bring to complete cargoes, 47;
    individual orders for, 48;
    in immigrant ships, 48;
    dealers in, 48;
    numbers in 1704, 56;
    listed as tithables, 56;
    distribution of, 58-59;
    not slaves, 60;
    like English apprentices, 60;
    outfit of on expiration of term, 61;
    not entitled to land, 61;
    hope to become landowners, 61-62;
    Virginia land of opportunity for, 71;
    freedmen often purchase, 72;
    of early period become prosperous, 73-80;
    list of, 78;
    proportion of among immigrants, 81-82;
    little hope for advancement of after 1660, 96-100;
    importation of in Restoration period, 98-99;
    inventories which show none, 106-107;
    many freed to fight in _Bacon's Rebellion_, 113;
    few become landowners at end of 17th century, 112-113;
    usefulness of as compared with slaves, 126;
    price of, 127;
    not always docile, 128;
    slave labor curtails importation of, 134;
    England opposes migration of, 135;
    vast numbers imported, 142.

  Seymour, Attorney-General,
    tells Virginians to make tobacco, 136.

  Sheep,
    scarce in Virginia, 102.

  Sheriff,
    collects quit rents, 51;
    draws up rent roll, 52;
    unearths false returns, 54-55.

  Sherwood, William,
    calls _Bacon's_ men rabble, 93.

  Shipbuilding,
    materials for needed in England, 8;
    lack of injures merchant marine, 9;
    materials for found in Virginia, 15;
    _Capt. Smith_ explains why Virginia cannot produce materials for, 17.

  Shurley, Daniel,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Sickness, The Virginia,
    _Capt. Blewit_ dies of, 18;
    glass workers die of, 19;
    servants die of, 33;
    described, 39;
    terrible mortality from, 39, 80;
    abates before end of 17th century, 40;
    not fatal to slaves, 128.

  Silk,
    from South Europe, 12;
    in Virginia, 15.

  Slaughter, John, 80.

  Slave trade,
    in hands of Dutch, 31;
    restrictions on, 45.

  Slaves,
    adequate for tobacco raising, 29;
    first cargo of in Virginia, 30;
    few in Virginia prior to 1680, 31;
    influx of, 40;
    numbers in 1704, 56;
    listed as tithables, 56;
    distribution of, 58-59;
    inventories show that many planters had none, 106-107;
    used by wealthy men in 17th century, 108;
    first cargo of, 124;
    few prior to 1680, 124;
    importations of, 124-125;
    Dutch control trade in, 125-126;
    fitness of for tobacco culture, 126;
    price of, 127;
    labor of crude, 127-128;
    health of good, 128;
    docile, 128;
    plots among, 128-129;
    no wrong seen in, 129;
    duty on importation of, 129;
    large importations of, 1680-1708, 130-131;
    6,000 by 1700, 130;
    12,000 in 1708, 130;
    30,000 in 1730, 131;
    use of cheapens tobacco, 132;
    use of curtails importation of servants, 134;
    England favors use of in Virginia, 135-136;
    pernicious effect of in ancient Rome, 137-139;
    effect of on Virginia yeomanry, 139-155;
    causes migration of whites, 139-146;
    at first produce only lower grades of tobacco, 147;
    become more efficient, 147;
    contempt of for poor whites, 152;
    small holders of, 152-159;
    cast stigma on labor, 155;
    large holders of increase in numbers, 155-159.

  Smelting,
    wood needed for, 8;
    in Virginia, 15;
    machinery for sent to Virginia, 17;
    begun at _Falling Creek_.

  Smith, Capt. John,
    describes Baltic trade, 8;
    explains difficulty of building up manufacturers in Virginia, 17.

  Smither, William,
    buys 200 acres, 50.

  Smyth,
    describes poor whites of Virginia, 152, 155.

  Spain,
    commerce with, 12;
    growing domains of, 14;
    tobacco of used in England, 25, 26;
    tobacco of excluded from England, 67, 68, 86, 87;
    tobacco trade to, 119;
    trade to injured by war, 131.

  Spanish Succession, War of, 103; 115; 119;
    cuts off tobacco trade to France and Spain, 131; 148.

  Sparshott, Edward,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Smith, Lawrence,
    sued for arrears of quit rents, 143.

  Sparkes, John,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Spencer, Capt. Robt.,
    servants and slaves of, 59.

  Spencer, Secretary,
    writes of reviving tobacco trade, 115;
    says slaves cheaper labor than whites, 132.

  Splitimber, John,
    his cattle, 101;
    inventory of, 106-107.

  Spotsylvania,
    large grants in, 145;
    poor whites in, 151;
    small slave holders of, 153-154;
    land transfers in, 154;
    large slave holders in, 157; 159.

  Spotswood, Alexander,
    says slaves cause over production of tobacco, 129; 151;
    has 60 slaves, 158.

  Storey, John,
    imports negroes, 130.

  Stuarts, second despotism of,
    affects Virginia, 114.

  Stublefield, George,
    has 42 slaves, 158.

  Surry,
    land transfers in, 46;
    tithables in, 56, 58;
    inventories and wills in, 59;
    negroes plot in, 128.

  Sweden,
    tobacco trade to, 118-119.

  Symonds, Roger,
    granted 100 acres, 81.


  Taliaferro, Richard,
    has 43 slaves, 158.

  Tenants,
    few in Virginia, 44, 45, 62.

  Thoroughgood, Adam,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1629, 73;
    _Burgess_ in 1632, 74;
    landowner, 75;
    brother of _Sir John Thoroughgood_, 75.

  Tithables,
    those listed as, 56;
    in Surry, 56-57;
    number of in various counties, 58.

  Tobacco,
    history of Virginia built on, 20, 23;
    Indians revere, 24;
    first cured in Virginia by Rolfe, 24;
    Virginia suited for, 24;
    ready market for, 24;
    extensively used in England, 24;
    used by James I, 25;
    Virginians turn eagerly to culture of, 25;
    send first cargo of to England, 25;
    London Company displeased at culture of, 25;
    England reconciled to, 26;
    Virginia's only hope, 26;
    Crown tries to divert Virginia from, 27;
    cultivation in Virginia universal, 27;
    shapes immigration, 29;
    requires unskilled labor, 29;
    prosperity of freedmen hinges on, 62;
    amount of one man could produce, 63-64;
    over production of in 1640, 63;
    price of prior to 1660, 64-67;
    account for migration of 1618-1623, 64;
    rich returns from, 64;
    restrictions on trade of, 67-69;
    growing of in England prohibited, 67;
    tax on, 67;
    illegal foreign trade in, 68-69;
    reëxported from England, 70;
    Virginia underbids world in, 70;
    returns from, 71-72;
    freight on high, 72;
    effect of Navigation Acts on, 85-96;
    foreign trade in prohibited, 85;
    requires world market, 86;
    planting in England prohibited, 87;
    exports of to Spain, 87;
    reëxported, 87;
    planted in Holland, 88;
    glut in England causes price of to drop, 89-91;
    exhausts soil, 105;
    Charles I makes offer for, 110;
    trade of revives, 115-116;
    production of increases, 115-116;
    returns from, 116;
    reëxports of, 116-120;
    production of abroad, 117;
    duty on yields crown large revenue, 121;
    price of still low at end of 17th century, 123;
    slaves adequate to its cultivation, 127-128;
    wars interfere with trade in, 131;
    slaves cheapen production of, 132;
    poor whites produce the best, 146-147;
    foreign trade in ruined by war, 148-150;
    advantages of large plantations for, 156-157.

  Towns,
    few in Virginia, 29.

  Townsend, Richard,
    Burgess in 1629, 73.

  Trussell, John,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Turnbull, Robert,
    has 81 slaves, 158.


  Underwood, John,
    patents land in _James City_, 77.

  Upton, John,
    landowning freedman, 75.


  Vegetables,
    abundant in Virginia, 102.

  _Virginia's Cure_,
    says Burgesses mostly freedmen, 74.

  _Virginia Unmasked_,
    describes Virginia houses, 104.

  _Virginia Magazine of History and Biography_,
    shows that many freedmen migrated to Virginia, 81.

  _Virginia Richly Valued_,
    advises emigrants as to outfit, 104.


  Wages,
    high in Virginia, 16; 29; 30;
    low in England, 31.

  Wage earners,
    few in Virginia, 44;
    mostly recently freed servants, 44.

  Walker, Robert,
    has 52 slaves, 158.

  Warburton, Thomas,
    patents land in James City, 77.

  Warden, Thomas,
    landowner, 79.

  Warwick,
    average plantation of, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58; 81.

  Washington, Richard,
    deals in servants, 48.

  Watson, John,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Weaver, Samuel,
    landowning freedman, 75.

  Webster, Roger,
    servant, _Burgess_ in 1632, 74.

  Whitlock, Thomas,
    will of, 105-106.

  Williamsburg, 35; 54.

  Williams, William,
    buys 200 acres, 50.

  Wills,
    throw light on distribution of servants and slaves, 59; 73;
    headrights mentioned in, 76.

  Wine,
    prospect for in Virginia, 15.

  Woolens,
    need of potash for, 8;
    French duty on, 13.

  Woolritch, William,
    landowning freedman, 74.

  Wormsley, Ralph, 109;
    letter to from _Fitzhugh_, 130.

  Wray, Thomas,
    granted 50 acres, 81.


  Yates, William,
    has 55 slaves, 158.

  Yeomanry,
    largest class in Virginia, 59, 62;
    freedmen in, 72-82; 85;
    desperately poor, 90-91;
    driven to revolt by poverty, 92-93;
    no advancement for after 1660, 97-100;
    enjoy plentiful food, 101-103;
    often suffer for proper clothing, 103-105;
    _Burgesses_ represented interests of, 109;
    aid in ejecting Harvey, 110;
    many favor _Parliament in Civil War_, 110-111;
    in control from 1652 to 1660, 112;
    chief sufferers from _Navigation Acts_, 113;
    support Bacon in rebellion, 113;
    struggle for political rights, 114;
    few recruits to at end of 17th century, 122;
    condition of at end of 17th century, 123;
    effect of slavery on in ancient Rome, 137-139;
    migration of from Virginia 139-146;
    produce higher grades of tobacco, 146-147;
    misery of in 1713, 150;
    many sink into poverty, 151-154;
    many become slave holders, 152-159;
    slaves make less industrious, 155; 160.

  Yeardley, Sir George, 29;
    instructed to enforce free exchange of goods, 65.

  York,
    land transfers in, 46;
    plantations of small, 53;
    farms and tithables of, 58;
    servants and slaves in, 59;
    landowners of who had been headrights, 76; 79; 107; 130.

  Young, Richard,
    granted 100 acres, 81.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

1. Passages in italics are surrounded by _underscores_.

2. Punctuation corrections:

   Pg. 3 - added closing quotes (" ... not even beggars;")

   Pg. 142 - added quotes ("It should be inquired into," he said, "how
   it comes to pass ...")

   Pg. 151 - added period (for themselves only. Making)

   Pg. 152 - added opening quote ("illiberal, noisy and rude,")

   Pg. 172 - Footnote [5-29], added closing quote (" ... to the
   Government.")

   Pg. 251 - added comma after "George" (Archer, George,)

   Pg. 252 - changed "." to ";" (Carolina ... 99-100; 139-146.)

   Pg. 254 - added comma after "Benjamin" (Harrison, Benjamin,)

   Pg. 254 - added comma in Freedmen (what became of, 43;)

   Pg. 257 - changed comma to semi-colon (Plantations ... listed in rent
   roll of 1704-5, 53;)

3. Spelling Corrections:

   Pg. 87 - "exlusive" to "exclusive" (1) (secured exclusive
   privileges)

   Pg. 88 - "nigher" to "higher" (profit higher at home?)

   Pg. 124 - "butt wenty" to "but twenty" (there were but twenty)

   Pg. 125 - "chieftians" to "chieftains" (the native chieftains)

   Pg. 156 - "Birtish" to "British" (upon British imports)

   Pg. 162 - added Chapter Title "Notes to Chapters" as shown in the
   Contents.

   Pg. 176 - "Britain" to "British" (in Footnote [7-23] ... British
   Public Record Office)

   Pg. 191 - "ped" to "per" (per Robert Rivers)

   Pg. 208 - "Sgeriff" to "Sheriff" (Henry Royall Sheriff)

   Pg. 215 - "Shreiff" to "Sheriff" (the Sheriff is to be allowed)

   Pg. 215 - added "A" at head of alphabetical list of names.

   Pg. 223 - "Sherif" to "Sheriff" (Tho Parker Sheriff)

   Pg. 245 - added "D" at head of alphabetical listing of names.

   Pg. 252 - "Spotsvylvania" to "Spotsylvania" (Chew, Larkin ... dealer
   in _Spotsylvania_)

   Pg. 255 - "gratned" to "granted" (Land, ... large tracts granted,)

   Pg. 257 - "Eir" to "Sir" (Sandys, Sir Edwin,)

   Pg. 258 - "centry" to "century" (Sickness ... abates before end of
   17th century,)

   Pg. 259 - "Thorouhggood" to "Thoroughgood" (Thoroughgood, Adam, ...
   brother of _Sir John Thoroughgood_,)

4. Footnote and Anchor Corrections/Notations:

   Footnotes and their anchors have been renumbered to include the
   chapter number, thus the Chapter 3 Footnote #5 becomes [3-5] in this
   e-text.

   Pg. 19 - A second anchor to Footnote [1-18] has been corrected to
   anchor Footnote [1-19].

   Pg. 87 - Chapter 5, Footnote anchors skip from [5-2] to [5-7], and
   again from [5-33] to [5-35]. No anchor points for Footnotes 3 through
   6 or 34 appear in the original text though the footnotes are included
   in the "Notes to Chapters" beginning on pg. 162. These footnotes have
   been marked with a ? "question mark". (ex; ?[5-3]) Also;

   Pg. 115 - Chapter 7, Footnotes skip from [7-2] to [7-4]. No reference
   point for Footnote 3.

   Pg. 163 - Footnote [2-19], no page number was given, (p.--.)

   Pg. 179 - Footnote [8-54], in reference to Philip Fithian, Journal
   and letters, p. 130 appears twice in original text and has been
   retained.

5. Appendix - Information contained in the Rent Rolls appears to have been
set out verbatim for each VA county or Parish. Inconsistencies appearing
in the original text, which have been retained include:

   a. Inconsistent punctuation of abbreviations;
   b. Inconsistent representation of abbreviations;
   c. Missing end of line punctuation;
   d. Inconsistent alphabetization of proper names;
   e. Inconsistent spelling of proper names;
   f. Inconsistent mathmatical calculations;

6. Other notes and corrections:

   Printer or Author regularly used "country" in place of what are VA.
   counties.

   Pg. 251 - Index listing for Ball, William, no page reference given.

   Pg. 253 - "558" to "58" (Index listing for Essex, ... farms and
   tithables of, 58.)

   Pg. 258 - Index listing for Smelting ... begun at _Falling Creek_.
   No page reference given.

7. Word variations:

   "_Perfect Discription_" and "_Perfect Description_"

   "pre-eminence" and "preëminently"






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLANTERS OF COLONIAL VIRGINIA ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

