generously made available by The Internet Archive)









                      MANNERS AND RULES

                             OF

                        GOOD SOCIETY

                 _OR SOLECISMS TO BE AVOIDED_


                        BY A MEMBER
                     OF THE ARISTOCRACY




                   THIRTY-EIGHTH EDITION

                 [Illustration: Decoration]


                          LONDON
                  FREDERICK WARNE AND CO.
                       AND NEW YORK

                           1916
                  (_All rights reserved_)




_Printed in Great Britain_




PREFACE


"MANNERS AND RULES OF GOOD SOCIETY" contains all the information
comprised in the original work, "Manners and Tone of Good Society," but
with considerable additions. In a volume of this nature it is necessary
to make constant revisions, and this is periodically done to keep it up
to date, that it may be depended upon as being not only the most
reliable, but also the _newest book of etiquette_.

A comparison of the number of chapters and their subjects with those of
the early editions would best demonstrate how the work has grown, not
merely in bulk, but in importance also. This extension has allowed many
subjects to be more exhaustively treated than heretofore, and it now
includes every rule and point that could possibly be comprehended in its
title.

The work throughout its many editions has commended itself to the
attention of thousands of readers, and it is hoped the present edition
will be received by society in general with the marked success of its
predecessors.




CONTENTS


      CHAPTER                                                  PAGE

           INTRODUCTORY REMARKS                                  ix

        I. THE MEANING OF ETIQUETTE                               1

       II. INTRODUCTIONS                                          6

      III. LEAVING CARDS                                         19

       IV. PAYING CALLS                                          32

        V. PRECEDENCY                                            44

       VI. THE COLLOQUIAL APPLICATION OF TITLES                  53

      VII. POINTS OF ETIQUETTE AS REGARDS ROYAL PERSONAGES       61

     VIII. POINTS OF ETIQUETTE WHEN TRAVELLING ABROAD, AND
           PRESENTATIONS AT FOREIGN COURTS                       65

       IX. THE RECEIVED MODE OF PRONOUNCING CERTAIN SURNAMES     68

        X. PRESENTATIONS AT COURTS AND ATTENDING COURTS          73

       XI. PRESENTATIONS AT LEVÉES AND ATTENDING LEVÉES          82

      XII. BALLS AND STATE BALLS                                 87

     XIII. DINNER GIVING AND DINING OUT                          99

      XIV. DINNER-TABLE ETIQUETTE                               116

       XV. EVENING PARTIES                                      122

      XVI. WEDDINGS AND WEDDING LUNCHEONS                       128

     XVII. WEDDING RECEPTIONS                                   143

    XVIII. WEDDING EXPENSES                                     146

      XIX. AFTERNOON "AT HOMES"                                 151

       XX. "AT HOME" DAYS                                       159

      XXI. COLONIAL ETIQUETTE                                   161

     XXII. INDIAN ETIQUETTE                                     164

    XXIII. GARDEN-PARTIES                                       166

     XXIV. TOWN GARDEN-PARTIES                                  171

      XXV. EVENING GARDEN-PARTIES                               174

     XXVI. LUNCHEONS                                            176

    XXVII. BREAKFASTS                                           183

   XXVIII. PICNICS AND WATER-PARTIES                            186

     XXIX. JUVENILE PARTIES                                     190

      XXX. WRITTEN INVITATIONS                                  195

     XXXI. REFUSING INVITATIONS                                 200

    XXXII. WALKING, DRIVING, AND RIDING                         202

   XXXIII. BOWING                                               206

    XXXIV. THE COCKADE                                          209

     XXXV. COUNTRY-HOUSE VISITS                                 211

    XXXVI. HUNTING AND SHOOTING                                 219

   XXXVII. SHAKING HANDS                                        225

  XXXVIII. CHAPERONS AND DÉBUTANTES                             228

    XXXIX. PRESENTATIONS AT THE VICEREGAL COURT, DUBLIN CASTLE  229

       XL. HOSTESSES                                            234

      XLI. THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF LADY PATRONESSES OF PUBLIC
           BALLS                                                239

     XLII. PERIODS OF MOURNING                                  242

    XLIII. ENGAGED                                              250

     XLIV. SILVER WEDDINGS                                      253

      XLV. SUBSCRIPTION DANCES                                  256

     XLVI. GIVING PRESENTS                                      259

    XLVII. CHRISTENING PARTIES                                  261

           INDEX                                                265




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS


The title of this work sufficiently indicates the nature of its
contents. The Usages of Good Society relate not only to good manners and
to good breeding, but also to the proper etiquette to be observed on
every occasion.

Not only are certain rules laid down, and minutely explained, but the
most comprehensive instructions are given in each chapter respecting
every form or phase of the subject under discussion that it may be
clearly understood what _is_ done, or what is _not_ done, in good
society, and also how what _is_ done in good society should be done. It
is precisely this knowledge that gives to men and women the
consciousness of feeling thoroughly at ease in whatever sphere they may
happen to move, and causes them to be considered well bred by all with
whom they may come in contact.

A solecism may be perhaps in itself but a trifling matter, but in the
eyes of society at large it assumes proportions of a magnified aspect,
and reflects most disadvantageously upon the one by whom it is
committed; the direct inference being, that to be guilty of a solecism
argues the offender to be unused to society, and consequently not on an
equal footing with it. This society resents, and is not slow in making
its disapproval felt by its demeanour towards the offender.

Tact and innate refinement, though of the greatest assistance to one
unused to society, do not suffice of themselves; and although counting
for much, cannot supply the want of the actual knowledge of what is
customary in society. Where tact and innate refinement do not exist--and
this is not seldom the case, as they are gifts bestowed upon the few
rather than upon the many--then a thorough acquaintance with the social
observances in force in society becomes more than ever necessary, and
especially to those who, socially speaking, are desirous of making their
way in the world.

Those individuals who have led secluded or isolated lives, or who have
hitherto moved in other spheres than those wherein well-bred people
move, will gather all the information necessary from these pages to
render them thoroughly conversant with the manners and amenities of
society.

This work will be found of equal service to both men and women, as in
each chapter the points of social etiquette to be observed by both sexes
have been fully considered.

Those having the charge of young ladies previous to their introduction
into society, either mothers, chaperons, or governesses, will also
derive much useful and practical information from the perusal of this
work, while to those thoroughly versed in the usages of society it
cannot fail to commend itself, containing as it does many useful and
valuable hints on social questions.




MANNERS AND RULES OF GOOD SOCIETY




CHAPTER I

THE MEANING OF ETIQUETTE


What is etiquette, and what does the word convey? It is a poor one in
itself, and falls very far short of its wide application. It has an
old-fashioned ring about it, savouring of stiffness, primness, and
punctiliousness, which renders it distasteful to many possessing
advanced ideas; and yet the word etiquette is not so very old either, as
Johnson did not include it in his dictionary, and Walker apologises for
introducing it into his, and according to the authorities he quotes, it
is supposed to be derived from stichos, stichus, stichetus, sticketta,
and from thence to etiquette. But whether derived from the Latin or the
French--and many incline to the latter opinion--there is no doubt that
could a new word be found to replace this much abused one, it would be a
welcome addition to our vocabulary. The word has unfortunately become
associated in our minds with forms, ceremonies, and observances, in an
exaggerated degree; and it has been so constantly misused and
misinterpreted and misunderstood that ridicule and contempt have been
most unjustly and unfairly thrown upon it. The true meaning of
etiquette can hardly be described in dictionary parlance; it embraces
the whole gamut of good manners, good breeding, and true politeness. One
of the reasons which have no doubt contributed to bring the word
"etiquette" into disrepute, is the manner in which the subject has been
handled by incompetent people, who, having but a very hazy and obscure
knowledge, if any knowledge at all, yet profess to write guides to
polite manners--rambling and incoherent guides, which not only provoke a
smile from those better informed, but mislead and bewilder any one rash
enough to consult them, without previous inquiry as to whether they are
safe to follow. A little caution on this head would insure the most
correct and reliable work being secured amongst so much that is
unreliable. Some people read everything that is written on the subject
of etiquette, not only those who are ignorant and wish to learn
something of its laws, but those who are thoroughly well versed in them
and who, one might suppose, had nothing to learn; still these latter
like to see what is written, to feel the satisfaction of being supported
in their own knowledge by a well-informed writer; or of finding
amusement in the absurdities gravely advanced by some one writing from
another sphere than that where _savoir vivre_ reigns. Others attach a
very narrow meaning to the word etiquette, and neither accept it nor
understand it in its true sense; they have an idea that its rules
influence and govern society in general. Rules of etiquette are from
their point of view but trammels and shackles; let them be cast off or
burst through, say they; let every one do as he likes; let all behave as
they like; we are in a free country, why should we not wipe our mouths
upon the tablecloth if we please? Others again, devour books of
etiquette on the quiet; they are very much in want of instruction as
every one knows, but they have not the courage to confess that they are
awake of this want, and are trying to pick up some knowledge of this
kind to be useful to them; as their aim is to rise in the social scale,
they would not let their friends know for worlds about this new study,
but they know it, and find that they have improved, that they do not
commit as many _gaucheries_ as heretofore; still, they have caught the
letter rather than the spirit of etiquette, they have read the rules it
prescribes, and act up to them as far as their memories serve them; but
they have failed in one essential particular of understanding that
courtesy, consideration towards others, and unselfishness, are the
sources of true politeness from which etiquette springs.

There is an idea amongst some few people who have mixed little in the
world, and moved but in one fixed groove, that the more exalted the
sphere, the more perfect the manners. It is needless to attempt to
refute such a fallacy as this, for examples of the most perfect manner
are to be met with not only amongst those who can boast of long lineage
and high birth, but also amongst those who lay claim to neither.

Our present code of etiquette is constructed upon the refinement,
polish, and culture of years, of centuries. Wealth and luxury, and
contact with all that is beautiful in art and nature, have in all ages
exercised a powerful influence on the manners of men; we do not say on
the times, as unfortunately these advantages did not reach down to the
many but were confined to the strictly few; but in these modern days the
many have come, and still come, within the charmed circle; the ring
broadens, ever widens; it is not now as in olden days that "their lot
forbade." On the contrary, the possession of wealth or of talent is the
open sesame to the most refined and cultured circles. The word etiquette
is too narrow for all it embraces; it must be viewed in a double light,
and be taken from a moral point as well as from a conventional one. A
kindly nature, and an unselfish spirit are never wanting in true
politeness, but the conventionalities of society give the finish and
completeness to the whole, the colour, as it were, to the picture. In
some the conventional spirit is uppermost and they have at best but a
surface polish. In others the kindly feelings of the heart are allowed
full play, and no act of genuine politeness is omitted or left undone in
their intercourse with their fellows, and these graces of kindly
politeness linger in the memory, trivial though they may have been,
years after one has lost sight of this true gentleman or thorough lady,
and one says of him, "What a charming man he was, how courteous and
considerate, and how kind!" and of her, "She was the sweetest and
prettiest-mannered woman I ever met."

It is only given to the very few to be thoroughly and unaffectedly
charming without a shadow of self-consciousness or effort. To assume a
would-be charming manner for the moment, with the desire to be unusually
pleasing to some one in particular, does not confer the enviable
reputation of having a charming manner. It does not sit easy enough to
be altogether natural; it conveys the idea of being put on for the
occasion, and, like all other imitations, it hardly ever pleases and
seldom deceives. Etiquette and true politeness would have us go further
than this, and our manners of to-day should be our manners of to-morrow,
and not variable according to place and persons. The world is quick to
note these uncertain demeanours, and every one's measure is readily
taken and retained.

The rules of etiquette are indispensable to the smooth working of
society at large. Take, for example, the etiquette of precedency, in
force both in public and in private: on every public occasion, and in
every private circle, precedency steps in to render assistance, and is
as necessary in the smallest private circle as in the largest public
gathering, because it assigns to every one his or her place as far as
claim can be laid to place. Mistakes in the matter of precedency are not
only committed by those who have enjoyed few social advantages, but by
those also who have had everything in their favour. Young ladies, for
instance, when married from the schoolroom, as it were, often make grave
mistakes on the question of precedency, if they do not ignore it
altogether.

The etiquette of card leaving and that of paying calls are indisputably
necessary and only the very ignorant would attempt to gainsay their
utility; without these aids to order and method all intercourse between
friends and acquaintances would be uncertain and chaotic; as it is there
is little excuse when the right thing is not done, and any departure
from the simple rules laid down on these heads, is the best possible
proof of the standing, position, and associations of the one at fault.

Any one point of etiquette if brought to the bar of common-sense would
be pronounced reasonable, proper, and sensible; and there is strictly
speaking no question of etiquette that cannot be thus judged and upon
which a like verdict would not be given. There is no one rule of
etiquette that can be described as absurd or ridiculous, arbitrary or
tyrannical, and taken collectively the rules are but social obligations
due from one person to another. Why should we not be a well-mannered
people? Why should we not be refined, cultivated, and polished in our
demeanour and bearing? Why should we not seek to charm if we can? Why
should we not cultivate and encourage in ourselves consideration,
thoughtfulness, and graciousness towards others in the smallest details
of daily life?




CHAPTER II

INTRODUCTIONS


There are ceremonious introductions and unceremonious introductions,
premeditated introductions and unpremeditated introductions; but, in all
cases, introductions should never be indiscriminately made--that is to
say, without a previous knowledge on the part of those making them as to
whether the persons thus introduced will be likely to appreciate each
other, or the reverse, or unless they have expressed a desire to become
acquainted. For instance, a lady should not introduce two of her
acquaintances residing in a country town or watering-place, moving in
different circles, unless they have each expressed such a desire.

       *       *       *       *       *

=An Undesired Introduction=, if made, compels the one to whom it is the
most unwelcome, to treat the other with marked coldness, or to continue
an acquaintance that is distasteful.

Should the slightest doubt exist as to how an introduction will be
received--whether the meditated introduction is a spontaneous desire on
the part of a lady or gentleman, or whether one person expressed a wish
to make the acquaintance of another person and expressed that wish to a
mutual friend--the received rule is to consult the wishes of both
persons on the subject before making the introduction.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Difference of Rank= exists between two persons, it would be
sufficient to ascertain the wishes of the person of highest rank alone.

A person about to make an introduction, should say to the one lady, but
not in the hearing of the other, "Mrs. A----, may I introduce Mrs. B----
to you?" or some such formula, according to the degree of intimacy
existing between herself and Mrs. A. (See "The Art of Conversing.")

When two ladies are of equal rank, the wishes of the person with whom
the person making the introduction is least intimate should be
consulted.

In the case of one person having expressed a wish to make the
acquaintance of another, there remains but the wishes of one person to
ascertain.

Acquiescence having been given, the introduction should be made.

In making an introduction, the lady of lowest rank should be introduced
to the lady of highest rank; in no case should the lady of highest rank
be introduced to the lady of lowest rank. This point of etiquette should
always be strictly observed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Gentleman should always be introduced to a Lady=, whatever his rank
may be, without reference to her rank, whatever it may be. This rule is
invariable, and is based upon the privilege of the sex--"_place aux
dames_."

It is not usual to ascertain a gentleman's wishes as to whether he will
be introduced to a lady or not, although at a ball it is usual to do so
when the introduction is made for a special object, viz., that of
obtaining a partner for a lady; and as a gentleman may be either unable
or unwilling to ask the lady to dance, it is incumbent to ascertain
beforehand whether the introduction is desired or not, otherwise the
introduction would be of no avail for the purpose, and prove a
disappointment to the lady.

"Would you like to be introduced to Miss A----?" or some such polite
phrase (see "The Art of Conversing"), is the sort of formula by which to
ascertain a gentleman's wishes as to an introduction in the ball-room;
as ball-room introductions are understood to mean an intention on the
part of a gentleman to ask a lady to dance or to take her in to supper.

In general society, gentlemen are supposed to seek, rather than to avoid
the acquaintance of ladies, irrespective of whatever sets in society to
which they belong. It is immaterial to a gentleman in which set in
society his acquaintances move, and he can be polite to all without
offending any in their several circles.

With regard to his own sex a gentleman is generally as exclusive as to
the acquaintanceships which he forms, as is a lady with regard to the
acquaintanceships which she forms. Reciprocity of taste is the basis on
which acquaintanceships between men are established, subject, in a
certain measure, to social position; though this rule is itself subject
to wide exceptions.

It is the rule for a gentleman to ask a mutual friend, or an
acquaintance, for an introduction to a lady, and it is the received rule
to do so when a gentleman desires to be introduced to any lady in
particular; but gentlemen do not ask to be introduced to each other,
unless some special reason exists for so doing--some reason that would
commend itself to the person whose acquaintance was desired, as well as
to the person making the introduction; otherwise, such a wish would
appear to be either puerile or sycophantic, thus the request might meet
with a refusal, and the proffered acquaintanceship be declined.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When Introductions are made between Ladies=, an unmarried lady should
be introduced to a married lady, unless the unmarried lady is of a
higher rank than the married lady, when the rule is reversed.

The correct formula in use when making introductions is "Mrs. X----,
Lady Z.," thus mentioning the name of the lady of lowest rank first, as
she is the person introduced to the lady of highest rank, "Mrs. X----,
Lady Z.," is all that need be said on the occasion by the person making
the introduction. When the ladies are of equal rank it is immaterial
which name is mentioned first; but there generally exists sufficient
difference in the social position of the two ladies to give a slight
distinction in favour of the one or of the other, which the person
making the introduction should take into consideration.

When the introduction has been made, the ladies should bow to each
other, and either lady should make a slight remark.

It is not usual for ladies on being first introduced to each other to
shake hands, but only to bow; but there are very many exceptions to this
rule.

When one lady is of higher rank than the other, should she offer to
shake hands, it would be a compliment and a mark of friendliness on her
part.

When a person introduces two intimate friends of his or hers to each
other, they would be expected to shake hands, instead of bowing only.

The relations of an engaged couple should, on being introduced, shake
hands with both bride and bridegroom elect, as should the intimate
friends of an engaged couple; as also should the relations of the two
families on being introduced to each other.

It is the privilege of the lady to be the first to offer to shake hands,
in every case, when a gentleman is introduced to her.

A lady should shake hands with every one introduced to her in her own
house--that is to say, whether the person is brought by a mutual friend,
or is present by invitation obtained through a mutual friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At Dinner-parties=, both small and large, the hostess should use her
own discretion as to the introductions she thinks proper to make. It is
not customary to make general introductions at a dinner-party; but in
sending guests down to dinner, who are strangers to each other, the host
or hostess should introduce the gentleman to the lady whom he is to take
down to dinner. It would be quite unnecessary to ask the lady's
permission before doing so. It would be sufficient to make the
introduction a few moments before dinner was announced, and the usual
formula is, "Mrs. A., Mr. B. will take you in to dinner." A bow is the
recognition of this introduction.

When the majority at a dinner-party are strangers to each other, a host
or hostess should introduce one or two of the principal guests to each
other, when time allows of its being done before dinner is served; such
introductions are oftener made at country dinner-parties than at town
dinner-parties.

A hostess should, in some instances, introduce ladies to each other in
the drawing-room after dinner if the opportunity offers, and she
considers it advisable to do so.

As a rule, a host seldom introduces gentlemen to each other in the
dining-room after dinner, as they address each other as a matter of
course on such occasions.

A hostess should introduce her principal guests to each other, at
five-o'clock teas, garden-parties, small "at homes," etc.--that is to
say, gentlemen to ladies--for the purpose of their taking the ladies to
the tea-room. In this case also, the introduction should be made without
previously consulting the lady; and a gentleman, knowing the reason of
the introduction, should at once proffer the expected civility.

At these gatherings a hostess should use her own discretion as to any
general introductions she thinks proper to make, and should introduce
any gentleman to any lady without previously consulting the lady if she
thinks the introduction will prove agreeable to her.

When introducing ladies to each other, she should give married ladies,
and ladies of rank, the option of the introduction; but should
introduce young unmarried ladies to each other if she thinks proper.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When Callers arrive simultaneously=, the hostess should introduce them
directly or indirectly to each other, if there is no social reason to
the contrary.

When a hostess is aware that her visitors do not desire each other's
acquaintanceship, or, if she considers that the introduction is not
altogether a suitable one, agreeable to both persons, she should not
make it, but converse with each visitor in turn, at the same time not
allowing the conversation to become too general.

At large gatherings, persons desirous of avoiding each other's
acquaintanceship, could be present at the house of a mutual acquaintance
without coming into direct contact with one another, providing the host
and hostess possessed sufficient tact and discretion not to attempt to
effect a _rapprochement_ between them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At Country-house Parties=, the hostess should introduce the principal
ladies to one another on the first day of their arrival; but if it is a
large party, introductions should not be generally made, but should be
made according to the judgment of the hostess. The fact of persons being
guests in the same house constitutes in itself an introduction, and it
rests with the guests thus brought together whether the acquaintanceship
ripens into subsequent intimacy or not.

The same remark applies in a degree to afternoon teas and "at homes."
The guests converse with each other if inclined to do so. The act of so
conversing would not constitute an acquaintanceship, although it might,
under some circumstances, establish a bowing acquaintanceship,
especially between gentlemen.

Ladies should not bow to each other after only exchanging a few remarks
at afternoon tea, or at a garden-party, unless there were some
particular social link between them to warrant their so doing, in which
case the lady of highest rank should take the initiative.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Introductions at Public Balls.=--It is erroneous to suppose that it is
the duty of stewards to make introductions at public balls; it is the
exception, and not the rule, for stewards to introduce persons to each
other who are strangers to themselves.

Society objects, and the stewards object, to making promiscuous
introductions, on the following grounds: first, as regards the chaperon,
whether mother or relative, who has the charge of a young lady; then as
regards a young lady herself; and last, but not least, as regards the
position occupied by the steward himself. A chaperon naturally looks and
feels displeased when a steward who is a stranger to herself offers to
introduce a man who is evidently a stranger to him, which fact she
gathers by his saying, "This gentleman wishes to be introduced to your
daughter," or by his asking the stranger his name before making the
introduction. A chaperon is responsible for the acquaintances a young
lady forms while under her charge at a ball, and if amongst her own
friends and acquaintances she cannot find partners for her, she would
prefer that she spent a comparatively dull evening than that she should
run the risk of forming undesirable acquaintances.

Young ladies have not always the discretion possessed by their elders,
or sufficient knowledge of the world to do the right thing. Thus, some
young ladies would either coldly decline the introductions, or if the
introductions were made, would as coldly decline to dance, whilst
others, anxious to dance, would accept both the introductions and the
partners, and take their chance as to whether their brothers would like
to see them dancing with strangers thus introduced. A steward himself
particularly dislikes to be made responsible for a man he does not know;
and whether a chaperon and a young lady are old friends of his, or
whether they are merely new acquaintances, they equally trust to his
not introducing men to them whom they would not care to know, and of
whom he knows nothing save that they have solicited an introduction to
them.

Very few stewards care to accost a lady whom they merely know by sight
and by name for the purpose of introducing a stranger; they prefer to
decline to make the introduction, on the plea of not having the honour
of the lady's acquaintance.

Stewards consider that the position of a young man must be a peculiar
one, and his presence at a ball somewhat of an anomaly, if he does not
possess an acquaintance in the room, through whom he can become known to
one or other of the stewards, or through whom he can be introduced to
any particular lady with whom he may desire to dance.

When a gentleman is introduced to a young lady at a public ball, it
generally means that he is introduced to her as a partner, and that
though he may not ask her for the next dance, he will for a subsequent
one, or that he will at least offer to take her in to supper, or, if
earlier in the evening, to give her some tea, or if she declines these
civilities, that he will continue a conversation with her until the next
dance commences, or until a dance is over. When a gentleman does neither
of these things, but walks away as soon as the introduction is made, it
is a proof how little he desired it, and that doubtless the option was
not given him of refusing it.

Good-natured friends of both sexes know how difficult it is to get
partners for well-dressed, well-mannered, good-looking girls at a ball,
unless they are more than ordinarily attractive in some way or other, in
which case they are popular and sought after, and the only difficulty
rests with the young ladies themselves as to how they shall best
apportion the dances so as to satisfy their numerous partners, or
persuade their chaperons to stay for one more dance which they have
promised to, etc.

It is a well-known fact in the ball-going world that the majority of
young men insist upon being introduced to the most popular girls in a
ball-room, and refuse being introduced to one who does not appear to
have plenty of partners.

Public balls are in reality made up of a number of small parties and
different sets, each set or party being entirely independent of the
other.

At county balls the county people take large house-parties, and each
house-party does or does not mingle with other house-parties, according
to standing or inclination.

If three large house-parties join forces at a ball they form a very
imposing majority; but there are other sets in the same ball-room,
dancing to the same band and adjourning to the same supper-room, equally
apart and equally distinct.

At balls held at watering-places, although the residents do not take
large house-parties, yet they join forces with those residents with whom
they are acquainted, reinforced by friends who come down purposely to be
present at the ball. Thus, on the face of it, a steward's introductions
cannot fail to be ill-received, in whatever set he may be coerced into
making them; and it is well understood that introductions, to prove
acceptable, should only be made through friends and acquaintances, and
even then with tact and judgment.

As the stewards of a ball are usually the most influential gentlemen in
the place, it naturally follows that they are acquainted with many, if
not with all, of the principal people present, therefore when they make
introductions it is not by virtue of their office, but simply as a
matter of friendship, and through being personally acquainted with those
introduced by them.

Introductions out of doors are rather a matter of inclination than not,
as, for instance, when a lady is walking with another lady to whom she
is on a visit she should introduce any friends to her hostess she might
happen to meet, and her hostess should do likewise if time and
opportunity offer for so doing; should any reason exist for not making
an introduction on the part of either lady, it should be explained when
they are again alone, as were either of the ladies to exclude the other
from the conversation it would be considered discourteous towards the
one excluded. When two ladies accidentally meet when out walking, and
are subsequently joined by two or more ladies, introductions should not
be made by either of the ladies, unless some special reason exists for
so doing. A lady, as a rule, should not introduce gentlemen to each
other unless one of them is her host, when it would be correct to do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

=How to act on the Occasion of an Introduction= is determined almost
entirely upon the reason for its being made, and by whom and to whom the
person is introduced. Even the _locale_ has something to do with it, and
thus a variety of issues are raised, upon which an instantaneous
judgment has to be given. The mind has to travel with lightning rapidity
over the ground to arrive at a correct course of action; but the mind
does not always respond to the call made upon it: it hesitates, and acts
not upon the outcome of reflection, but upon the spur of the moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Received Rule is not to shake hands=, but merely to bow on being
introduced; but this rule under certain circumstances would not meet the
case; it would disappoint the one introducing and the one introduced.
For instance if a relative of the former is the person introduced a bow
would be a very chilling response to the introduction made; to shake
hands, on the contrary, would be the correct thing to do, and both
persons should offer at the same moment this cordial recognition. On the
other hand, if a casual introduction is made without any premeditation,
and those introduced are totally unknown to each other, an exchange of
bows is all that is required of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Amongst the Exceptions for not merely bowing= on being introduced are
the introductions made between young ladies and elderly ones, and
between young ladies themselves. An elderly lady, as a general rule,
shakes hands with a girl introduced to her with the idea of being
cordial and kind, not to say condescending, and girls generally shake
hands with each other in place of bowing, as acquaintanceships formed by
them have not the importance that attaches to those of older ladies;
besides, a greater readiness to make friends is the privilege and
characteristic of youth.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Men take very much the Same View= as regards introductions as do
women--that is to say, if an introduction is made by a relative of the
man introduced, the men would shake hands and not merely bow. This holds
equally good where intimate friends are concerned: they almost rank on
the footing of relations, and a cordial reception is given to an
introduction thus made. When casual introductions are made of necessity
rather than of intention men do not shake hands. When "I think you have
met A." or "I think you know Mr. A." is said--the one by a host and the
other by a hostess--nothing further is required from either than a bow
and a smile of acquiescence accepting the introduction and a disclaimer
is not expected if "Mr. A." is not actually known. The uncertainty is an
excuse for making the introduction.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ladies do not rise from their Seats on being introduced either at an
"At Home"= or before dinner is announced, or after dinner, or when
calling when people are introduced to them, or when they themselves are
introduced. Half an exception occurs, it is true, at crowded "at homes,"
when to rise and talk to the lady introduced is almost a necessity:
there is no vacant seat for her to take, and, therefore, if both do not
stand, conversation is at a deadlock, as the few first conventional
remarks made by either are lost in the general buzz going on around;
also, it is awkward and ungraceful for a lady to bend over one seated
for the purpose of saying a few platitudes. "Introductory remarks," or
remarks following upon introductions, have too often a melancholy ring
of commonplaceness about them and are distinctly trite. How can they be
otherwise? To venture out of the commonplace into originality would be
suspicious of eccentricity, and no one wishes to be considered a little
odd.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Before and after Dinner, when Introductions are made= between ladies it
is to those seated near to each other, and, therefore, there would be no
occasion to rise, as there might be at an "at home." There is no
question of a lady rising from her seat when a man is introduced to her,
unless that man is her host, when she should rise and shake hands with
him, or a clerical dignity--a bishop for instance, if opportunity allows
of it, and on a semi-official occasion. This question does not trouble
men, as they are usually found standing, or they are brought up to a
person to be introduced, and even if a man ventures upon sitting down at
an "at home," or before dinner is announced, he springs to his feet with
alacrity when any approach is made in the matter of introducing him to a
fellow guest.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Introductions often have to be made at Afternoon Calls=, supposing that
two or three callers only are present and the hostess feels that she
must render the talk general by making some kind of introduction, direct
or indirect, as she thinks best. The ladies thus introduced remain
seated and bow. They do not shake hands even under the exceptional
conditions previously referred to, but they would at once join in the
talk that passes for conversation, and on departure would shake hands
with the relative in question after having shaken hands with the hostess
and having expressed pleasure at meeting this near relative--mother or
sister, or whoever she may happen to be.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Introductions between Callers= made under enforced circumstances have
not much bearing on future acquaintance. Those introduced pass so short
a time in each other's company, and know practically nothing of each
other's surroundings, that they are uncertain whether at future meetings
they ought to recollect that such introductions have taken place, and
whether they should bow or forget. Actually it would be correct to bow
if the opportunity is given so to do, but unless the wish to bestow
recognition is mutual it is of little avail if grudgingly given, and it
would be worse still were it withheld. Some people have short memories
for faces, and others are short-sighted, and both these drawbacks have
to be reckoned with when expecting recognition from a person to whom one
has been thus introduced.




CHAPTER III

LEAVING CARDS


The etiquette of card-leaving is a privilege which society places in the
hands of ladies to govern and determine their acquaintanceships and
intimacies, to regulate and decide whom they will, and whom they will
not visit, whom they will admit into their friendship, and whom they
will keep on the most distant footing, whose acquaintance they wish
further to cultivate and whose to discontinue.

It would seem that the act of leaving cards is but imperfectly
understood, and that many erroneous impressions prevail respecting the
actual use of visiting cards: The object of leaving cards is to signify
that a call has been made, due civility shown, and a like civility
expected in return.

Leaving cards, or card-leaving, is one of the most important of social
observances, as it is the ground-work or nucleus in general society of
all acquaintanceships. Leaving cards, according to etiquette, is the
first step towards forming, or towards enlarging, a circle of
acquaintances, and the non-fulfilment of the prescribed rules is a sure
step in the opposite direction. The following is the received code of
card-leaving in all its details according to the etiquette observed in
good society by both ladies and gentlemen, and should be faithfully
followed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady's Visiting Card= should be printed in small, clear copper-plate
script, and free from any kind of embellishment as regards ornamental
or Old English letters. It should not be a thin card, and should be
three inches and five eighths in width, and slightly under two and a
half in depth.

The name of the lady should be printed in the centre of the card, and
her address in the left-hand corner. If she has a second address, it
should be printed in the opposite corner of the card. If the second
address is but a temporary one, it is usually written and not printed.

A married lady should never use her christian name on a card; but she
should use her husband's christian name before her surname if his father
or elder brother is living.

It is now considered old-fashioned for husbands and wives to have their
names printed on the same card, although at watering-places, the
practice of having the two names on the same card, "Mr. and Mrs. Dash,"
is still occasionally followed; but even when these cards are used, a
lady and gentleman still require separate cards of their own.

A lady having a large acquaintance should keep a visiting book, in which
to enter the names of her acquaintances, and the date when their cards
were left upon her, with the dates of her return cards left upon them,
that she might know whether a card were due to her from them, or whether
it were due to them from her.

A lady having a small acquaintance would find a memorandum book
sufficient for the purpose; a line should be drawn down the centre of
every page, dividing it into two columns, the one column for the names,
and the opposite column for the dates of the calls made and returned.

Leaving cards principally devolves upon the mistress of a house; a wife
should leave cards for her husband, as well as for herself; and a
daughter for her father. The master of a house has little or no
card-leaving to do, beyond leaving cards upon his bachelor friends.

In the country it is otherwise, and those who return home are called
upon by their friends and acquaintances in the first instance, unless
under exceptional circumstances.

Ladies arriving in town should leave cards on their acquaintances and
friends to intimate that they have returned.

Visiting cards should be left in person, and should not be sent by post,
although in town, when the distance is considerable, it is tacitly
allowed; but, as a rule, ladies invariably leave their cards themselves.
On arriving in town for the season ladies having a large acquaintance
often send their visiting cards to their various friends and
acquaintances by a man-servant or through a stationer.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Routine of Card-leaving.=--As regards the routine of card-leaving.
When driving, a lady should desire her footman to inquire if the
mistress of the house at which she is calling is "at home." If not "at
home," and it is a first call, she should hand him _three_ cards--_one_
of her own, and _two_ of her husband's. Her card is left for the
mistress of the house, and her husband's cards for both master and
mistress.

If not a first call a lady should leave one only of her husband's cards
if his acquaintance with her friend's husband is an intimate one and
they are in the habit of meeting frequently. If, on the contrary, they
know each other but slightly, and meet but seldom, then two of his cards
should be left. This, however, not on every occasion of calling.

When a lady is merely leaving cards, she should hand the three cards to
her servant, saying, "For Mrs. ----." This ensures the cards being left
at the right address, and is the correct formula for the occasion.

When a lady is walking, and finds the mistress of the house at which she
calls is "not at home," she should act as above.

When a lady intends making a call she should ask if "Mrs. ---- is at
home?" And if the answer is in the affirmative, she should, after making
the call, leave _two_ of her husband's cards on the hall table, and
neither put them in the card-basket nor leave them on the drawing-room
table, nor offer them to her hostess, all of which would be very
incorrect; but she might on reaching the hall hand them to the
man-servant silently, or she might send them in by her own servant when
seated in her carriage, saying, "For Mr. and Mrs. Smith." She should not
leave her _own_ card on the hall table, as, having seen the lady of the
house, the reason for doing so no longer exists.[1]

When a lady calling is accompanied by her husband and the mistress of
the house is at home, the husband should leave one of his cards only,
for the absent master of the house; when the master of the house is at
home also, a card in that case should not be left.

When the mistress of a house has a grown-up daughter or daughters, the
lady leaving cards should turn down one corner of her visiting card--the
right-hand corner generally--to include the daughter or daughters in the
call. This custom of turning down a corner of a visiting card signifies
that other ladies of the family besides the hostess are included in the
call. A foreigner turns down the _end_ of a card instead of one corner
only, which has not the same signification. It is to denote that he has
left it in person.

A lady should not leave one of her husband's cards for the daughters of
the house, but she not unfrequently leaves his card for the grown-up
sons of the house.

When a lady intends leaving cards on a friend who is the guest of some
one with whom she is unacquainted, she should only leave cards for her
friend and not for her friend's hostess; but if she is slightly
acquainted with her friend's hostess, she should leave cards upon her
on the occasion of her first visit to her friend, but it would not be
necessary to do so at every subsequent visit, especially if they were of
frequent occurrence.

Young ladies should not have visiting cards of their own; their names
should be printed beneath that of their mother on her card. In the case
of there being no mother living, the daughter's name should be printed
beneath that of her father on the usual lady's visiting card, but never
on the smaller cards used by gentlemen. When young ladies are taken out
into society by relatives or friends, their names should be written in
pencil under the names of the ladies chaperoning them on their visiting
cards.

Maiden ladies of a certain age should have visiting cards of their own,
but until a young lady has attained what is termed a certain age, it
argues no little independence of action to have a card of her own; but
when she no longer requires chaperonage, she is entitled to a card of
her own, being clearly her own mistress, and able to choose her own
acquaintances.

When a young lady is on a visit unaccompanied by her parents, and wishes
to call on ladies with whom the lady she is staying with is
unacquainted, she should leave her mother's card on which her own name
is also printed, and should draw a pencil through her mother's name to
intimate that she was not with her on that occasion.

Cards should always be returned within a week if possible, or ten days
at latest, after they have been left, but to do so within a week is more
courteous. And care must be taken to return the "call" or "cards"
according to the etiquette observed by the person making the call or
leaving the card; that is to say, that a "call" must _not_ be returned
by a card only, or a "card" by a "call." This is a point ladies should
be very punctilious about.

Should a lady of higher rank return a card by a "call," asking if the
mistress of the house were "at home," her so doing would be in strict
etiquette; and should she return a "call" by a card only, it should be
understood that she wished the acquaintance to be of the slightest; and
should a lady call upon an acquaintance of higher rank than herself, who
had only left a card upon her, her doing so would be a breach of
etiquette.

In large establishments the hall porter enters the names of all callers
in a book expressly kept for the purpose, while some ladies merely
desire their servant to sort the cards left for them.

The name of the lady or gentleman for whom the cards are intended should
never be written on the cards left at a house. The only case in which it
should be done would be when cards are left on a lady or a gentleman
staying at a crowded hotel, when, to save confusion, and to ensure their
receiving them, their names should be written on them thus: "For Mr. and
Mrs. Smith." But this would be quite an exceptional case, otherwise to
do so would be extremely vulgar.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leaving Cards after Entertainments.=--Visiting cards should be left
after the following entertainments: balls, receptions, private
theatricals, amateur concerts, and dinners, by those who have been
invited, whether the invitations have been accepted or not, and should
be left the day after the entertainment if possible, and certainly
within the week according to the rules of card-leaving already
described. On these occasions cards should be left without inquiry as to
whether the hostess is at home, although after a dinner-party it is the
rule to ask if she is at home, as to dine at a house denotes a greater
intimacy than being present at a large gathering. If the hostess were
not at home, cards should be left.

If a lady has been but once present at any entertainment, whether the
invitation came through a mutual friend or direct from the hostess
herself, the hostess being but a slight acquaintance of her own, besides
leaving cards on her the day following, she can, if she desires, leave
cards on her the following season, or, if residing in the same town,
within a reasonable time of the entertainment; but if these cards are
not acknowledged by cards being left in return, she should of course
understand that the acquaintance is to proceed no further.

A lady should not leave cards on another lady to whom she has but
recently been introduced at a dinner-party or afternoon tea; for
instance, she must meet her several times in society, and feel sure that
her acquaintance is desired, before venturing to leave cards. If two
ladies are of equal rank, tact will be their best guide as to the
advisability of leaving cards or not upon each other; the lady of
superior rank may take the initiative if she pleases. If either of the
ladies express a wish to further the acquaintance by asking the other to
call upon her, the suggestion should come from the lady of highest rank;
if of equal rank it is immaterial as to which first makes the
suggestion. But in either case the call should be paid within the week.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leaving Cards upon New-comers.=--In the country the residents should be
the first to leave cards on the new-comers, after ascertaining the
position which the new-comers occupy in society.

Persons moving in the same sphere should either leave cards or call
according as they intend to be ceremonious or friendly, and the return
visits should be paid in like manner, a card for a card, a call for a
call.

It is the received rule that residents should call on new-comers,
although having no previous acquaintance with them, or introductions to
them.

New-comers, even if of higher rank, should not call on residents in the
first instance, but should wait until the residents have taken the
initiative. If residents do not wish to continue the acquaintance after
the first meeting, it is discontinued by not leaving cards, or by not
calling again, and if the new-comers feel disinclined to continue the
acquaintance they should return the calls by leaving cards only. Calling
on new-comers in the country should not be done indiscriminately, and
due consideration should be paid to individual status in society.

The lady of highest social position in the circle to which the
new-comers belong generally takes the responsibility of calling first on
the new-comers. By new-comers is expressed persons who intend to reside
in a county or town for a long, or even for a short period, and who are
not casual visitors in the place.

The custom of residents calling on new-comers is entirely confined to
county society, and does not apply to residents in large towns and
populous watering-places.

In old cathedral cities and quiet country towns, far from the
metropolis, on the contrary, the rule holds good of residents calling
on new-comers.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cards "To Inquire."=--Cards to inquire after friends during their
illness should be left in person, and should not be sent by post; but
they may be sent by a servant. On a lady's visiting card should be
written above the printed name: "To inquire after Mrs. Smith." When the
person inquired after is sufficiently recovered to return thanks in
person, the usual visiting card, with "many thanks for kind inquiries,"
written above the printed name, is the usual mode of returning thanks,
and is all-sufficient for the purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

=P.P.C. Cards.=--Formerly P.P.C. cards were left within a week of
departure, or within ten days if the acquaintance was a large one.

The letters P.P.C. for _pour prendre congé_, written at the lower corner
of visiting cards, indicate departure from town or from a neighbourhood.
P.P.C. cards may be left in person or sent by a servant; they can also
be sent by post. The object of leaving P.P.C. cards is to avoid
leave-takings and correspondence concerning departure, and to prevent
offence being given if letters and invitations remained unanswered.

In the country an absence of from three to six months renders leaving
P.P.C. cards somewhat necessary; under that period it would be
unnecessary to give notice of a temporary absence which does not amount
to an actual departure. Short absences render it unnecessary to leave
P.P.C. cards. Holiday movements at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide
are thoroughly recognized, and no leave-taking is obligatory. P.P.C.
cards are now seldom if ever left in town.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Business Calls.=--When a lady makes a strictly business call upon
either a lady or gentleman she should give her card to the servant to
be taken to his master or mistress, but on no other occasion should
she do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gentlemen's Visiting Cards.=--A gentleman's card should be thin--thick
cards are not in good taste--and not glazed, and of the usual narrow
width, _i.e._ one and a half inches in depth, and three inches in width;
his name should be printed in the centre, thus: "Mr. Smith" or "Mr.
Francis Smith," should he require the addition of his christian name to
distinguish him from his father or elder brother. To have "Francis
Smith" printed on the card without the prefix of "Mr." would be in
bad taste.

Initials appertaining to honorary rank should never be written or
printed on a card, such as D.L., K.C., M.P., K.C.B., M.D., etc. Military
or professional titles necessarily precede the surname of the person
bearing them, and are always used, such as "Colonel Smith," "Captain
Smith," "Rev. H. Smith," "Dr. Smith," etc.

As regards titles, "The Honourable" is the only title that is not used
on a visiting card. Thus "The Honourable Henry Smith's" card should bear
the words "Mr. Henry Smith" only.

A Baronet's card should be printed thus, "Sir George Smith," and a
Knight's card thus, "Sir Charles Smith." A gentleman's address should be
printed in the left hand corner of the card. If a member of a club, it
is usual to print the name of the club at the right hand. Officers
usually have the name of the club printed at the left hand corner in the
place of the address, and the regiment to which they belong at the right
hand.

Cards should be printed in small copper-plate script, without
ornamentation of any kind. Old English letters look old-fashioned on a
card, and are but little used; and ornamental capital letters are never
used, and are out of date. The lettering should be as plain and as free
from any sort of embellishment as it well can be.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Routine of Card-leaving for Gentlemen.=--To bachelors card-leaving
is an irksome routine of etiquette, and is, therefore, in a measure
often neglected, by reason of their having little or no leisure at
command during the afternoon hours. This is now thoroughly understood
and accepted in general society. When, however, a bachelor has his way
to make in society and has leisure to further the acquaintanceships he
has already made, he should follow the rules of card-leaving.

Bachelors, as a rule, are expected to leave cards on the master and
mistress of a house with whom they are acquainted as soon as they are
aware that the family have arrived in town; or if a bachelor himself has
been away, he should leave cards on his acquaintances immediately after
his return. He should leave one card for the mistress of the house and
one for its master.

A gentleman should not turn down a corner of his card, even though he
may be acquainted with other ladies of the family besides the mistress
of the house. A gentleman should not leave a card for the young
daughters of the house, or for any young relative of its mistress who
might be staying with her; but if a married couple with whom he is
acquainted were staying with the friends on whom he is calling, he
should leave two cards for them, one for the wife and one for the
husband, and should tell the servant for whom they are intended.

As regards leaving cards upon new acquaintances, a gentleman should not
leave his card upon a married lady, or the mistress of a house, to whom
he has been introduced, however gracious or agreeable she has been to
him, unless she expressly asks him to call, or gives him to understand
in an unmistakable manner that his doing so would be agreeable to her.
This rule holds good, whether the introduction has taken place at a
dinner-party, at a ball, at an "at home," at a country-house gathering,
or elsewhere; he would not be entitled to leave his card on her on such
slight acquaintanceship; as, if she desired his further acquaintance,
she would make some polite allusion to his calling at her house, in
which case he should leave his card on her as soon afterwards as
convenient, and he should also leave a card for the master of the house,
the lady's husband or father (as the case may be), even if he had not
made his acquaintance when making that of the lady.

A gentleman should not leave a card on a young lady to whom he has
been introduced, but upon her mother or the relative with whom she
is residing.

When the acquaintance existing between gentlemen is but slight, they
should occasionally leave cards upon each other, especially when they do
not move in the same circle, and are not otherwise likely to meet; it
generally follows that the one who most desires the acquaintanceship is
the one to leave his card first, always supposing that the strength of
the acquaintance would warrant his so doing. The one of highest rank
should be the one to intimate that he desires the acquaintance of the
other; if the rank be equal, it is a matter of inclination which calls
first.

The rules of etiquette, though stringent as regards acquaintances, have
little or no application as regards intimate friends; friendship
overrules etiquette.

When a bachelor has a number of intimate friends, very little
card-leaving is required from him as far as they are concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Leaving Cards after Entertainments.=--In the event of a gentleman
receiving an invitation to an entertainment from an acquaintance, or
from a new acquaintance, or through some mutual friend, he should leave
his cards at the house within a week or ten days after the
entertainment, one for the mistress and one for the master of the house,
whether he has accepted the invitation or not. Between friends this rule
is greatly relaxed.

It is usual for a gentleman to leave his cards on the host or on the
hostess, after every entertainment to which he has been invited by them,
whether it be a dinner-party, or ball, or "at home," etc. Whether he has
been present or not, the fact of his having been invited by them obliges
him to pay them this civility, although great latitude as regards time
is now accorded in general society with regard to this particular rule.

If invited by a new acquaintance, the cards should be left a few days
after the entertainment, but if by a less recent acquaintance they
should be left within ten days or a fortnight, but the earlier the cards
are left the greater the politeness shown.

If a bachelor acquaintance gives an entertainment, the same rule applies
as to the necessity of cards being left on him by those gentlemen but
slightly acquainted with him who have been invited to the entertainment.

When a gentleman has been invited to an entertainment given at the house
of a new acquaintance, whether the acquaintance be a lady or a
gentleman, it would be etiquette for him to leave his card upon them on
their arrival in town or elsewhere, even though they may not have
invited him to any subsequent entertainment given by them within the
year. If during the following year they do not again invite him, he
might consider the acquaintance at an end and cease to call. These
complimentary calls made, or rather cards left, should not average more
than four during the year.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Memorial Cards= are out of date in society, and consequently should not
be sent to either relatives or friends.

A widow should not make use of her christian name on her visiting cards
to distinguish her from other members of her late husband's family. Her
cards should be printed as during his lifetime.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It is, however, permissible on the occasion of a _first_ call to
say, "I shall leave my card in the hall to remind you of my address";
or some such phrase.




CHAPTER IV

PAYING CALLS


Ladies stand upon strict and ceremonious etiquette with each other as
regards both paying and receiving calls. Ignorance or neglect of the
rules which regulate paying calls, brings many inconveniences in its
train; for instance, when a lady neglects to pay a call due to an
acquaintance, she runs the risk of herself and daughters being excluded
from entertainments given by the said acquaintance.

When a call has not been made within a reasonable time, a coldness is
apt to arise between ladies but slightly acquainted with each other.
Some ladies take this omission good-naturedly or indifferently, while
with others the acquaintance merges into a mere bowing acquaintance to
be subsequently dropped altogether.

The first principle of calling is, that those who are the first to
arrive in town should be the _first_ to call upon their acquaintances to
intimate their return.

"Morning calls," so designated on account of their being made before
dinner, are, more strictly speaking, "afternoon calls," as they should
only be made between the hours of three and six o'clock.

Calls made in the morning--that is before one o'clock--would not come
under the denomination of "morning calls," as they can only be made by
intimate friends and not by acquaintances, and are not, therefore,
amenable to the rules of etiquette which govern the afternoon calls,
which calls are regulated in a great measure--as to the hour of
calling--by the exact degree of intimacy existing between the person who
calls and the person called upon. From three to four o'clock is the
ceremonious hour for calling; from four to five o'clock is the
semi-ceremonious hour; and from five to six o'clock is the wholly
friendly and without ceremony hour.

If a lady is driving when she calls at the house of an acquaintance, she
should say to her servant, "Ask if Mrs. A---- is at home."

When a lady is walking, she should ask the same question herself.

When the answer is in the negative, she should leave one of her own
cards and one of her husband's, and should say to the servant, "For Mr.
and Mrs. A----."

When the answer is in the affirmative, the lady should enter the house
without further remark and follow the servant to the drawing-room.

The servant should go before the visitor, to lead the way to the
drawing-room, and, however accustomed a visitor may be to a house, it is
still the proper etiquette for the servant to lead the way, and announce
him or her to his mistress; and this rule should not be dispensed with,
except in the case of very near relations or very intimate friends.

At the drawing-room door the servant waits for a moment until the
visitor has reached the landing, when the visitor should give his or her
name to the servant, "Mr. A----" or "Mrs. A----," should the servant be
unacquainted with it.

If the visitor calling bears the title of "Honourable" it should not be
mentioned by him or her to the servant when giving the name, neither
should it be mentioned by the servant when announcing the visitor.

All titles are given in full by the servants of those who bear them,
thus: "The Duke and Duchess of A----," "The Marquis and Marchioness of
B----," "The Earl and Countess of C----," "Viscount and Viscountess
D----," "Lord and Lady E----," etc.; but a marchioness, a countess, or a
viscountess when giving her name to be announced at a morning call would
style herself "Lady A----" only.

A gentleman or lady should never give his or her visiting card to the
servant when the mistress of the house is at home.

A servant should not knock at the drawing-room door when announcing
visitors. The servant, on opening the drawing-room door, should stand
inside the doorway, he should not stand behind the door, but well into
the room; facing the mistress of the house if possible, and should say,
"Mr. A----," or "Mrs. A----."

When the mistress of the house is not in the drawing-room when a visitor
arrives, the visitor should seat herself and rise at her entrance.

Visitors should not make any inquiries of the servant as to how long his
mistress will be, or where she is, or what she is doing, etc. Visitors
are not expected to converse with the servants of their acquaintances,
and should not enter into conversation with them.

Formerly a gentleman when calling, took his hat and stick in his hand
with him into the drawing-room, and held them until he had seen the
mistress of the house and shaken hands with her. He either placed them
on a chair or table near at hand or held them in his hand, according as
to whether he felt at ease or the reverse, until he took his leave. Many
middle-aged and elderly men still follow this fashion in a degree, and
take their hats and sticks into the drawing-room when making formal
calls.

The newer fashion amongst younger men is to leave their hats and sticks
in the hall and not to take them into the drawing-room with them when
calling. To do this is now very general, as hats are in the way if tea
is going on; besides, men were apt to forget where they placed their
hats, and frequently had to return to the drawing-room in search of
them.

At "at homes," small afternoon teas, luncheons, dinners, etc., the rule
is the same, and hats are left in the hall by invited guests.

A gentleman should not take his stick or umbrella with him into the
drawing-room, but leave it in the hall.

When gentlemen wear gloves, they can take them off or keep them on as
they please, it is immaterial which they do, but when a call is made
when tea is going on, it is more usual to take them off.

When the mistress of the house is in the drawing-room when a visitor is
announced--and she should so arrange her occupations as always to be
found there on the afternoons when she intends being "at home" should
visitors call--she should rise, come forward, and shake hands with her
visitor. She should not ask her visitor to be seated, or to "take a
seat," but she might say, "Where will you sit?" or, "Will you sit here?"
or something to this effect; and should at once sit down and expect her
visitor to do the same, as near to herself as possible.

Both hostess and visitor should guard against displaying a fussy
demeanour during a morning call, as a morning call is oftener than not a
_tête-à-tête_, and a _tête-à-tête_ between two persons but slightly
acquainted with each other requires a considerable amount of tact and
_savoir vivre_ to be sustained with ease and self-possession. A fussy
woman is without repose, without dignity, and without _savoir vivre_.

A hostess betrays that she is not much accustomed to society when she
attempts to amuse her visitor by the production of albums, photographs,
books, illustrated newspapers, portfolios of drawings, the artistic
efforts of the members of the family, and the like; conversation being
all that is necessary, without having recourse to pictorial displays.

If not intimate enough to refer to family matters, the conversation
should turn on light topics of the hour.[2]

People unused to society are apt to fall back upon the above
adventitious aids. A hostess should rely solely upon her own powers of
conversation to make the short quarter of an hour--which is the limit of
a ceremonious call--pass pleasantly to her visitor. The hostess should
not offer her visitor any refreshments, wine and cake, for instance. No
refreshments whatever, save tea, should be offered to morning visitors;
they are not supposed to require them.

In the country it is customary to offer sherry to gentlemen callers, and
to order tea for the ladies, even though the call is made rather early
in the afternoon, and a little before the hour for having tea.

Ceremonious visits are usually paid before the hour of half-past four;
but if tea is brought in while the visitor is in the drawing-room, or if
the visitor calls while the hostess is having tea, she should naturally
offer her visitor tea.

When the mistress of the house only expects a few callers, "tea" is
placed on a small table--a silver tray being generally used for the
purpose. The hostess should pour out the tea herself; when a gentleman
is present, he should hand the cups to the visitors or visitor,
otherwise the hostess should herself do so, and then hand the sugar and
cream, without asking whether her visitors will have either, unless she
is preparing the cups of tea herself, in which case she should ask the
question.

When a second visitor arrives, ten or fifteen minutes after the first
visitor, the first visitor should take her leave as soon as she
conveniently can. When the second visitor is a lady, the hostess should
rise and shake hands with her, and then seat herself; the first visitor,
if a lady, should not rise; if a gentleman, he should do so.

A hostess should also rise and come forward when a gentleman is
announced; this gives her an opportunity of talking to him for a few
moments on his first entering the room. The second visitor should at
once seat him or herself near to the hostess.

She should introduce the callers to each other unless she has some
especial reason for not doing so. She could, however, in the course of
conversation merely mention the name of each caller, so that each may
become aware of the name of the other. This is now often done when
formal introductions are not made. If the hostess possesses tact, and a
facility and readiness of speech, she should skilfully draw both callers
into the conversation (a subject which is fully enlarged upon in "The
Art of Conversing"). The hostess should not take this latter course
unless aware that the two visitors would be likely to appreciate
each other.

When one visitor arrives immediately after the other, the hostess should
converse equally with both visitors, and the lady who was the first to
arrive should be the first to leave, after a call of from ten to fifteen
minutes. When only one visitor is present the hostess should accompany
her to the door of the drawing-room, and linger for a few moments,
whilst the visitor is descending the stairs. To do so would not be
imperative, but it would be courteous. When the host is present he
should accompany the lady downstairs into the hall; this also is an
optional civility, and greatly depends upon the estimation in which the
lady is held by host and hostess.

When two visitors are present the hostess should rise and shake hands
with the departing visitor; but unless a person of greater consideration
than the visitor who still remained seated, she should not accompany her
to the drawing-room door.

One visitor should not rise from her seat when another is about to take
her leave. When visitors are acquainted with each other they should rise
and shake hands. When one of the visitors is a gentleman he should rise,
even if unacquainted with the lady who is about to take her leave; he
should not remain seated when the hostess is standing.

When two visitors, either two ladies or two gentlemen, have slightly
conversed with each other during a morning call, they should not shake
hands with each other on leaving, but should merely bow. When they have
not spoken to each other, they should not bow.

When they have been formally introduced they should still only bow,
unless the acquaintance has progressed into sudden intimacy through
previous knowledge of each other.

When one of the visitors present is a gentleman he should open the
drawing-room door for the departing visitor, but he should not accompany
her downstairs unless requested by the hostess to do so; the visitor
should bow to him and thank him, but not shake hands with him.

When the hostess has shaken hands with a guest, and before crossing the
room with her, she should ring the drawing-room bell, that the servant
may be in readiness in the hall to open the door. She should ring the
bell even if the host were accompanying the lady downstairs. It would be
thoughtless on the part of the hostess to forget to ring the bell to
give notice to the servant that a visitor was leaving.

In the country, the caller before rising to depart sometimes asks if she
may ring for her motor-car to come round. When the hostess is in reach
of the bell, she should ring it for her; when a gentleman is present, he
should do so. On the servant's entrance, the caller should say, "My
motor-car, please!"

When a lady is calling on a friend, the guest of some one with whom she
herself is unacquainted, or even but slightly acquainted, she should in
both cases ask if her friend is at home, and not if the mistress of the
house is at home; and having paid her visit, on leaving the house she
should leave cards for its mistress if she is slightly acquainted with
her, but should not do so if she is unacquainted with her.

When a lady has a guest staying on a visit to her, if convenient, she
should, when her guest expected visitors, absent herself from the
drawing-room at that particular time, unless the expected visitors are
mutual friends of herself and guest.

If she is in the drawing-room with her guests when a visitor is
announced so as to render an introduction inevitable, a formal
introduction should be made, but the mistress of the house, after a very
few minutes, should make some excuse, quietly leave the room, and not
return until after the departure of the visitor. It would be
inconsiderate were the mistress of the house to remain in the
drawing-room while calls were paid to her guest by strangers to herself
unless at her guest's particular request. When a visitor is a gentleman,
and the guest a young unmarried lady, the mistress of the house should
remain in the drawing-room to chaperon her.

When the mistress of the house is desirous of making the acquaintance of
any particular friend of her guest, from whom she expected a visit, when
the visit occurs and previous to the visitor taking her leave, the guest
should ask if she will allow her to introduce her to the lady with whom
she is staying. If her visitor desires the introduction, she should then
ring and request the servant to tell his mistress that Mrs. A. is in the
drawing-room, which message the hostess would understand to mean that
her presence is desired, and the introduction would then be made on her
appearing. An introduction, if made in this manner, could become the
basis of a future acquaintance, both ladies having had the option of
refusing the acquaintance of the other if so disposed; whereas a forced
introduction where no option is given would hardly count as the basis of
a future acquaintance unless the ladies thus introduced mutually
appreciated each other.

In the country a guest seldom has friends and acquaintances in the
neighbourhood, who are unknown to her hostess; if otherwise, the
hostess should give her guest the opportunity of seeing her visitor by
leaving them together when the call is made.

When a guest is present when the mistress of a house is receiving
callers, she should introduce them to her guest or her guest to them,
according to the rank of either (see Chapter II.).

When a lady is driving with a friend who is a stranger to the
acquaintance on whom she is calling, she should not take her into the
house with her while she makes her call, unless she is a young lady, or
unless there is some especial reason for introducing the two ladies to
each other, or unless both ladies have expressed a wish to become
acquainted with each other. Husbands and wives occasionally pay calls
together, but oftener they do not. A lady, as a rule, pays a call by
herself, unless she has a grown-up daughter, when she should accompany
her mother.

Occasionally two ladies, both intimate with the lady of the house, pay
their calls together. A family party, of father and mother and daughter,
or daughters, rarely call in town together, save under very exceptional
circumstances; but in the country a family party of three or four
would, as a matter of course, call together; it is country etiquette
to do so.

A considerable difference exists with regard to "Sunday calls," or
calling on Sundays. Ladies should not pay ceremonious calls on Sundays;
it would not be etiquette for an acquaintance to call on a Sunday, it
would rather be considered a liberty, unless she were expressly asked to
do so. Intimate friends, on the contrary, often make Sunday a special
day for calling, and therefore, ladies and gentlemen--more especially
gentlemen--extend their calling hours from three until six o'clock
on Sundays.

When a lady is acquainted with the daughters of a family only, and not
with their father or mother, she should call on the daughters, who
should at once introduce her to their mother on the next occasion of
calling. If the mother is not present, the lady calling should leave
cards for her; and at all morning calls, when the daughters of the house
receive a ceremonious visit from an acquaintance, in the absence of
their mother, whether from indisposition or any other cause, cards
should be left for her in the hall before leaving by the lady calling
(see Chapter III.).

In all cases, when "morning calls" are made, and the lady called on is
not at home, cards should be left according to the etiquette described
in Chapter II., an etiquette which should be strictly observed; when the
lady called on is "at home," cards should be left for the gentlemen of
the family, according to the same rules of card-leaving, which cannot be
too punctiliously followed.

A mistress of a house should inform her servant after or before
luncheon, or before the hours for calling, whether she intends to be "at
home" to visitors or not during the afternoon.

"Not at home" is the understood formula expressive of not wishing to
see visitors.

"Not at home" is not intended to imply an untruth, but rather to signify
that for some reason, or reasons, it is not desirable to see visitors;
and as it would be impossible to explain to acquaintances the why and
the wherefore of its being inconvenient to receive visitors, the formula
of "Not at home" is all-sufficient explanation, provided always that a
servant is able to give a direct answer at once of "Not at home" when
the query is put to him. If a servant is not sure as to whether his
mistress wishes to see visitors or not, it is almost a direct offence to
the lady calling if he hesitates as to his answer, and leaves her either
sitting in her carriage or standing in the hall, while "He will see if
his mistress is 'at home,'" perhaps returning with the unsatisfactory
answer that she is "Not at home"; in which case the intimation is almost
received as a personal exclusion rather than as a general exclusion
of visitors.

If a lady is dressing to go out when a visitor calls, the servant can
mention that fact to a visitor calling, and offer to ascertain if his
mistress will see the caller; and the caller should use her own
discretion as to whether she will allow him to do so or not; but unless
the visit is one of importance, it would be best in such a case only to
leave cards.

When a second visitor calls, a servant should not be permitted to say
that his mistress is "engaged with a lady," or "with a gentleman," but
should usher the second caller into the drawing-room, as he has
previously done the first caller. He should not inquire as to whether
his mistress will see the second caller or not. Neither should he inform
the second caller as to whether any one is or is not with his mistress,
as ignorant servants are too apt to do.

It is not usual to offer coffee at afternoon tea; tea only is given. To
offer coffee is a foreign fashion, and not an English one.

"Morning" callers should not be conducted to the dining-room to have
tea; and tea is only served in the dining-room on the occasion of a
large afternoon tea, or afternoon "at home," etc. (See chapter on
"Afternoon 'At Homes'" p. 151.)

The tea hour varies from 4 to 4.30 o'clock. When callers are present at
4 o'clock, tea should be brought in at that hour. It should be placed
upon a small table, which is first covered with a white linen or damask
tea-cloth. The tea-tray should be large enough to hold, in addition to
the china, silver teapot, etc., an urn for hot water, which should be
brought in and placed upon it. A stand containing hot cakes, an uncut
cake, small cakes, tiny sandwiches, and thin bread-and-butter should be
placed near to the tea-table. Tiny tea-plates should be placed in a pile
upon the tea-tray, they being in general use. The hostess or her
daughter should pour out the tea.

Apart from the foregoing style of afternoon tea is the newer fashion of
what might be termed "a round-table tea," at which hostess and guests
sit, but this style is more usual at country houses than in town houses
at present, on account of the space required, if for no other reason.
The tea is served in a smaller drawing-room, upon a large round or oval
table, which is covered with a white table-cloth, upon which the
tea-tray with all its contents is placed. Cakes, hot and cold,
sandwiches, pastry, fruit, jam, bread-and-butter, biscuits, dry toast,
etc., are given, and the visitors seated at the table help themselves to
what they require. The hostess pours out the tea and hands the cups as
when guests are not seated in this way. Dessert plates and dessert
knives and forks should be placed on the table beside the small
tea-plates, to be taken as required.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] See work entitled "The Art of Conversing."




CHAPTER V

PRECEDENCY


The order of precedency due to each individual according to rank is a
matter of great importance at official banquets and at ceremonious
dinner-parties, when its correct observance should be strictly
adhered to.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards Precedency amongst Royal Personages=, the Sovereign takes
precedence of all others in the realm; the King takes precedence of
Queen Mary. The Prince of Wales takes precedence of the Duke of
Connaught. Queen Alexandra takes precedence of the Royal Princesses. The
Royal Princesses take precedence of their husbands, Prince Christian and
the Duke of Argyll.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Precedency accorded to Foreign Royal Personages= in this country
very much depends upon their individual rank. Imperial Highnesses and
Royal Highnesses take precedence of Serene Highnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Precedency accorded to Eastern Princes= is generally synonymous
with that accorded to Serene Highnesses; but in some instances the
claims of individual precedency are so difficult to define, that in
official cases it is sometimes necessary to make a special rule as to
the amount of precedency to be allowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards General Precedency=, archbishops, ambassadors, The Lord High
Chancellor, The Prime Minister, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, Lord
President of the Council, and Lord Privy Seal, take precedence of
dukes; dukes take precedence of earls, and so on throughout the various
degrees of nobility.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Foreign Ministers and Envoys= take precedence next after dukes, in the
order of their seniority of service in England. In all cases where
precedency is to be established between persons of equal rank it is
necessary to refer to a Peerage for date of creation of title, as this
actually decides all precedency.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For Precedency due to Baronets= and their wives a Baronetage should
be consulted.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For Precedency due to Knights= and their wives a Knightage should be
consulted in reference to each order of knighthood.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For the Precedency due to the Legal Profession= a Law List should be
consulted when it is not defined by office or birth.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For the Precedency due to the Clergy= a Clergy List should be consulted
when superior preferment or birth does not define it.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For the Precedency due to Officers= in the army and navy an Army List
and a Navy List should be consulted to determine the precedency due to
each in the separate Services.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Officers should be sent in to Dinner= according to the dates of
commission, but no branch of the Army takes precedence over the other as
regards rank of officers; that is to say, a colonel of 1901, of say, a
West India regiment, would precede a colonel of Guards, artillery or
cavalry of 1902 promotion. Drawn up on a brigade parade, the cavalry
take the right of the line; thus: Artillery, Royal Engineers, footguards
and regular regiments, regiments and West India regiments, in the order
named in the Army List.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards Precedency between Officers= of the combined Services a
table of "Relative Rank and Precedency in the Army and Navy" should be
consulted, as a captain in the navy after three years' service ranks
with a colonel in the army, a lieutenant of the navy of eight years'
standing ranks with a major in the army, and a lieutenant under that
standing in the navy, ranks with a captain in the army, etc.

Consulate officers also take precedence according to seniority of
service in England and date of official arrival. The Foreign Office List
of the current year should be consulted for date in each instance.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards the Precedence due to Widows= bearing titles who have
married again: The widow of a peer married to a commoner retains her
title by courtesy, and the precedency due to the title is accorded
to her.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When the Widow of a Duke= marries a person of lower rank than that of
her late husband, she still retains her precedency.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Daughter of a Peer= if married to a baronet or a commoner retains
her precedency, but if married to a baron her precedency is merged in
that of her husband.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Widow of a Baronet= married to a commoner retains her title by
right and not by courtesy.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Widow of a Knight= married to a commoner retains her title by
courtesy only, but the precedency due to the widow of a knight is
accorded to her.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When the Daughter of a Duke= marries a peer she takes the precedency
due to the rank of her husband; if she marries a commoner, precedency is
accorded to her due to the daughter of a duke.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Age confers no Precedency= on either sex. Equals in rank from the
highest to the lowest take precedence according to the creation of their
title and not as regards the age of the person bearing the title. As,
for instance, a youthful duke would take precedence of an aged duke, if
the title of the youthful duke bore an earlier date than that of the
aged duke. The same rule applies equally to baronets and knights.

When two earls are present at a dinner-party, the date of their
respective patents of nobility decides the order of precedency due
to them.

A host or hostess should always consult a "Peerage" or a "Baronetage" if
in doubt as to the precedence due to expected guests bearing titles;
wealth or social position are not taken into account in this matter, it
being strictly a question of date.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Precedence due to Ladies of Equal Rank= takes effect in the same
manner. Thus, a young wife of a baronet takes precedence over the
elderly wife of a baronet if the creation of her husband's title bears
an earlier date.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When the Claims to Precedency of Persons of Equal Rank= clash, the
claims of a gentleman should be waived in favour of those of a lady,
should the persons be of opposite sexes. Thus, if two couples of
superior rank to the other guests were present at a dinner-party, the
host should take down the lady of highest rank, and the hostess should
be taken down by the gentleman of highest rank, in which case the lady
second in rank should go in to dinner _before_ her husband, although
the gentleman taking her down to dinner were of lower rank than her
husband.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Esquires, and the Wives of Esquires=, take precedence according to
their social position. Members of Parliament have no precedence, though
it is often accorded to them as a matter of courtesy, especially in the
county which they represent; the wives of members of Parliament are
likewise entitled to no precedence on the ground of their husbands being
members of Parliament.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The High Sheriff of a County= takes precedence over all other gentlemen
in the county, of whatever rank, save the lord-lieutenant, according to
the Royal warrant issued by His late Majesty King Edward, giving
precedence to lord-lieutenants of counties before high sheriffs.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The High Sheriff= out of his particular county has no precedence,
neither has a lord-lieutenant; and the wives of either lords-lieutenants
or high sheriffs take no precedence on account of their husbands'
official dignity.

       *       *       *       *       *

=An Assize Judge= takes precedence over the high sheriff as the assize
judge represents the Sovereign of the Realm.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Clergymen, Barristers-at-Law=, officers in the army and navy take
precedence over esquires on account of such rank; and in each profession
precedence should be accorded them according to dignity, date of
ordination, date of call, and date of commission in their several
professions, assuming that the rank is equal.

       *       *       *       *       *

=High Clerical and Legal Dignitaries= take special precedence; for
instance, the Archbishop of Canterbury takes precedence of all dukes,
and the Lord Chancellor takes precedence of the Archbishop of York, who
also takes precedence of dukes; bishops take precedence of all barons,
whatever their date of creation. The Lord Chief Justice, the Master of
the Rolls, when not peers, and all judges of the High Court of Justice
in their various divisions, take precedence after Privy Councillors and
before baronets and all knights, save the Knights of the Garter.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Relative Rank between Officers of the Army and Navy= and doctors of
divinity is somewhat difficult to determine as regards the precedence to
be given them at a dinner-party. "Dod" places "esquires by office,
which, of course, includes all officers of the army and navy," next
_before_ the younger sons of knights and before doctors in divinity, who
follow next in order; while "Lodge" places "officers of the navy and
army" _after_ the younger sons of knights bachelor, clergymen, and
barristers-at-law.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Precedency at Dinner-Parties.=--When royalty is present at a
dinner-party, a prince of blood royal takes precedence of a princess,
and leads the way with the hostess, the host following next with the
princess. On the other hand, a princess of the blood royal takes
precedence of a foreign prince--her husband--and leads the way with
the host.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Host should take down the Lady of Highest Rank=, and lead the way
with her to the dining-room. The guests should follow the host in
couples according to the degree of precedence due to them, and the
hostess should follow the last couple with the gentleman of highest
rank present.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Greater Number of Gentlemen= than ladies are present at a
dinner-party, as is often the case, these gentlemen should follow the
hostess to the dining-room and not precede her.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Widow or Maiden Lady is Hostess,= and there is no gentleman of
the family present to act as host, the gentleman second in rank should
take down the lady of highest rank, leading the way with her to the
dining-room, the hostess following last, with the gentleman of highest
rank.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In the Case of either a Husband's Sister= or a wife's sister being
required to act as hostess, precedence should be given to the
wife's sister.

       *       *       *       *       *

=An Eldest Son's Wife= should take precedence of her husband's sisters
in his father's house.

As regards the precedence due to the relatives of a host or hostess, it
should give way in favour of that due to the guests not related to the
host or hostess, although their relatives might be, perhaps, of higher
rank than the guests themselves.

Occasionally, the eldest son of the house acts as second host, taking
down a lady second or third in rank; but the daughters of the house
should always be taken down to dinner after the other ladies present,
and in no case before them.

No precedence is accorded to either a lady or a gentleman by virtue of a
mother's rank.

No precedence is accorded to brides in society, though occasionally in
the country old-fashioned people consider it due to a bride to send her
in to dinner with the host on the occasion of her first dining at a
house within three months of her marriage.


Table of General Precedency

GENTLEMEN

  The King.
  The Prince of Wales.
  The Sovereign's younger sons.
  The Sovereign's grandsons.
  The Sovereign's brothers.
  The Sovereign's uncles.
  The Sovereign's nephews.
  Ambassadors.
  Archbishop of Canterbury.
  Lord High Chancellor.
  Archbishop of York.
  The Prime Minister.
  Lord Chancellor of Ireland.
  Lord President of the Council.
  Lord Privy Seal.
  Dukes who may happen to hold either of these five offices--
    1. Lord Great Chamberlain.
    2. Earl Marshal.
    3. Lord Steward.
    4. Lord Chamberlain.
    5. Master of the Horse.
  Dukes in order of their patents of creation--
    1. Dukes of England.
    2.   "   " Scotland.
    3. Dukes of Great Britain.
    4.   "   " Ireland created before the Union.
    5. Dukes created since the Union.
  Eldest sons of Dukes of Blood Royal.
  Marquesses who may hold either of the Offices of State named above.
  Marquesses in same order as Dukes.
  Dukes' eldest sons.
  Earls holding either of the five Offices of State.
  Earls in same order as Dukes.
  Younger sons of Dukes of Blood Royal.
  Marquesses' eldest sons.
  Dukes' younger sons.
  Viscounts who may hold either of the five Offices of State.
  Viscounts in same order as Dukes.
  Earls' eldest sons.
  Marquesses' younger sons.
  Bishop of London.
      "     Durham.
      "     Winchester.
  Other English Bishops in order of their consecration.
  Moderator of the Church of Scotland.
  Barons holding either of the five Offices of State.
  Barons who may be Secretaries of State or Irish Secretary.
  Barons in same order as Dukes.
  The Speaker of the House of Commons.
  Treasurer of the Household.
  Comptroller of the Household.
  Vice-Chamberlain of the Household.
  Secretaries of State below the rank of Barons.
  Viscounts' eldest sons.
  Earls' younger sons.
  Barons' eldest sons.
  Commoners who are Knights of the Garter.
  Privy Councillors of rank lower than the foregoing, according to date
    they were sworn in.
  Chancellor of the Exchequer.
      "       "   " Duchy of Lancaster.
  Lord Chief Justice of England.
  Master of the Rolls.
  Lords Justices of Appeal and President of Probate Court.
  Judges of the High Court of Justice.
  Viscounts' younger sons.
  Barons'      "       "
  Sons of Life Peers.
  Baronets according to dates of patents.
  Knights Grand Cross of Bath.
  Knights Grand Commanders, Star of India.
  Knights Grand Cross of St. Michael and St. George.
  Knights Grand Commanders of Indian Empire.
  Knights Grand Cross of Royal Victorian Order.
  Knights Commanders of above Orders in same sequence.
  Knights Bachelors of above Orders in same sequence.
  Commanders of the Royal Victorian Order.
  Judges of County Courts in England and Ireland, and Judges of the
    City of London Court.
  Masters in Lunacy.
  Companions of Orders of Bath, Star of India, SS. Michael and George,
    and Indian Empire in same sequence.
  Members of 4th class of Royal Victorian Order.
  Companions of Distinguished Service Order.
  Eldest sons of younger sons of Peers.
  Baronets' eldest sons.
  Knights' eldest sons, in order of their fathers.
  Members of 5th class of Royal Victorian Order.
  Younger sons of Peers' younger sons.
  Baronets' younger sons.
  Knights' younger sons, in order of their fathers.
  Naval, Military, and other Esquires by Office.
  Gentlemen entitled to bear Coat Armour.


LADIES

  The Queen.
  The Queen Mother.
  The Sovereign's daughters.
  Wives of Sovereign's younger sons.
  Sovereign's granddaughters.
  Wives of Sovereign's grandsons.
  Sovereign's sisters.
  Wives of Sovereign's brothers.
  Sovereign's aunts.
  Wives of Sovereign's uncles.
  Sovereign's nieces.
  Wives of Sovereign's nephews.
  Duchesses (in same order as Dukes).
  Wives of eldest sons of Dukes of Blood Royal.
  Marchionesses.
  Wives of eldest sons of Dukes.
  Daughters of Dukes.
  Countesses.
  Wives of younger sons of Royal Dukes.
  Wives of eldest sons of Marquesses.
  Daughters of Marquesses.
  Wives of younger sons of Dukes.
  Viscountesses.
  Wives of eldest sons of Earls.
  Daughters of Earls.
  Wives of younger sons of Marquesses.
  Baronesses.
  Wives of eldest sons of Viscounts.
  Daughters of Viscounts.
  Wives of younger sons of Earls.
  Wives of eldest sons of Barons.
  Daughters of Barons.
  Maids of Honour.
  Wives of younger sons of Viscounts.
  Wives of younger sons of Barons.
  Daughters and sons' wives of Life Peers.
  Wives of Baronets.
  Daughters of Baronets.
  Wives of eldest sons of Knights.
  Daughters of Knights.
  Wives of younger sons of Peers' younger sons.
  Wives of younger sons of Baronets.
  Wives of younger sons of Knights.
  Wives of Esquires.
  Wives of Gentlemen.




CHAPTER VI

THE COLLOQUIAL APPLICATION OF TITLES


The colloquial application of titles differs materially from the
application of titles when not used colloquially, and many persons are
in doubt as to whether they should or should not make use colloquially
of titles in full.

His Majesty the King should be addressed as "Sir" by all those who come
in social contact with him; and by all others as "Your Majesty."

Her Majesty Queen Mary should be addressed as "Ma'm" by all those who
come in social contact with her; and by all others as "Your Majesty."

Her Majesty Queen Alexandra should be addressed as "Ma'm" by all those
who come in social contact with her; and by all others as "Your
Majesty."

The Prince of Wales, the Duke of Connaught, and all princes of the blood
royal, should be addressed by the upper classes as "Sir."

The princesses of the blood royal, should be addressed as "Ma'm" by the
upper classes. The wives of the princes of the blood royal should also
be addressed as "Ma'm" by the upper classes.

All crowned heads visiting England should be addressed as "Sir" by those
socially known to them, and as "Your Majesty" by all others. The Royal
ladies, their wives, should be addressed as "Ma'm" by those personally
known to them, and as "Your Majesty" by all others.

A foreign prince bearing the title of Serene Highness should be
addressed as "Prince," and not as "Sir," by the aristocracy and gentry,
and as "Your Serene Highness" by all other classes.

A foreign princess, also bearing the title of serene highness, should be
styled "Princess" when addressed colloquially by the upper classes, but
not as "Ma'am"; and as "Your Serene Highness" by all other classes.

An English duke should be addressed as "Duke" by the aristocracy and
gentry, and not as "Your Grace" by members of either of these classes.
All other classes should address him colloquially as "Your Grace."

An English duchess should be addressed as "Duchess" by all persons
conversing with her belonging to the upper classes, and as "Your Grace"
by all other classes.

A marquess, colloquially, should be addressed as "Lord A."

A marchioness should be addressed as "Lady A." by the upper classes. It
would be a mistake to address an English marquess as "Marquess," or a
marchioness as "Marchioness," colloquially speaking. All other classes
should address them either as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship," "My Lady" or
"Your Ladyship."

An earl should be addressed as "Lord B." by the upper classes, and as
"My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

A countess should be addressed as "Lady B." by the upper classes, and as
"My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

A viscount should be addressed as "Lord C." by the upper classes, and as
"My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

A viscountess should be addressed as "Lady C." by the upper classes, and
as "My Lady" or "Your ladyship" by all other classes.

A baron should be addressed as "Lord D." by the upper classes, and as
"My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

A baroness should be addressed as "Lady D." by the upper classes, and as
"My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

In strictly official or business intercourse a marquess, an earl, a
viscount, a baron, and a younger son of a duke or marquis, should be
addressed as "My Lord."

The eldest son of a duke should be addressed as "Lord A." by the upper
classes, and as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

The wife of the eldest son of a duke should be addressed as "Lady A."
by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all
other classes.

The younger sons of a duke should be addressed as "Lord John E." or
"Lord Charles E." by the upper classes, and as "My Lord" or "Your
Lordship" by all other classes. Persons well acquainted with them would
address them colloquially by their title and christian name, as "Lord
John" or "Lord Charles." The same remark applies to their wives, who are
often colloquially addressed as "Lady Alfred" or "Lady Edward."

The wives of the younger sons of a duke should be addressed as "Lady
John E." or "Lady Charles E." by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or
"Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

The daughters of a duke should be addressed as "Lady Mary A." or "Lady
Elizabeth B." by the upper classes, and as "Lady Mary" and "Lady
Elizabeth" by those intimate with them, and as "My Lady" or "Your
Ladyship" by all other classes.

The eldest son of a marquess should be addressed as "Lord A." by the
upper classes, and as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

The wife of the eldest son of a marquis should be addressed as "Lady A."
by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other
classes.

The younger sons of a marquis should be addressed as "Lord Henry B."
and "Lord Frederick B." by the upper classes, and as "My Lord" or "Your
Lordship" by all other classes.

The wives of the younger sons of a marquis should be addressed as "Lady
Henry B." and "Lady Frederick B." by the upper classes, and as "My Lady"
or "Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

The daughters of a marquis should be addressed as "Lady Florence B." and
"Lady Sarah B." by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or "Your
Ladyship" by all other classes.

The eldest son of an earl should be addressed as "Lord C." by the upper
classes, and as "My Lord" or "Your Lordship" by all other classes.

The wife of the eldest son of an earl should be addressed as "Lady C."
by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other
classes.

The daughters of an earl should be addressed as "Lady Blanche" and "Lady
Evelyn" by the upper classes, and as "My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all
other classes.

The younger sons of earls, and both eldest and younger sons of viscounts
and barons, only bear the courtesy title of honourable. The daughters of
viscounts and barons also bear the courtesy title of honourable. This
title should never be used colloquially, "The Hon. Cecil Blank," "The
Hon. Mrs. Cecil Blank," and "The Hon. Mary Blank," should be styled
"Mr., Mrs., and Miss Mary Blank."

Baronets should be addressed by their full title and surname, as Sir
John Blank, by the upper classes, and by their titles and christian
names only by all other classes.

Baronets' wives should be addressed as "Lady B." or "Lady C.," according
to the surnames of their husbands: thus, "Sir John Blank's" wife should
be addressed as "Lady Blank" by the upper classes, not as "Lady John
Blank"--to do so would be to give her the rank of the wife of the
younger son of a duke or marquis instead of that of a baronet's wife
only--and as "My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

The wives of knights should be addressed as "Lady B." or "Lady C.,"
according to the surnames of their husbands: thus, "Sir John Blank's"
wife should be addressed as "Lady Blank" by the upper classes, and as
"My Lady" or "Your Ladyship" by all other classes.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In addressing Foreigners of Rank colloquially=, the received rule is to
address them by their individual titles and surnames.

A prince or princess should be addressed by their full title: thus,
"Prince Munich," or "Princess Munich," by the upper classes. Persons
intimate with them usually address them as "Prince" or "Princess," as
the case may be.

In the case of a prince being a younger son, and not the reigning head
of the house, his christian name is generally used after his title when
addressing him: thus, "Prince Louis," in lieu of "Prince" only. The same
remark applies to the unmarried daughters of princes. They also should
be addressed by their christian name, in addition to their title of
"Princess," by the aristocracy and gentry, and as "Your Serene" or "Your
Imperial Highness," according to their birth and title, by all other
classes.

A French duke should be addressed by his surname, with the addition of
monsieur: thus, "Monsieur de Rouen," by the upper classes, and as
"Monsieur le Duc" by all other classes.

A French duchess should be addressed by her surname, with the addition
of madame: thus, "Madame de Rouen" by the upper classes, and as "Madame
la Duchesse" by all other classes.

A marquis should be addressed by his surname, with the addition of
monsieur: thus, "Monsieur de Harfleur" by the upper classes, and as
"Monsieur le Marquis" by all other classes.

A marquise should be addressed by her surname, with the addition of
madame: thus, "Madame la Harfleur" by the upper classes, and as "Madame
la Marquise" by all other classes.

A comte should be addressed by his surname, with the addition of
monsieur: thus, "Monsieur de Montpellier" by the upper classes, and as
"Monsieur le Comte" by all other classes.

A comtesse should be addressed by her surname, with the addition of
madame: thus, "Madame de Montpellier" by the upper classes, and as
"Madame la Comtesse" by all other classes.

A vicomte should be addressed by his surname, with the addition of
monsieur: thus, "Monsieur de Toulouse" by the upper classes, and as
"Monsieur le Vicomte" by all other classes.

A vicomtesse should be addressed by her surname, with the addition of
madame; thus, "Madame de Toulouse" by the upper classes, and as "Madame
la Vicomtesse" by all other classes.

A baron should be addressed by his surname, with the addition of
monsieur: thus, "Monsieur d'Avignon" by the upper classes, and as
"Monsieur le Baron" by all other classes.

A baronne should be addressed by her surname, with the addition of
madame: thus, "Madame d'Avignon" by the upper classes, and as "Madame la
Baronne" by all other classes.

A young unmarried lady should be addressed as "Mademoiselle d'Avignon"
by the upper classes, and as "Mademoiselle" by all other classes.

In German titles the distinction of "Von" before the surname is seldom
used colloquially, the title and surname being used without the prefix
of "Von." Thus, "Count von Ausberg" should be addressed as "Count
Ausberg" in conversation, and not as "Monsieur le Comte."

Foreign ladies of rank should be addressed by their title and surname,
and not by their title only, and the prefix "Von" should be omitted; but
in the case of a French or Italian title the "de" or "de la" before the
surname should on no account be omitted.

When Englishmen are extremely intimate with foreigners of rank they
would, in conversation, probably address them by their surnames; but
only thorough intimacy and friendship warrants this familiarity.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards addressing the Clergy=, an archbishop should be addressed
colloquially as "Archbishop" by the upper classes, and as "Your Grace"
by the clergy and all other classes.

A bishop should be addressed colloquially as "Bishop" by the upper
classes, and as "My Lord" by the clergy and all other classes.

A dean should be styled "Dean Blank" or "Dean," by the upper classes,
and as "Mr. Dean" by the clergy.

An archdeacon should be addressed as "Archdeacon Blank," and a canon as
"Canon Blank."

The wives of archbishops, bishops, and deans should be respectively
addressed as "Mrs. A.," "Mrs. B.," or "Mrs. C." They take no title from
the spiritual rank of their husbands.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Officers in the Army= should be respectively addressed as "General A.,"
"Colonel B.," "Major C.," or "Captain D.," and not as "General,"
"Colonel," or "Major," except by their very intimate friends.

The wives of officers should be addressed as "Mrs. A.," "Mrs. B.," "Mrs.
C.," or "Mrs. D." They should never be addressed as "Mrs. General A.,"
"Mrs. Colonel B.," "Mrs. Major C.," or "Mrs. Captain D."

A lady should not address her husband colloquially by his surname only,
as "Jones," "Brown," or by whatever his surname might be, or speak of
him without the prefix of "Mr."

The usual rule is for a wife to speak of her husband as "Mr. Brown," or
"My husband," except to intimate friends, when the christian name only
is frequently used, and to address him by his christian name only.

A wife should not address her husband by the initial letter of his
surname, as "Mr. B." or "Mr. P."; neither should a husband address his
wife by the initial letter of his surname.

When intimate friends address each other by the initial letter of their
names it is by way of pleasantry only, and such cases, of course, do not
come within the rules of etiquette.

Peeresses frequently address their husbands, and speak of them, by the
name attached to their title, in place of using their christian or
family name. Thus, the "Earl of Blankshire" would be styled "Blankshire"
by his wife, without the prefix of "Lord," and his usual signature would
be "Blankshire," without the addition of any christian name.

Baronets' wives should not address their husbands by their surnames, but
by their christian names, and should speak of them as "Sir George" or
"Sir John."

The wives of knights also should not address their husbands by their
surnames, but by their christian names, and should speak of them as "Sir
George" or "Sir John."

The Lord Mayor should be addressed as "Lord Mayor," colloquially, and
the Lady Mayoress as "Lady Mayoress," unless the Lord Mayor during
office is created a baronet or receives the honour of knighthood, when
he should be addressed as "Sir John" or "Sir Henry," and his wife as
"Lady A."




CHAPTER VII

POINTS OF ETIQUETTE AS REGARDS ROYAL PERSONAGES


General society is now very frequently brought into contact with
royalty--members of the Royal Family of England and members of various
royal families of Europe.

With His Majesty this association is of frequent occurrence as regards
the general public, and persons possessing special interest are
constantly brought into communication with him.

Strict Court etiquette is greatly in abeyance, and laid aside by His
Majesty when paying visits to personal friends, or when receiving visits
from the same.

The geniality of the English princes and princesses is everywhere
acknowledged, and the restrictions of Court etiquette are frequently
relaxed by their desire when visiting at the houses of the nobility and
gentry.

The etiquette that reigns in foreign Courts--Austria, Russia, Greece,
etc.--is seldom waived, and is adhered to with much punctilio. So much
so is this the case with certain foreign princes who visit our shores,
that the observances they claim as due to their exalted position are
often felt to be a restraint upon the hosts whom they honour with their
company, in town or country, at dinner, ball, or country-house party.

On the other hand, many royal personages who occasionally visit England
are unbending and unceremonious towards society in general.

When royal personages visit London for a few weeks, whether located at
palace, embassy, or hotel, it is etiquette for any person who is
personally acquainted with or connected in any way with their Court or
cabinet, or who has been presented at their Court, to leave cards on
them and write their names in their visiting books. Persons still higher
in the social scale, give receptions in their honour, and invite them to
stay at their princely mansions.

When such visits are paid, the principal neighbours are usually invited
to meet the royal guests at dinner, ball, or reception, and on the
invitation card is written, "To meet H.R.H. the Crown Prince of ----,"
or "Her Serene Highness the Grand Duchess of ----," etc.; but a hostess
exercises her own discretion respecting the invitations she issues.

If a ball is in contemplation the county at large is invited to the
mansion, but if dinner invitations only are issued, then the circle is
necessarily restricted to a favoured few.

The neighbours who are not invited to a house where a royal guest is
staying should avoid calling on the hostess until the departure of the
royal visitors, even if calls are due.

The principal people of a county who happen to be present at an
entertainment, either dinner or dance, are usually presented to the
royal guests by the host or hostess, permission to do so having been
first solicited.

When the person to be presented is a person of rank or distinction, it
would only be necessary to say, "May I present Lord A., or General B.,
to you, Sir?" but if the person to be presented has no particular claim
to the honour beyond being popular in the county, the request should be
prefaced with a few words of explanation respecting the person to be
presented.

When the name or fame of those presented has reached the ears of the
royal guests, they usually shake hands on the presentation being made,
and enter into conversation with them; otherwise they merely bow, and
make one or two passing remarks.

A house-party is generally composed of those with whom a royal guest is
more or less acquainted. When the party includes any one who is a
stranger to the royal guests, he or she should be presented on the first
opportunity.

The members of the Royal Family have each, more or less, their
particular set, as have also the foreign princes who periodically visit
this country, and therefore house-parties are usually made up of those
moving in the set of the expected prince.

For the proper mode of addressing royal personages, see Chapter VI.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards royal invitations=, all invitations from the Sovereign are
commands, and must be answered and obeyed as such, and the word
"command" must be made use of in answering such invitations. If any
reason exists for not obeying His Majesty's commands it should be
stated.

Invitations from members of the Royal Family are treated by courtesy as
commands, but in replying to such invitations the word "command" should
not be used. The answers to such invitations should be addressed to the
Comptroller of the Household, by whom they are usually issued.

Answers to royal invitations should be written in the third person, and
reasons given for non-acceptance.

A previous engagement cannot be pleaded as an excuse for refusing a
royal invitation; only personal indisposition or serious illness, or
death of near relatives, would be adequate reasons for not accepting a
royal invitation.

When a royal invitation is verbally given, the answer should be verbal
also.

At all entertainments at which royal guests are present they should be
received by the host and hostess in the entrance-hall. In the case of
serene highnesses they should be received by the host and conducted by
him to the hostess; this rule equally applies to the reception of
eastern princes.

The etiquette to be observed on the departure of royal personages is
identical with that observed on their arrival.

With regard to inviting members of the Royal Family to assist at the
opening of any public undertaking, the request should be made through
the Comptroller of the Household of the prince who is to be invited, or
through his secretary, and the same rule equally applies to both prince
and princess.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Indian Princes.=--The exact status of Indian princes has never been
actually laid down, but all who are "Highnesses" are given precedence at
the English Court and in society after the Royal Family and foreign
princes. In the procession at Court entertainments they go in front of
ambassadors.

No Indian prince is considered to be of blood royal, and they do not
stand in the line at levées and Courts, but all have the private
_Entrée_.




CHAPTER VIII

POINTS OF ETIQUETTE WHEN TRAVELLING ABROAD, AND PRESENTATIONS AT FOREIGN
COURTS


The acquaintanceship of foreign residents is of considerable service to
English people purposing to winter abroad, or to remain for any length
of time in a continental city, as by its means they obtain an entrance
into foreign society. An introduction to the English Ambassador or
Minister at a foreign Court is of still greater service in this matter.

People of recognised position in society have the privilege of leaving
cards at the English Embassy at any foreign city in which they intend
making a temporary stay.

So thoroughly is the position of English travellers known to the English
Ministry at a foreign Court, that should a person, who is not received
in English society, leave cards at the English Embassy, they would be at
once returned as an intimation that the acquaintance is declined.

It is erroneous to suppose that by leaving cards upon foreigners of
distinction, an acquaintanceship can be commenced, for unless
introductions have been formally made, leaving cards is a useless
proceeding.

At far-away spots little frequented by the general run of travellers,
and where there are but few, if any, resident English, travellers
requiring advice or assistance from the English consul, can, without an
introduction, call upon him, nationality being the ground upon which to
do this, and if of equal social standing, they would be received with
social consideration; if otherwise, all assistance would be given to
them from an official point of view. Many people when travelling abroad
make pleasant acquaintances even without the help of introductions, the
occasion of a meeting being as it were a semi-introduction in itself.

Such casual acquaintanceships are, however, attended with certain risks,
especially to persons who have been absent from England some little
time, or who when in England have entered comparatively but little in
society, and who are thus apt to drift unawares into close friendships
with people perhaps well bred and agreeable, although tabooed at home
for some good and sufficient reason. _Contretemps_ such as these are
painful to kind-hearted people when subsequently compelled to avoid and
to relinquish the acquaintance of those with whom they have become
pleasantly intimate. An introduction to an English resident in either
town or city obviates any unpleasantness of this nature, as one so
situated is generally kept _au courant_ with all that takes place in
society at home.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When persons desire to enter into society abroad= they endeavour to
obtain letters of introduction from friends and acquaintances to
residents in the cities they purpose visiting.

Unless English travellers have been duly presented at the Court of St.
James's, they cannot obtain presentations at foreign Courts through the
English Embassies.

When a lady desires a presentation at a foreign Court, she should write
to the English Ambassadress and request the honour of a presentation,
and should state the date of her presentation and the name of the lady
by whom she was presented. After her statement has been duly verified
the request is granted. In a like manner when a gentleman desires a
presentation at a foreign Court, he should write to the Ambassador and
request the honour of a presentation, and should state the date of the
Levée at which he was presented, and the name of the person by whom the
presentation was made.

Presentations at foreign Courts take place in the evening, and the
persons to be presented, and those who attend, assemble previous to the
entrance of the royal personages: the rule is for the grand _maîtresse_
to present each lady in turn to her royal mistress, who makes the tour
of the apartment for this purpose, and addresses some courteous
observation to each.




CHAPTER IX

THE RECEIVED MODE OF PRONOUNCING CERTAIN SURNAMES


There are, perhaps, two reasons why various surnames are so frequently
mispronounced, the one being unfamiliarity with the freak of fashion
which governs the pronunciation of certain well-known names, the other
ignorance, or want of education.

When sensitive persons hear a name pronounced differently from the way
in which they have themselves but just pronounced it, and in a tone and
manner strongly suggestive of correction, it is wounding to their _amour
propre_.

As a rule, when persons are in doubt as to the correct pronunciation of
any particular name, it would be best to avoid mentioning it, if
possible, until their doubts are set at rest by some one better informed
than themselves.

Names that have a fashionable or peculiar pronunciation, or are
pronounced otherwise than as they are spelt, are but few, and names
which it is possible wrongly to accent are also not very numerous; but
it is surprising how often these names occur in the course of
conversation.

The names of distinguished artists that are open to mispronunciation
occur far oftener in conversation than do the general run of uncommon
surnames.

There are many celebrated hunts and hunting quarters of which the names
are open to considerable mispronunciation.

With regard to placing the accent on the wrong syllable in the
pronunciation of names, it requires but little thought to avoid making
this mistake, a popular error being that of placing the accent upon the
last syllable of a name; whereas, in a name of two syllables, the accent
should invariably be placed upon the first, and the second syllable
should be as it were slightly abbreviated or slightly altered.

In names of three syllables the error usually consists in placing the
accent upon the last syllable, whereas the accent should be placed upon
the second syllable. There are occasional exceptions to this rule, and
the few names given in this chapter, both as regards their pronunciation
and accentuation, will serve as a useful guide in the pronunciation of
uncommon names.

  |SPELT.               |PRONOUNCED.       |REMARKS.                    |
  |---------------------|------------------|----------------------------|
  |Abergavenny.         |Abergen'ny.       |_Av_ not sounded.           |
  |Arbuthnot.           |Arbuth'not.       |                            |
  |Arundel.             |Arrandel.         |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Beaconsfield.        |Beckonsfield.     |                            |
  |Beauchamp.           |Bea'cham.         |                            |
  |Beauclerk or }       |Bo'clair.         |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Beauclerc.   }       |                  |                            |
  |Belvoir.             |Be'ver.           |                            |
  |Berkely.             |Bark'ley.         |                            |
  |Bethune.             |Bee'ton.          |                            |
  |Bicester.            |Bis'ter.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Blount.              |Blunt.            |                            |
  |Blyth.               |Bly.              |_Th_ not sounded.           |
  |Bourke.              |Burk.             |                            |
  |Bourne.              |Burn.             |                            |
  |Bowles.              |Boles.            |                            |
  |Breadalbane.         |Breaddal'bane.    |Accent on second syllable.  |
  |Brougham.            |Broum.            |                            |
  |Buchan.              |Buck'an.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Burdett.             |Burdett'.         |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Burnett.             |Burnett'.         |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Bury.                |Berry.            |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Calderon.            |Cal'dron not      |                            |
  |                     |  Cauldron.       |                            |
  |Charteris.           |Charters.         |                            |
  |Cholmeley.           |Chum'ley.         |                            |
  |Cholmondeley.        |   "              |                            |
  |Cirencester.         |Cis'ester.        |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Clanricarde.         |Clanrecarde.      |Accent on second syllable.  |
  |Cockburn.            |C[=o]burn.        |_Ck_ not sounded.           |
  |Colquhoun.           |Kohoon'.          |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Conynham.            |Cunyingham.       |                            |
  |Coutts.              |Koots.            |                            |
  |Cowper.              |Cooper.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Dalziel.             |Dee'al.           |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Derby.               |Darby.            |                            |
  |Des Vaux.            |Deveu.            |The _x_ not sounded.        |
  |Devereux.            |Devereu.          |The _x_ not sounded.        |
  |Dillwyn.             |Dil'lun.          |The _wy_ takes the sound    |
  |                     |                  |  of _u_; the accent on     |
  |                     |                  |  first syllable.           |
  |Duchesne.            |Dukarn.           |                            |
  |Du Plat.             |Du Plar.          |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Elgin.               |                  |The _g_ hard as in give.    |
  |Eyre.                |Air.              |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Fildes.              |Filedes.          |Not Filldes.                |
  |Fortescue.           |Fort'iskew.       |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Geoffrey.            |Jefrey.           |                            |
  |Geoghegan.           |Gaygan.           |                            |
  |Gifford.             |Jifford.          |The _g_ soft as in George.  |
  |Gillett.             |                  |_G_ hard as in Gilbert.     |
  |Gillott.             |                  |_G_ hard.                   |
  |Glamis.              |Glarms.           |                            |
  |Gorges.              |Gor'jes.          |First _g_ hard and second   |
  |                     |                  |   _g_ soft.                |
  |Gough.               |Goff.             |                            |
  |Gower.               |Gor.              |But Gower as regards the    |
  |                     |                  |  street of that name with  |
  |                     |                  |  the general public.       |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Harcourt.            |Har'kut.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Heathcote.           |Heth'kut.         |                            |
  |Hertford.            |Har'ford.         |                            |
  |Home.                |Hume.             |                            |
  |Hughes.              |Hews.             |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Jervis.              |Jarvis.           |                            |
  |Johnstone.           |                  |The _t_ not sounded.        |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Kennaird.            |Kennaird'.        |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Kennard.             |Kennard'.         |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Ker.                 |Kar.              |                            |
  |Knollys.             |Knowls.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Layard.              |Laird.            |                            |
  |Leconfield.          |Lek'onfield.      |                            |
  |Lefevre.             |Lefavre.          |                            |
  |Leigh.               |Lee.              |                            |
  |Lyvedon.             |Livden.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Macnamara.           |Macnemar'ar.      |Accent on third syllable.   |
  |Mainwaring.          |Man'nering.       |                            |
  |Marjoribanks.        |Marshbanks.       |                            |
  |McIntosh.            |Makintosh.        |                            |
  |McLeod.              |McCloud.          |                            |
  |Menzies.             |Myng'es.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Meux.                |Mews.             |The _x_ sounded as _s_.     |
  |Millais.             |Mil'lay.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Milnes.              |Mills.            |                            |
  |Molyneux.            |                  |The _x_ sounded with slight |
  |                     |                  |  accent on last syllable.  |
  |Monck.               |Munk.             |                            |
  |Monckton.            |Munk'ton.         |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Monson.              |Munson.           |                            |
  |Montgomerie or}      |Mungum'ery.       |Accent on second syllable.  |
  |Montgomery.   }      |                  |                            |
  |Mowbray.             |Mobrey.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Nigel.               |Ni'jel.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Ouless.              |Ooless.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Parnell.             |Parnell'.         |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Pepys.               |Pep'is.           |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Pierrepont.          |Pierpont.         |                            |
  |Ponsonby.            |Punsonby.         |                            |
  |Pontefract.          |Pomfret.          |                            |
  |Pugh.                |Pew.              |                            |
  |Pytchley.            |P[=y]tch'ley.     |Not Pitchley.               |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Ruthven.             |Riv'en.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Sandys.              |Sands.            |                            |
  |St. Clair.           |Sinclair.         |                            |
  |St. Maur.            |See'mor, or       |                            |
  |                     |S'nt Maur.        |                            |
  |St. John.            |Sinjin.           |As regards christian and    |
  |                     |                  |  surname, but as St. John  |
  |                     |                  |  when applied to church    |
  |                     |                  |  or locality.              |
  |Seymour.             |Sey'mer.          |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Strachan.            |Strawn.           |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Tadema.              |Tad'ymar.         |Accent on first syllable.   |
  |Tollemache.          |Tollmash.         |                            |
  |Trafalgar.           |Trafalgar'.       |Accent on last syllable; as |
  |                     |                  |  regards the peer of that  |
  |                     |                  |  name, not otherwise.      |
  |Tredegar.            |Trede'gar.        |Accent on second syllable.  |
  |Tremayne.            |Tremayne'.        |Accent on last syllable.    |
  |Tyrwhitt.            |Tirritt.          |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Vaughan.             |Vorn.             |                            |
  |Vaux.                |                  |The _x_ sounded.            |
  |Villbois.            |Vealbwor.         |                            |
  |Villiers.            |Vil'lers.         |                            |
  |                     |                  |                            |
  |Waldegrave.          |Wal'grave.        |The _de_ not sounded.       |
  |Wemyss.              |Weems.            |                            |
  |Willoughby D'Eresby. |Willowby D'Ersby. |                            |




CHAPTER X

PRESENTATIONS AT COURTS AND ATTENDING COURTS


Courts are now held in lieu of Drawing-rooms by Their Majesties the King
and Queen at Buckingham Palace, and at which Presentations to Their
Majesties are made.

These Courts are held in the evenings at ten o'clock, but the hour at
which the company should commence to arrive is intimated by the Lord
Chamberlain in the notice issued of the Courts to be held.

Two Courts are usually, but not invariably, held before Easter, and two
more after Easter.

Ladies who have been presented at Drawing-rooms and Courts, held during
the last two reigns, do not require to be again presented to Their
Majesties the King and Queen; thus, ladies who have already been
presented at these Drawing-rooms, and who are desirous of being invited
to one or other of these Courts, and who are also desirous of making
presentations, should send in their names and the names of those to be
presented by them to the Lord Chamberlain, St. James's Palace, S.W., on
the 1st of January in each year, but not before that date.

Ladies are also privileged to mention at the same time when it will be
most convenient to them to pay their respects to Their Majesties. If it
should not be convenient for a lady to attend or be presented at the
particular Court to which she is invited, it will be open to her to make
her excuses to the Lord Chamberlain in writing, when her name can, if
desired, and if possible, be transferred to another list.

A lady who makes a presentation to Their Majesties, must be personally
acquainted with and responsible for the lady she presents. She must
herself attend the Court, and cannot present more than one lady in
addition to her daughter or daughter-in-law. The numbers received at
each Court being necessarily limited, ladies can only receive occasional
invitations. Therefore, those who cannot be included in the year's list
of invitations will receive an intimation to this effect from the Lord
Chamberlain in answer to their applications to attend.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Persons entitled to be presented at Their Majesties' Courts= are
the wives and daughters of the members of the aristocracy, the wives and
daughters of those holding high official appointments in the Government,
the wives and daughters of Members of Parliament, the county gentry and
town gentry, the wives and daughters of the members of the legal,
military, naval, clerical, medical, and other professions, the wives and
daughters of merchants, bankers, and members of the Stock Exchange, and
persons engaged in commerce on a large scale.

Although the word "gentry" is thus elastic, and although persons coming
within the category might be fairly entitled to the privilege of
attending Courts, yet it is well understood that birth, wealth,
associations, and position give a _raison d'être_ for such privilege;
as, for instance, the wife and daughters of an officer in the navy or a
line regiment, whose means are slender, and whose position is obscure,
would not be justified for these reasons in attending a Court, although
the officer himself might attend a levée if desirous of doing so; and
this remark equally applies to the wives and daughters of clergymen,
barristers, and others similarly situated.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Presentations to Their Majesties= are made officially by the various
foreign ambassadresses, by the wives of the members of the Cabinet, and
by the wives of other official personages in various departments of the
State, either civil, military, naval, or clerical.

Presentations at each of Their Majesties' Courts are now limited by
royal command.

Presentations to Their Majesties should be made either by a relative or
a friend of the lady presented who has herself been previously
presented.

A lady has the privilege of presenting one lady only at a Court in
addition to her daughter or daughter-in-law.

This restriction does not apply to ladies who, from official position or
other circumstances, are specially privileged to make presentations to
Their Majesties.

When a presentation is not made officially or by a near relative it is
considered a favour on the part of the person making the presentation
towards the person presented.

The responsibility of a presentation rests upon the person who makes it,
both as to the social and moral fitness of the person presented;
therefore, to solicit the favour of a presentation from a friend is to
incur a considerable obligation, and it is a favour ladies have no
hesitation in refusing unless good reasons exist for granting it.

When presentations are made through official channels the responsibility
rests upon the "office" rather than upon the person making the
presentation; hence presentations so made have little personal
significance to the person making them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady having been presented on her Marriage= has the privilege of
attending, by invitation, any subsequent Court, but ladies who have no
official position will only be allowed to attend a Court by summons
every third year. On the accession of her husband to any title, she
would again have to be presented, and should she marry a second time
another presentation would be necessary to entitle her to attend one of
Their Majesties' Courts.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is the Privilege of the Married Lady to make Presentations=, but
should any person be presented whose antecedents or present position
renders her socially unqualified to be presented, the Lord Chamberlain,
on becoming aware of the fact, would at once cancel the presentation,
and officially announce it in the _Gazette_, and the person making such
presentation would be expected to tender an apology for so doing.

       *       *       *       *       *

=An Unmarried Lady does not possess the Privilege= of making a
presentation, however high her rank may be. She is not permitted to
attend any subsequent Courts after first presentation until three years
have elapsed; save under exceptional circumstances.

Four Courts are held during each year at Buckingham Palace, two before
and two after Easter, but due intimation is given previous to each Court
being held by the Lord Chamberlain through the medium of the official
_Gazette_, from whence it is copied into the newspapers.

The wives of members of the Cabinet and of the ambassadors or ministers
at the Court of St. James's usually attend at each Court, and have the
privilege of doing so by reason of the official presentations made by
them at each Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is compulsory for a Lady= making a presentation to be herself
present at the Court at which the presentation is to be made, though it
is not necessary for her to accompany the person whom she presents, but
simply to attend the same Court.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Lady intends making a Presentation= she should, on or after the
1st of January write to the Lord Chamberlain and inform him of a wish
to attend a Court, and forward the name of the lady to be presented by
her.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ladies are not expected= to attend Court more than once in every three
years, unless under exceptional circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady attending a Court= may present one lady in addition to her
daughter or daughter-in-law.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady presented for the First Time= can only present her daughter or
daughter-in-law at the Court at which she is presented.

       *       *       *       *       *

=No Applications can be received= from ladies who wish to be presented.
Their names must be forwarded by the ladies who wish to make the
presentations.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Summonses are issued= about three weeks before the date of each Court.

Ladies may be accompanied to Court by their husbands if the latter have
been presented, but gentlemen do not pass before the King and Queen.
Ladies are requested to forward the names of their husbands at the same
time as their own, in order that they may be submitted together, as once
the summons has been issued the amending of a summons card in order to
include a lady's husband can only be permitted under the most
exceptional circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Those who have the Privilege of the Entrée= enter at the gate of the
Palace situated outside Buckingham Gate. Those who possess this
privilege are the diplomatic circle, the Cabinet ministers and their
wives, and the members of the Household. The rooms, two in number, next
to the Presence Chamber, are appropriated to them. All who have the
privilege of the _entrée_ are received by Their Majesties before the
general circle, and according to their individual precedency, and they
have also the privilege of making the first presentations.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Lady arrives at the Palace= she should leave her wraps in the
cloak-room with one of the maids in attendance. After crossing the Great
Hall, she then makes her way up the Grand Staircase to the Corridor,
where she shows her invitation-card to the page-in-waiting, and then
passes on to one of the saloons.

When a lady arrives early she gains admission to the saloon next to
those reserved for the _entrée_. When she arrives late she has to take
her place in a further room of the suite according to the number of
persons present.

The gentlemen-at-arms stationed at the door of each room close the gilt
barriers when they consider the saloons are full. Chairs and benches are
placed in the corridor and in these saloons for the accommodation of
ladies thus waiting their turn to enter the Throne-room or Presence
Chamber.

As the ladies quit each room for the Presence Chamber, others take their
places, and the barriers are again closed, and this is continued until
every one has been received.

A lady has to pass through the two _entrée_ saloons before reaching the
Picture Gallery.

At the door of the Picture Gallery a lady's train, which she has
hitherto carried on her arm, is let down by two officials in attendance,
and spread out by them with their wands; she should cross the gallery
with her train down to the Presence Chamber, at the door of which she
should give the card of invitation she has brought with her to the
official stationed there to receive it.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady on being presented=, curtsys to the King and curtsys to the
Queen. The King bows in return, as does also the Queen. A lady presented
does not kiss the Queen's hand, as she formerly did. The King does not
shake hands with any present, however high their rank may be, neither
does the Queen shake hands with any present.

A lady on being presented does not now curtsy to any member of the
Royal Family when she has passed Their Majesties, and leaves the
Presence Chamber, stepping backwards, facing the royal party, until
making her exit from the apartment, when an official places her train on
her arm at the threshold of the doorway.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Lady wishes to attend a Court=, after having been duly
presented, it is necessary to inform the Lord Chamberlain of her wish to
attend. Summonses are issued about three weeks before the date of each
Court.

Having received a summons to attend a Court she should take the summons
card with her, which she should show to the page-in-waiting in the
corridor, and eventually hand it to the official stationed at the door
of the Presence Chamber, by whom it is passed on to the Lord
Chamberlain, who announces the name to Their Majesties.

A lady attending a Court curtsys to the King; she also curtsys to the
Queen, but does not curtsy to any other member of the Royal Family
present.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In the General Circle there is no Precedency= as to the order in which
ladies attending a Court enter the Presence Chamber. The earliest
arrivals are the first to appear before Their Majesties, without
reference to rank or position; and the same rule applies to ladies who
are presented, or to ladies who make presentations.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Married Lady presented at a Court= can, at the same Court, present
her daughter or daughter-in-law; but in this case the one presented by
her should enter the Presence Chamber after her, and not before her.

Although, according to present regulations, the unmarried daughters of
members of the nobility and gentry who have already been presented are
only expected to attend a Court once in every three years, it will not
prevent their being invited to Court functions, to the State balls,
concerts, and garden parties.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ladies who have been presented at a Court= have the privilege of
writing their names in Their Majesties' visiting book at Buckingham
Palace once during the season. The hours of calling for this purpose are
generally from three to five o'clock in the afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is Imperative for Ladies to wear Full Court Dress= when attending or
being presented at a Court, viz. low bodice, short sleeves, and train to
dress not less than three yards in length from the shoulders.

Whether the train is cut round or square is a matter of inclination or
fashion. The width at the end should be 54 inches.

It is also imperative that a presentation-dress should be white, if the
person presented be an unmarried lady; and it is also the fashion for
married ladies to wear white on their presentation, unless their age
renders their doing so unsuitable.

The white dresses worn by either _débutantes_ or married ladies may be
trimmed with either coloured or white flowers, according to individual
taste.

       *       *       *       *       *

=High Court Dress.=--The Queen has been pleased to permit that a high
Court dress of silk, satin, or velvet, may be worn at Their Majesties'
Courts, and on other State occasions, by ladies, to whom, from illness,
infirmity, or advancing age, the present low Court dress is
inappropriate, viz.: Bodices in front, cut square, or heart-shaped,
which may be filled in with white only, either transparent or lined; at
the back, high, or cut down three-quarters height. Sleeves to elbow,
either thick or transparent.

Trains, gloves, and feathers as usual.

It is necessary for ladies who wish to appear in "High Court Dress" to
obtain Royal permission, through the Lord Chamberlain.

This regulation does not apply to ladies who have already received
permission to wear high dress.

       *       *       *       *       *

=White gloves only should be worn=, excepting in case of mourning, when
black or grey gloves are admissible.

As a lady on presentation does not now kiss the Queen's hand as formerly
she did, she is not required to remove the right-hand glove before
entering the Presence Chamber. This order, therefore, is no longer in
force, and a lady wearing elbow gloves and bracelets will find it a
great convenience not to be obliged to take off her glove.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is compulsory for both Married and Unmarried Ladies to Wear
Plumes.=--The married lady's Court plume consists of three white
feathers.

An unmarried lady's of two white feathers.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The three white feathers= should be mounted as a Prince of Wales'
plume, and worn towards the left-hand side of the head.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Coloured feathers= may not be worn.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In deep mourning= white feathers must be worn, black feathers are
inadmissible.

       *       *       *       *       *

=White veils or lace lappets= must be worn with the feathers. The veils
should not be longer than 45 inches.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bouquets are not included= in the dress regulations issued by the Lord
Chamberlain, although they are invariably carried by both married and
unmarried ladies. It is thus optional to carry a bouquet or not, and
some elderly ladies carry much smaller bouquets than do younger ladies.

A fan and a lace pocket-handkerchief are also carried by a lady on
presentation or on attending a Court, but these two items are also
altogether optional.




CHAPTER XI

PRESENTATIONS AT LEVÉES AND ATTENDING LEVÉES


=Levées are held by the King= in person. Those who have been presented
at levées held by His late Majesty, King Edward, do not require to be
again presented to His Majesty King George.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Four or more Levées are usually held every year= by the King at St.
James's Palace.

Gentlemen are officially presented by the heads of any department or
profession to which they individually belong, whether civil or military,
naval or clerical; it is more usual for a gentleman to be presented by
the head of his department, or by the colonel of his regiment, than by
his nearest relative.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Presentations are also made by Relatives= and friends of those
presented; but these are greatly in the minority at all levées.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gentlemen must be again presented= at every step in their career,
whether civil, military, naval, or clerical--on civil appointments, on
gaining steps of naval, military, legal, or clerical rank, and on
accession to title, whether inherited or conferred.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Those entitled to be presented at His Majesty's Levées= are the members
of the aristocracy and gentry, the members of the diplomatic corps, the
Cabinet, and all leading Government officials, Members of Parliament,
leading members of the legal profession, the naval and military
professions, the leading members of the clerical profession, the leading
members of the medical and artistic professions, the leading bankers,
merchants, and members of the Stock Exchange, and persons engaged in
commerce on a large scale. An exception to the rule as regards retail
trade is made in favour of any person receiving Knighthood, or when
holding the office of Mayor, or being made a Justice of the Peace, or on
receiving a Commission in the Territorial forces.

The dates on which levées are to be held are duly announced in the
_Gazette_, and in the daily newspapers.

At all future levées cards of admission will be required, as the numbers
at each of these ceremonies must be limited.

The Lord Chamberlain has issued the following revised list of rules,
which are to be observed at attendances and presentations in future--

All officers, whether on the active or retired lists, of the Royal Navy
and the Royal Marines, of whatever rank, should communicate with and
obtain their cards from the private secretary to the First Lord of the
Admiralty. All civil officers of the Admiralty should follow the same
rule.

All officers, whether on the active or retired lists, of the Army,
Regulars or Territorials, of whatever rank, except those on the Indian
and Colonial Establishments, should communicate with and obtain their
cards from the Adjutant-General at the War Office, stating clearly at
which levée they desire to be present, and whether they wish to attend
or to be presented; if the latter, stating by whom and on what occasion.
Deputy-lieutenants of counties should also communicate and obtain their
cards from the War Office.

Officers of the Household Cavalry and Foot Guards on the active list
should make application to the Lord Chamberlain at St. James's Palace
for cards of admission and presentation. All retired Officers of the
Household Cavalry and Brigade of Guards should apply to the War Office.

All officers of the Indian Civil Service and of the Indian Army, of
whatever rank, whether on the active or retired lists, should
communicate with, and obtain their cards from the private secretary to
the Secretary of State at the India Office, Whitehall.

All officers of the Colonial service and Colonial forces, of whatever
rank, whether on the active or retired lists, should communicate with
and obtain their cards from the Colonial Office, Whitehall.

Similarly, all gentlemen connected with the Foreign Office, the Home
Office, officials connected with the Houses of Parliament, or any
Government department, should communicate with and obtain their cards
for attendance or presentation at levées from the department under which
they serve.

Judges, law officers, King's Counsel, and all legal officials holding
appointments under the Crown are requested to make their applications
through the secretary to the Lord Chancellor.

Peers, bishops, Lords-Lieutenants of Counties, Members of Parliament,
clergy of all denominations, and all gentlemen, other than the
above-mentioned, should communicate with the Lord Chamberlain at St.
James's Palace, when they will each be furnished with a card of
admission for use at the levée.

The names both for attendance and presentation must be received at the
various offices above indicated not later than eight days prior to the
date of each levée, but in the case of officers, who make application to
the War Office, fourteen days before the date of each levée.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Gentleman makes a Presentation= it is compulsory for him to
attend the same levée as the person whom he presents, and the card of
presentation is sent to him to be forwarded to the person to be
presented.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Gentleman on being presented= should bow to the King, and His Majesty
will bow to him in return. Gentlemen attending a levée should also bow
to His Majesty.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gentlemen who have been presented= at a levée have the privilege of
writing their names in His Majesty's visiting book at Buckingham Palace
once during the season. The hours of calling for this purpose are
generally from three to five o'clock in the afternoon.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Dress to be worn at Courts, State Functions and Levées.=--Full
dress uniform is invariably worn by all gentlemen entitled to wear it.
All officers of Scottish kilted corps should wear the kilt irrespective
of their being mounted officers or not. Gentlemen who do not wear
uniform may wear either velvet Court dress, new style; velvet Court
dress, old style; cloth Court dress.

The new style velvet Court dress is of black silk velvet. The body of
the coat lined with white silk and the skirt with black silk. Steel
buttons. Waistcoat of white satin or black silk velvet. Breeches of
black silk velvet, black silk hose, patent leather shoes, steel buckled;
white bow necktie, white gloves, sword, black beaver or silk cocked hat.
The velvet Court dress, old style, is very similar to the foregoing,
with the addition of a black silk wig-bag at the back of the neck, and
lace frills and ruffles. The cloth Court dress consists of a coat of
dark mulberry, claret, or green cloth with black silk linings, gold
embroidery on collar, cuffs, and pocket flaps, gilt buttons with
Imperial Crown; waistcoat of white corded silk or white Marcella;
breeches of cloth, colour of coat; black silk hose, patent leather
shoes, sword, white bow necktie, white gloves, black beaver or silk
cocked hat.

Levée dress is identical with the foregoing except that trousers--with a
row of narrow gold lace down the side seams--are worn, and not
breeches. Military patent leather boots.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Archbishops and Bishops= at Levées and Courts wear Convocation robes,
viz. scarlet cloth chimere, without hood; purple cassock and sash, lawn
rochet with sleeves, white cambric bands, black silk scarf, black
breeches, silver knee buckles, black silk stockings, shoes with silver
buckles; purple or black velvet square soft cap to be carried. At
Evening State Functions and Full Dress Dinners they wear a purple cloth
Court coat over a short cassock or apron, sash of purple silk, black
breeches, black silk stockings, shoes with silver buckles; black corded
silk three-cornered hat to be carried.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Deans and Archdeacons= at Evening State Functions wear the same dress
as bishops except that the coat and short cassock are black. Doctors of
Divinity at Levées and Courts wear the scarlet cloth robe of their
University, without hood.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Clergy if not Doctors of Divinity= at Levées and Courts wear full
canonicals, that is, a black silk Geneva gown, double-breasted; black
silk long cassock and sash, scarf and white lawn bands, black breeches,
silver knee buckles, black silk stockings, shoes with silver buckles,
black corded silk three-cornered hat. At Full Dress Dinners and Evening
State Parties when canonicals are not worn, they wear a black cloth
Court coat, cassock, waistcoat of black corded silk, black breeches,
black silk stockings, shoes, silver buckles; black corded silk
three-cornered hat to be carried. White gloves are worn at all Court
functions. The academical habit should not be worn at Court except when
addresses are presented from the Universities.

When the Court is in mourning, gentlemen attending a levée are expected
to wear a band of black crape on the left arm above the elbow.




CHAPTER XII

BALLS AND STATE BALLS


=Balls= are given in town and country by society at large, and these
invitation balls include Hunt Balls, Military and Naval Balls, Yeomanry
and Territorial Balls, Bachelors' Balls, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Public Balls= are those balls for which tickets of admission can be
purchased, although for many of these balls it is necessary to obtain
vouchers from the committees or patronesses, when held in town or at
watering-places.

Public balls include County Balls, Charity Balls, and Subscription
Balls, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In Town, Ball-giving= is in a way a science, and an amusement upon
which large sums of money are frequently expended.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Crowded Ball= is not always pronounced a good ball by the guests,
often the contrary, but then, again, what is termed a thin ball is open
to the accusation of not going off well, and falling rather flat; of not
being kept up with spirit, and of being considered a stupid ball, and so
on.

To hit upon a happy medium with regard to the number of guests is an
achievement in ball-giving which is only arrived at by a careful study
of the map of the county, and a judicious selection of night. This
selection is of paramount importance to the success of a ball, as when a
smarter ball is given at a smarter house on the particular evening
chosen by the giver of a less brilliant ball, the grander ball
extinguishes the lesser ball, through the most fashionable people merely
looking in at the one, and remaining the rest of the evening at the
other. This putting out as it were of the lesser light, occurs very
frequently during the London season to ball-givers moving in the same
sets. The guests who have been expected to add lustre to the lesser
balls appear but for a few minutes, and usually arrive rather early,
uncomplimentarily early, at perhaps a little before eleven, and remain
hardly half an hour in the rooms, making their way to another ball of
the same calibre, and remaining there perhaps another twenty minutes,
before arriving at the goal, viz. _the_ ball of the evening. Both ladies
and gentlemen follow this practice, thus, at a little after twelve, an
average ball-giver finds her rooms deserted by all but those who have
nowhere else to go. Although the flitting of the guests thus early is a
disappointment to the hostess, and although it does not prevent the
fleeting ball-givers from making suitable returns by placing the family
on their ball lists, it yet greatly mars the enjoyment of the ball, and
prevents its being looked back upon with anything approaching to
pleasure or satisfaction, the departure of the most eligible partners
being not the least of the vexations of the night.

These _contretemps_ are sometimes unavoidable; but, when practicable, it
is always best to postpone a ball rather than to allow it to clash with
a ball of greater pretensions.

An impromptu dance is often a great success, while an impromptu ball is
almost as certain to prove a great failure.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Difference between a Dance and a Ball= consists in the number of
the invitations issued, in the strength of the band, and the extent of
the supper arrangements.

At a dance the number of the guests varies from eighty to two hundred;
at a ball they vary from two hundred to five hundred.

At a dance a piano band is frequently engaged, while at a ball a full
band is requisite. At a ball the floral decorations are a great feature,
at a small dance they are often dispensed with. Ladies new to society as
it were, or whose circle of acquaintance is of a limited character, and
who do not number in that circle many ball-givers, and who yet desire to
form a ball acquaintance, frequently place their ball in the hands of
some intimate friend of higher standing than themselves, giving her
_carte blanche_ to form a ball list. When this plan is followed,
invitations are still sent out by the ball-giver; in every case the name
and compliments of the lady who forms the list are sent with the card.

This plan, although of advantage to the hostess, is often productive of
much unpleasantness to her unfashionable friends, who are naturally very
much affronted at being excluded from the ball list, which they usually
are, as a lady who undertakes to form a ball list for a friend is not a
little arbitrary as to the conditions under which she assumes its
management. She naturally wishes the ball to be confined to her own set,
to the exclusion of what she terms all outsiders.

Ladies are always more or less reluctant to yield up their ball to the
exclusion of their old friends, however anxious they may be to make new
ones. But when a ball is thus given it is thoroughly understood that
conditions, however stringent, must be complied with.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Hostess should receive her Guests= at the head of the staircase at a
ball given in town, and at the door of the ball-room at a country house
ball. She should shake hands with each guest in the order of their
arrival.

The ladies of a party should advance towards the hostess, followed by
the gentlemen of their party.

A lady and gentleman should not ascend the staircase arm-in-arm, or make
their entrance into the ball-room arm-in-arm. The gentlemen invariably
enter the ball-room after the ladies of their party, and never before
them, or arm-in-arm with them. A ball is usually opened either by the
hostess herself, or by one of her daughters.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Opening a Fancy Dress Ball= simply signifies dancing in the first
quadrille. Opening a dance means dancing the first valse.

When a member of the Royal Family, or a foreign prince, is expected,
dancing should not commence until the arrival of the royal guest; and
when the royal guest is a lady, the host should open the ball with her,
having his wife or daughter as _vis-à-vis_. When the royal guest is a
prince, the hostess or her daughter should open the ball with him.

When a prince wishes to dance with any lady present, with whom he is
unacquainted, his equerry informs her of the prince's intention, and
conducts her to the prince, saying as he does so, "Mrs. A----, your
Royal Highness" or "Miss B----, your Royal Highness." The prince bows
and offers her his arm; the lady should curtsey and take it. She should
not address him until addressed by him, it not being considered
etiquette to do so. The same course is followed by a princess; strangers
to the princess should not ask her to dance, but the host has the
privilege of doing so. When more than one royal personage is present,
the one of the highest rank leads the way, with either hostess or host.
(See Chapter V.)

       *       *       *       *       *

=Royal Guests= should be received by the host and hostess at the
entrance of the mansion, and by them conducted to the ball-room. At
ball-suppers the same precedence is strictly in force, the royal guests
leading the way with host or hostess (see p. 49).

The same etiquette should be observed on the departure of royal guests
as on their arrival.

       *       *       *       *       *

=General Introductions= should not be made to royal guests, and
introductions should be made by request only.

Gentlemen present at a ball are expected to ask the daughters of the
house for one dance at least.

A hostess should use her own discretion as to any introduction she
thinks proper to make. When a ball is given in the country, the hostess
should endeavour to find partners for those young ladies who are
strangers to the general company. But when a ball is given in town, she
is not expected to do so, as in town the guests are supposed to be
acquainted with each other more or less, and to be independent of the
kind offices of a hostess.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Dances mainly in vogue at the moment= are, "Valses," "The Boston,"
"Two Steps," and "The Cotillon," in which handsome presents are given.
"Quadrilles" are danced at "State Balls," and at those balls at which
the King and Queen are present. Also at "Fancy Dress Balls." "Lancers"
are danced occasionally at "Hunt Balls."

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Precedency observed= in sending guests in to supper is far more
punctiliously followed in the country than in town. The host should take
in the lady of highest rank present, and the hostess should endeavour to
send in the principal guests according to their individual rank; but in
town she generally leaves the guests to follow the host and lady of
highest rank according to their inclinations, a guest should not enter
the supper-room before the host has done so.

When a gentleman takes a lady in to supper, he should re-conduct her to
the ball-room as a matter of course; the fact of friends joining her in
the supper-room would not relieve him from this obligation. And the same
etiquette applies equally to a lady. She should return to the ball-room
only with the gentleman who has taken her down to supper, unless she is
engaged for the ensuing dance, when her partner might come in quest of
her; she should then return to the ball-room with him.

It is not usual for guests to take leave of a hostess at a London ball.
This remark applies to acquaintances of the hostess, and not to intimate
friends.

At a country ball the guests are on a more friendly footing than is
generally the case in town; and, therefore, make a point of taking leave
of the hostess if possible.

It is optional whether a host conducts a lady to her carriage or not. In
the country more is expected of him than in town in this respect, as at
a London ball, such a civility would involve a vast amount of exertion
which few hosts would be willing to undergo: ladies accompanied by an
acquaintance generally make their way to their carriages.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Custom of covering in Small Balconies= and the windows of the
drawing-rooms where a ball takes place, rendering the atmosphere of the
room almost insupportable from the total exclusion of air, is fast
disappearing. The space gained by this means for the accommodation of
the guests is totally disproportionate to the discomfort thereby
entailed upon them.

Ball-givers have at length realised the mistake of crowding two hundred
to three hundred people together into rooms not properly ventilated, and
it is now the rule, when covering in balconies, to introduce window
frames into the bunting covering, and to drape them with lace curtains,
etc., the windows of the ball-room being entirely removed.

Large blocks of ice are frequently placed in convenient spots for the
purpose of cooling the atmosphere, and coloured ice produces a pretty
effect.

Patent ventilators are also much in use, and the substitution of
electric lighting, on account of its emitting little heat, has become
general.

Ball-goers appreciate these alterations as only those who have
experienced the close, stifling atmosphere of an over-crowded ball-room
can do, and as half the London ball-rooms are only average-sized
drawing-rooms, the absurdity of excluding air from the ball-room with
yards of thick canvas cannot be too severely criticised.

Ball-givers, too, frequently issue far more invitations than the size of
their rooms authorises, under the mistaken idea that to have a great
crowd in their rooms is to give a good ball.

But experienced ball-givers limit the number of their invitations to
under two hundred, instead of expanding it to over three hundred.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Country Ball Season= ostensibly commences in November, reaches its
zenith in January, and terminates early in February.

The stewards of these balls are, as a rule, the representatives of the
various classes by whom they are attended; the members of the
aristocracy residing in the county heading the list of stewards, and the
members of the professional classes usually closing it.

The top of the ball-room is, as a rule, appropriated by the aristocratic
element, head stewards and "lady patronesses."

The enjoyment derived from country balls depends upon a variety of
circumstances, which do not influence in a like degree the ball-going
world of London.

       *       *       *       *       *

=County Balls= are principally composed of a series of large parties
brought by different ladies in the neighbourhood where the ball is held;
but there are two classes of county balls, balls which are held in large
and populous towns and attended by the principal residents of the towns,
with only a small sprinkling of the county aristocracy and county
gentry.

There are also Hunt Balls and annual Charity Balls which take place
between October and February, and which are an amalgamation of both
classes of balls.

The neighbourhood where a ball is held is a sufficient indication as to
whether it is likely to be a smart one or not.

As a rule the leading ladies of a county lend their names as patronesses
and supporters of a charity ball, although it by no means follows that
they will personally attend it; but a long list of influential
patronesses materially increases the sale of tickets, which is the
result to be achieved.

A large attendance is not the primary object of a county ball, as the
sum raised by the sale of tickets is only required to defray the
expenses of the ball, although these are sometimes considerable,
especially when the decorations are elaborate, and the arrangements on a
grand scale, in which case there is not seldom a deficiency rather than
a surplus, which deficiency is defrayed by the stewards themselves.

To ensure a good ball considerable unanimity on the part of the county
ladies is demanded, and they usually meet and consult together previous
to fixing the date of the ball, to take into consideration the fixtures
of neighbouring county balls, and so avoid the possibility of the said
balls clashing with their own county ball, and also with a view of
perhaps attracting the house parties of their more distant neighbours to
swell the numbers at their own ball.

House parties invited for a ball vary from ten to twenty-five, as the
accommodation of a house admits.

It is not the province of the stewards of a ball to find partners for
either ladies or gentlemen, and therefore, if a lady does not form one
of a large party, but merely attends a county ball with a relative or
friend, and has not a large acquaintance amongst these present, she has
very little chance of obtaining partners.

Young ladies do not now return to their chaperons after each dance, or
after they have been to the tea-room.

A gentleman should offer his arm to his partner at the conclusion of a
dance to conduct her to the tea-room. In round dances, it is customary
to take frequent pauses, and not to race round the ball-room until the
music ceases.

At country balls programmes are invariably used; at London balls they
are never used, save at public balls.

County balls usually commence between nine and ten o'clock, sometimes a
ball is not opened until the most influential of the stewards and their
parties have arrived, but oftener than not the two first dances are over
before the arrival of the county magnates.

It depends upon the length of the drive at what time people arrive at a
ball; as a rule, they do not arrive later than 10.30 p.m.

The usual mode of conveying a house-party to a ball is by private
omnibus in addition to carriages and motor cars; but when these are
hired for the occasion the expense should be defrayed by the guests
themselves.

It is usual to leave a country ball not later than half-past two; the
most fashionable people invariably do so about that hour.

As a matter of course persons attending public balls take their ball
tickets with them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When attending a Military Ball=, or a Hunt Ball, it is usually the rule
to take the invitation card and hand it to the sergeant or official in
attendance.

It is sometimes stated on the invitation card that this is to be done,
although it is often taken for granted that persons will do so of their
own accord.

At balls given by private individuals, the invited guests should not
bring their invitation cards with them, unless in the case of a _bal
masqué_, where they are sometimes requested to do so.

In giving a ball three weeks' notice is considered necessary, but with
regard to a dance a short ten days' notice would suffice.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Invitation Card= is the usual "at home" card, the word "Dancing"
being printed in the corner of the card.

The word "ball" should never be used on an invitation card, however
grand the entertainment; and the same form of invitation is employed
either in the case of a small dance or of a large ball, though in the
event of a small dance only being given, the words "Small" or "Early"
should be written or printed on the invitation card.

Invitations to a ball should be issued in the name of the hostess only.

When the host is a widower, with a grown-up daughter, the invitations
should be issued in their joint names.

When the host is a widower, or a bachelor, they should be issued in his
name.

Invitations issued by officers, members of hunt committees, bachelors,
etc., to their balls, either request the pleasure or the honour of Mrs.
----'s company; but this formula should not be used by ladies when
issuing invitations; the "at home" card should simply bear the word
"Dancing" on the bottom of the card, the hour and date filled in in the
allotted space, the name of the guest written at the top of the card.

In the case of a written invitation, it would be correct to use the
words "ball" or "dance" when alluding to the entertainment about to be
given, in a friendly note.

A lady or gentleman might ask for an invitation for his or her friend to
a ball given by an acquaintance, although the acquaintanceship were of a
slight character; but a lady or gentleman should not ask for an
invitation to a ball if unacquainted with the giver of it. The fact of
mutual friends having received invitations to a ball gives no claim upon
the hospitality of a stranger, therefore such requests are inadmissible.

The proper course for a person to pursue in the event of desiring an
invitation to a ball given by some one with whom he or she is
unacquainted, is to request some mutual friend to obtain one; and this
course is always followed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cards should be left= by the guests present at a ball within the
current week if possible. (See Chapter III.)

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gratuities= should never be given by the guests to the servants of the
house where a ball is given.

       *       *       *       *       *

=State Balls.=--Two State Balls are annually given at Buckingham Palace
during the London season by command of His Majesty. Invitations are
issued by the Lord Chamberlain, but His Majesty previously revises the
list.

When ladies and gentlemen attend a State Ball at Buckingham Palace they
make their way to the ball-room _unannounced_; and there is no official
reception accorded to them, either by "Royalty" or by the Lord
Chamberlain.

Dancing does not commence until the arrival of the royal party, when the
guests rise and remain standing while the Royal Quadrille--with which
the ball opens--is being danced.

The King and Queen act as host and hostess on these occasions, but
confine their attentions to those with whom they are personally
acquainted.

Ladies attending a State Ball at Buckingham Palace should wear the usual
full evening dress; but they should not wear Court trains, or plumes, or
lappets.

Gentlemen attending State Balls should wear uniform or full Court
dress--dress coat, breeches and silk stockings, shoes and buckles;
trousers can only be worn as part of a uniform, and not with a Court
dress as generally worn at a levée.

A gentleman intending to dance should remove his sword, otherwise he
should not do so.

When the Court is in mourning, ladies attending a State Ball should wear
mourning according to the official notice which duly appears in the
_Gazette_.

Gentlemen should wear crape on the left arm, which is supplied in the
cloak-room of the Palace to those who have forgotten to provide
themselves with it, as it is imperative, when the Court is in mourning,
that a band of crape should be worn at either State Ball or State
Concert.

The balls given by the princes and princesses of the blood royal are not
State Balls, therefore Court dress is not worn by the gentlemen present.

They act as host and hostess at the balls given by them and receive
their guests, shaking hands with them as they are announced.

Ladies and gentlemen do not take their cards of invitation with them to
Buckingham Palace.




CHAPTER XIII

DINNER GIVING AND DINING OUT


=Dinner= giving is perhaps the most important of all social observances,
therefore dinner parties rank first amongst all entertainments.

Dinner giving is so thoroughly understood to rest upon the principle of
an equivalent, that those who do not give dinners hardly come within the
category of diners out. This rule, however, is open to many exceptions
in favour of privileged individuals, popular and prominent members of
society whose presence at dinner parties is appreciated and welcomed in
most circles.

Dinner-parties are of more frequent occurrence, and are of more social
significance, than any other form of entertainment.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Dinner Invitations.=--An invitation to dinner conveys a greater mark of
esteem, or friendship and cordiality, towards the guest invited, than is
conveyed by an invitation to any other social gathering, it being the
highest compliment, socially speaking, that is offered by one person to
another. It is also a civility that can be readily interchanged, which
in itself gives it an advantage over all other civilities.

The orthodox dinner giver must necessarily possess a certain amount of
wealth, and wealth and wit do not always go hand in hand. Oftener than
not, the former rather overweights the latter; hence, the introduction
of a lighter element in the form of amusing people whose _métier_ in
life it is to be amusing and to appear amused.

Dinner giving is in itself not only a test of the position occupied in
society by the dinner giver, but it is also a direct road to obtaining a
recognized place in society. A means of enlarging a limited acquaintance
and a reputation for giving good dinners is in itself a passport to
fashionable society. Dinner giving, in the fullest sense of the word, is
a science not easily acquired, so much depending on the talent which the
host or hostess may possess for organizing dinner-parties.

When a large dinner-party is contemplated, it is usual to give three
weeks' notice, but of late this notice has been extended to four, five,
and even six weeks.

Diners out are rather inclined to rebel against this innovation,
considering that an invitation bearing the date of a month hence pledges
them to remain in town, and as it were controls their movements, for the
acceptance of an invitation is in the eyes of diners out a binding
obligation; only ill-health, family bereavement, or some all-important
reason justifies its being set on one side or otherwise evaded.

Those inconsiderate enough to make trivial excuses at the last moment
are not often retained on the dinner-list of a host or hostess.

Dinner invitations are issued in the joint names of host and hostess.

The master of the house occupies a prominent position amongst his
guests, when dispensing hospitality as a "dinner giver."

From five to ten days' notice is considered sufficient for invitations
to small and unceremonious dinner-parties.

Printed cards are in general use in town for issuing dinner invitations,
and can be purchased from any stationer; these cards only require to be
filled in with the names of host and hostess and guests, date, hour, and
address. The united names of the host and hostess should be written in
the space left for that purpose. Thus, "Mr. and Mrs. A.," and the name
or names of the guests in the next vacant space.

When invitations are issued for small dinner-parties, it is more usual
to write notes than to make use of printed cards.

Acceptances or refusals of dinner invitations should be sent with as
little delay as possible after the invitations have been received. It is
a want of courtesy on the part of a person invited not to do so, as a
hostess is otherwise left in doubt as to whether the person invited
intends dining with her or not, and is consequently unable to fill up
the vacant place with an eligible substitute; thus rendering her
dinner-party an ill-assorted one.

An answer to an invitation cannot be solicited in a subsequent note; it
is therefore incumbent upon the invited person to dispatch an answer
within a day or two at least. Dinner invitations are either sent by post
or by a servant, and the answers are also conveyed in a like manner.

Dinner invitations are invariably sent out by the hostess.

It is not usual in town to invite more than three members of one family;
it is now the custom to ask young ladies with their parents to
dinner-parties.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Receiving Dinner-Guests.=--The guests should arrive within fifteen
minutes of the hour named on the invitation card.

On no occasion is punctuality more imperative than in the case of dining
out; formerly many allowed themselves great latitude in this respect,
and a long wait for the tardy guests was the result. A host and hostess
frequently waited over half an hour for expected guests. But now
punctuality has become the rule in the highest circles, and dinner is
served within twenty minutes of the arrival of the first guest. In
general, people much given to dining out make a point of arriving in
good time; but there are many in society who presume upon their
position, and are proverbially unpunctual, knowing that in the height of
the season a hostess would wait half an hour rather than sit down to
dinner without them; but this want of consideration soon becomes known
in their different sets, and is always taken into account when "their
company is requested at dinner."

In France, it is not the rule, or the custom, to wait dinner for late
arrivals, and the dinner is served punctually to the hour named in the
invitation.

The dinner-hour varies from eight to nine, although perhaps 8.30 is the
most usual hour. In the country it ranges from 7.30 to 8.30.

Punctuality on the part of the guests enables the hostess to make any
introductions she may consider advisable before dinner is served.

The host and hostess should be in readiness to receive their guests in
the drawing-room at the hour specified on the card.

On arrival, a lady should take off her cloak in the cloak-room, or
should leave it in the hall with the servant in attendance, before
entering the drawing-room.

A gentleman should leave his overcoat and hat in the gentlemen's
cloak-room, or in the hall.

At large dinner-parties, the butler is stationed on the staircase, and
announces the guests as they arrive. At small dinner-parties, or where
only one man-servant is kept, the servant precedes the guest or guests
on their arrival, to the drawing-room. The guests should then give their
names to the servant, that he may announce them.

A lady and gentleman, on being announced, should not enter the
drawing-room arm-in-arm or side by side. The lady or ladies, if more
than one, should enter the room in advance of the gentleman, although
the servant announces "Mr., Mrs., and Miss A."

The host and hostess should come forward and shake hands with each guest
on arrival. The ladies should at once seat themselves, but gentlemen
either stand about the room and talk to each other, or sit down after a
wait of some minutes.

When a lady is acquainted with many of the guests present, she should
not make her way at once to shake hands with all, but should make an
opportunity to do so in an unobtrusive manner; it would be sufficient to
recognise them by a nod or a smile in the mean time. A lady should bow
to any gentleman she knows, and he should cross the room to shake hands
with her at once if disengaged.

At a small dinner-party, where the guests are unacquainted, the hostess
should introduce the persons of highest rank to each other; but at a
large dinner-party, she would not do so, unless she had some especial
reason for making the introduction.

In the country, introductions at dinner-parties are far oftener made
than in town.

Precedency is strictly observed at all dinner-parties. (See Chapter V.)

       *       *       *       *       *

=Sending Guests in to Dinner.=--The host should take the lady of highest
rank present in to dinner, and the gentleman of highest rank should take
the hostess. This rule is absolute, unless the lady or gentleman of
highest rank is related to the host or hostess, in which case his or her
rank would be in abeyance, out of courtesy to the other guests.

A husband and wife, or a father and daughter, or a mother and son,
should not be sent in to dinner together.

A host and hostess should, if possible, invite an equal number of ladies
and gentlemen. It is usual to invite two or more gentlemen than there
are ladies, in order that the married ladies should not be obliged to go
in to dinner with each other's husbands only. Thus, Mrs. A. and Mr. B.,
Mr. B. and Mrs. A., Mrs. B. should be taken in to dinner by Mr. C., and
Mr. A. should take Mrs. G., and so on.

When ladies are in a majority at a dinner-party to the extent of two or
three, the ladies of highest rank should be taken in to dinner by the
gentlemen present, and the remaining ladies should follow by themselves;
but such an arrangement is unusual and undesirable, though sometimes
unavoidable when the dinner-party is an impromptu one, for instance, and
the notice given has been but a short one.

If there should be one gentleman short of the number required, the
hostess frequently goes in to dinner by herself, following in the wake
of the last couple.

The usual mode of sending guests in to dinner is for the host or hostess
to inform each gentleman, shortly after his arrival, which of the ladies
he is to take in to dinner.

No "choice" is given to any gentleman as to which of the ladies he would
prefer taking in to dinner, it being simply a question of precedency.

Should any difficulty arise as to the order in which the guests should
follow the host to the dining-room, the hostess, knowing the precedency
due to each of her guests, should indicate to each gentleman when it is
his turn to descend to the dining-room. He should then offer his arm to
the lady whom the host had previously desired him to take in to dinner.

Dinner is announced by the butler or man-servant.

When the guests have arrived, or when the host desires dinner to be
served, he should ring or inform the servant accordingly.

On dinner being announced, the host should give his right arm to the
lady of highest rank present, and, with her, lead the way to the
dining-room, followed by the lady second in rank, with a gentleman
second in rank and so on. The gentleman of highest rank present should
follow last with the hostess.

When the second couple are about to leave the drawing-room, the hostess
frequently requests each gentleman in turn to follow with a lady
according to the precedency due to each. Thus, "Mr. A., will you take
Mrs. B.?" This also answers the purpose of an introduction, should the
couple be unacquainted with each other, and the hostess has not found
an opportunity of introducing them to each other on their arrival.

When a case of precedency occurs, in which either the lady or gentleman
must waive their right of precedence, that of the gentleman gives way to
that of the lady. (See Chapter V.)

A gentleman should offer his right arm to a lady on leaving the
drawing-room.

Ladies and gentlemen should not proceed to the dining-room in silence,
but should at once enter into conversation with each other. (See the
work entitled "The Art of Conversing.")

On entering the dining-room the lady whom the host has taken in to
dinner should seat herself at his right hand. On the Continent this
custom is reversed, and it is etiquette for the lady to sit at the left
hand of the gentleman by whom she is taken in to dinner.

The host should remain standing in his place, at the bottom of the
table, until the guests have taken their seats, and should motion the
various couples as they enter the dining-room to the places he wishes
them to occupy at the table. This is the most usual method of placing
the guests at the dinner-table. When the host does not indicate where
they are to sit, they sit near to the host or hostess according to
precedency.

The host and hostess should arrange beforehand the places they wish
their guests to occupy at the dinner-table.

If a host did not indicate to the guests the various places he wished
them to occupy, the result would probably be that husbands and wives
would be seated side by side, or uncongenial people would sit together.

The custom of putting a card with the name of the guest on the table in
the place allotted to each individual guest is frequently followed at
large dinner-parties, and in some instances the name of each guest is
printed on a menu and placed in front of each cover.

The host and the lady taken in to dinner by him should sit at the bottom
of the table. He should sit in the centre at the bottom of the table and
place the lady whom he has taken down at his right hand. The same rule
applies to the hostess. She should sit in the centre at the top of the
table, the gentleman by whom she has been taken in to dinner being
placed at her left hand.

The lady second in rank should sit at the host's left hand.

Each lady should sit at the right hand of the gentleman by whom she is
taken in to dinner.

It is solely a matter of inclination whether a lady and gentleman, who
have gone in to dinner together, converse with each other only, or with
their right-and left-hand neighbours also, but they usually find some
topic of conversation in common, otherwise a dinner-party would prove
but a succession of _tête-à-tête_.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Menus= are placed the length of the table, on an average one to two
persons or occasionally one to each person, and the menu cards are
elaborate or simple, according to individual taste, and are purchased
printed for the purpose, having a space for the names of the dishes to
be filled in, which is usually done by the mistress of the house, unless
the establishment is on a large scale, it being usual to write them out
in French.

Fanciful menu holders are much in use.

The use of menus would be pretentious at a small dinner-party when there
is but little choice of dishes; but when there is a choice of dishes a
menu is indispensable.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Usual and Fashionable Mode of serving Dinner= is called _Dîner à la
Russe_, although at small or friendly dinners the host sometimes prefers
to carve the joint himself in the first course, and the birds in the
second course. But dinner-tables, whether for dining _à la Russe_, or
for dining _en famille_, are invariably arranged in the same style, the
difference being merely the extent of the display made as regards
flowers, plate and glass, which are the accessories of the dining-table.

When the host helps the soup, a small ladleful for each person is the
proper quantity; a soup-plate should not be filled with soup.

When the party is a small one, and the joints or birds are carved by the
host, the portions should be handed to the guests in the order in which
they are seated, although occasionally the ladies are helped before the
gentlemen.

The rule at all dinner-parties is for the servant to commence serving by
handing the dishes to the lady seated at the host's right hand, then to
the lady seated at the host's left hand, and from thence the length of
the table to each guest in the order seated, irrespective of sex.

Double _entrées_ should be provided at large dinner-parties, and the
servants should commence handing the dishes at both sides of the table
simultaneously.

_Dîner à la Russe_ is the Russian fashion introduced into society many
years ago. The whole of the dinner is served from a side-table, no
dishes whatever being placed on the table save dishes of fruit.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Dinner-table Decorations.=--As regards the most correct style of
dinner-table decorations, they offer great diversity of arrangement.

High centre pieces and low centre pieces. Low specimen glasses placed
the length of the table and trails of creepers and flowers laid on the
table-cloth itself are some of the prevailing features of the day, but
table decorations are essentially a matter of taste rather than of
etiquette, and the extent of these decorations depends very much upon
the size of the plate chest and the length of the purse of the dinner
giver.

The fruit for dessert is usually arranged down the centre of the table,
amidst the flowers and plate. Some dinner-tables are also adorned with a
variety of French conceits besides fruit and flowers; other
dinner-tables are decorated with flowers and plate only, the dessert not
being placed on the table at all; but this latter mode can only be
adopted by those who can make a lavish display of flowers and plate in
the place of fruit.

As regards lighting the dinner table. Electric light is now in general
use in town, and more or less in the country when possible. When not
available, lamps and wax candles are used as heretofore. The shades in
use should be carefully chosen as they add greatly to the comfort of the
guests and to the success of the lighting. Silver candlesticks are often
fitted with small electric lamps, and handsome silver lamps are brought
into use in a similar manner for the dinner table.

The term "cover" signifies the place laid at table for each person. It
consists of a table-spoon for soup, fish knife and fork, two knives, two
large forks, and glasses for wines given. For such arrangements see
chapter "Waiting at dinner" in the work entitled "Waiting at Table."

Sherry is always drunk after soup, hock with the fish after the soup.
Champagne is drunk immediately after the first _entrée_ has been served,
and during the remainder of dinner until dessert. Claret, sherry, port,
and Madeira are the wines drunk at dessert, and not champagne, as it is
essentially a dinner wine. When liqueurs are given they are handed after
the ices.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Dinner-table Etiquette.=--Soup should be eaten with a table-spoon and
not with a dessert-spoon, it would be out of place to use a
dessert-spoon for that purpose. Dessert-spoons, as their name implies,
are intended for other purposes, such as for eating fruit-tarts,
custard-puddings, etc., or any sweet that is not sufficiently
substantial to be eaten with a fork.

Fish should be eaten with a silver fork when possible, otherwise with a
silver fish knife and fork.

All made dishes, such as _quenelles_, _rissoles_, patties, etc., should
be eaten with a fork only, and not with a knife and fork.

For sweetbreads and cutlets, etc., a knife and fork are requisite; and,
as a matter of course, for poultry, game, etc.

In eating asparagus, a knife and fork should be used, and the points
should be cut off and eaten with a fork as is seakale, etc.

Salad should be eaten with a knife and fork; it is served on salad
plates, which are placed beside the dinner-plates.

Cucumber is eaten off the dinner-plate, and not off a separate plate.

Peas should be eaten with a fork.

In eating game or poultry, the bone of either wing or leg should not be
touched with the fingers, but the meat cut close off the bone; and if a
wing it is best to sever it at the joint, by which means the meat is cut
off far more easily.

Pastry should be eaten with a fork, but in the case of a fruit tart, a
dessert-spoon should be used as well as a fork, but only for the purpose
of conveying the fruit and juice to the mouth; and in the case of stone
fruit--cherries, damsons, plums, etc.--either the dessert-spoon or fork
should be raised to the lips to receive the stones, which should be
placed at the side of the plate; but when the fruit stones are of larger
size, they should be separated from the fruit with the fork and spoon,
and left on the plate, and not put into the mouth; and whenever it is
possible to separate the stones from the fruit it is best to do so.

Jellies, blancmanges, ice puddings, etc., should be eaten with a fork,
as should be all sweets sufficiently substantial to admit of it.

When eating cheese, small morsels of the cheese should be placed with
the knife on small morsels of bread, and the two conveyed to the mouth
with the thumb and finger, the piece of bread being the morsel to hold,
as cheese should not be taken up in the fingers, and should not be eaten
off the point of the knife.[3]

The finger-glass should be removed from the ice-plate and placed on the
left-hand side of the dessert-plate. When ices are not given, the
d'oyley should be removed with the finger-glass and placed beneath it.

When eating grapes, the half-closed hand should be placed to the mouth,
and the stones and skins allowed to fall into the fingers, and placed on
the side of the plate. Some persons bend the head so as to allow of the
stones and skins of the grapes falling on the side of the plate; but
this latter way is old-fashioned, and seldom followed. Cherries and
other small stone-fruit should be eaten in the way grapes are eaten,
also gooseberries.

When strawberries and raspberries, etc., are not eaten with cream, they
should be eaten from the stalks; when eaten with cream, a dessert-spoon
should be used to remove them from the stalks. When served in the
American fashion without stalks, both fork and spoon should be used.

Pears and apples should be peeled and cut into halves and quarters with
a fruit-knife and fork, as should peaches, nectarines, and apricots.

Melons should be eaten with a spoon and fork.

Pines with knife and fork.

The dessert is handed to the guests in the order in which the dinner has
been served.[4]

When the guests have been helped to wine, and the servants have left the
dining-room, the host should pass the decanters to his guests,
commencing with the gentleman nearest to him.

It is not the fashion for gentlemen to drink wine with each other either
at dinner or dessert, and the guest fills his glass or not, according to
inclination.

Ladies are not supposed to require a second glass of wine at dessert,
and passing the decanters is principally for the gentlemen. If a lady
should require a second glass of wine at dessert, the gentleman seated
next to her would fill her glass; she should not help herself to wine.
After the wine has been passed once around the table, or about ten
minutes after the servants have left the dining-room, the hostess should
give the signal for the ladies to leave the dining-room, by bowing to
the lady of highest rank present, seated at the host's right hand. She
should then rise from her seat, as should all the ladies on seeing her
do so.

The gentlemen should rise also, and remain standing by their chairs
until the ladies have quitted the room, which they should do in the
order in which they have entered it, the lady of highest rank leading
the way, the hostess following last.

The host, or the gentleman nearest the door, should open it for the
ladies to pass out, and close it after them.

When the ladies have left the dining-room, the gentlemen should close up
as near to the host as possible, so as to render conversation general.

The wines usually drunk by gentlemen after dinner are claret of a fine
quality, and port.

The ladies on leaving the dining-room return to the drawing-room. Coffee
should be almost immediately brought to the drawing-room. The
coffee-cups containing coffee should be brought on a silver salver, with
a cream-jug and a basin of crystallised sugar.

In large country houses coffee is sometimes brought in a silver
coffee-pot, and the lady would then pour out her own coffee, the servant
holding the salver the meanwhile.

Coffee should be taken a few minutes later to the dining-room, and
either handed to the gentlemen, or placed on the table, that they may
help themselves (see the work previously referred to).

A very general plan is, after the wine has gone round once or twice, for
the host to offer cigarettes, which are smoked before the gentlemen join
the ladies in the drawing-room.

After coffee, the gentleman of highest rank should leave the dining-room
first. The host would not propose an adjournment to the drawing-room,
until he observed a wish to do so on the part of his guests, but there
is no hard and fast rule on this head.

It is not now the fashion for gentlemen to sit over their wine beyond
fifteen or twenty minutes at the utmost, instead of as formerly, from
three-quarters of an hour to an hour, a change much appreciated by
hostesses.

On the Continent the gentlemen accompany the ladies to the drawing-room,
and do not remain in the dining-room as in England.

The gentleman of highest rank present could suggest an adjournment to
the drawing-room within a quarter of an hour if he thought proper to do
so. If the other guests were engaged in a discussion in which he did not
wish to take part, having suggested the adjournment, he could leave the
dining-room to join the ladies in the drawing-room; but as a rule, the
gentlemen leave the dining-room together, the host following last.

The host should ring the dining-room bell before leaving the room, as an
intimation to the butler that the gentlemen have left the room.

At ceremonious dinner-parties in town neither music nor cards are
introduced during the usual half-hour passed in the drawing-room before
the hour for departure.

At country-house dinner-parties music or round games of cards are in
request.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Departure after Dinner.=--There is no rule as to the order in which the
guests should take their leave. Half-past ten is the usual hour for
general departure; and the butler announces the several carriages as
they arrive to the guests in the drawing-room. But if any lady wished to
inquire if her carriage had arrived, she should ask the hostess's
permission to do so; and the bell would be rung for the purpose of
making the enquiry. The same remark applies to ordering a cab: the lady
should ask the hostess if one might be ordered for her.

The hostess should shake hands with all her guests on their departure,
rising from her seat to do so.

Each guest on departure should shake hands with both host and hostess.

If, on leaving the room, acquaintances should pass each other, they
should wish each other good-night, but they should not make the tour of
the rooms for the purpose of so doing.

The host should conduct one or two of the principal of his lady guests
to their carriages.

The ladies should put on their cloaks in the cloak-room, the host
waiting in the hall meanwhile.

A gentleman related to the host or hostess, or a friend of the family,
could offer to conduct a lady to her carriage if the host were otherwise
engaged.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gratuities= should never be offered by the guests at a dinner-party to
the servants in attendance. Gentlemen should not offer fees to the
men-servants, neither should ladies to the lady's-maid in attendance.

The guests should call on the hostess within a week or ten days after a
dinner-party. If "not at home," a married lady should leave one of her
own cards and two of her husband's; a widow should leave one of her own
cards; a bachelor or a widower should leave two cards.

The rule as to calling after dinner-parties is greatly relaxed between
intimate friends, and the call often omitted altogether; and this more
particularly as regards gentlemen, whose occupations during the day are
considered good and sufficient reasons for not calling.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Country Dinner-parties.=--In the country, new acquaintances, if
neighbours, should be asked to dinner within a month of the first call
if possible, and the return invitation should be given within the
following month.

When guests are assembled at a country house, they are sent in to
dinner, on the first evening, according to their individual precedence;
but on subsequent evenings the gentlemen frequently draw lots to decide
which lady they shall have the pleasure of taking in to dinner,
otherwise a lady and gentleman would go in to dinner together five or
six consecutive times, according to the length of the visit, but this is
more a practice with people who march with the times, than with what are
termed "old-fashioned people."

When a party is varied by additional dinner-guests each evening, drawing
lots gives way to precedency, it being too familiar a practice to be
adopted at a large dinner-party.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Saying Grace=, both before and after 'dinner,' is a matter of feeling
rather than of etiquette. It used to be very much the custom to say
"grace," but of late years it is oftener omitted than not, especially at
large dinner-parties in town.

In the country, when a clergyman is present, he should be asked to say
grace. When grace is said by the host, it is said in a low voice, and in
a very few words; the guests inclining their heads the while.

It was no rapid revolutionary change in manners that brought about the
difference that now exists between the Elizabethan and present eras; no
polished mentor came forward to teach that it was not the nicest and
cleanest to do, to put knives into the salt, to dip fingers into
plates, or to spread butter with the thumb; on the contrary, these
things righted themselves little by little, step by step, until the
present code of manners was arrived at. But it is quite possible that a
hundred years hence it will be discovered that the manners of the
present century offered wide scope for improvement.

In the meantime these rules of etiquette observed in society are adhered
to and followed by those who do not wish to appear singular, eccentric,
old-fashioned, unconventional, or any other adjective that the temper of
their judges may induce them to apply to them for committing solecisms,
either small or great.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Married Ladies, as a rule, dine out with their Husbands=, and do not
accept invitations to large dinners when their husbands are unable to
accompany them. There are, of course, exceptions to this rule, and
circumstances sometimes arise when it is greatly relaxed; but even in
this case it would be in favour of small and friendly dinners rather
than large ones.

During any temporary absence of her husband, a lady would accept
invitations to dine with her relatives and intimate friends, though she
might refuse invitations to large dinners given by acquaintances; but,
as a rule, when it is well known that the head of a house is away for
any length of time, invitations are seldom sent to the wife by givers of
large dinners.

When young ladies are invited to dinner they accompany their father,
mother or brother; but occasionally, when a young ladies' party is given
by a friend of their parents', the young ladies are invited alone, and
they should either go with their maid in a cab or by themselves in their
father's carriage.


FOOTNOTES:

[3] Respecting the arrangement of the dinner table for dessert, see
the work entitled "Waiting at Table."

[4] See the work entitled "Waiting at Table."




CHAPTER XIV

DINNER-TABLE ETIQUETTE


Fashion has its freaks and its vagaries, and in relation to inanimate
objects these freaks and vagaries are but transitory and evanescent, but
when they touch upon manners and modes they become a conventionality and
a custom perhaps for many a year. Changes and innovations, slight as
they are, are more subtle than sudden, and, paradoxical as it may seem,
they are as important as they are insignificant; still it is difficult
to believe that fingers once did duty for forks, and that it was not
customary for a host to supply his guests with forks, who, if fastidious
enough to require them, were expected to bring them in their pockets.

There are here and there people in society who affect a few
eccentricities of manner, but these whims at all times take the form of
originalities and not of vulgarities; and even then are only indulged in
by those whose position in society is secure.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards Dinner-table Etiquette.=--When a lady has taken her seat at
the dinner-table, she should at once remove her gloves; although
occasionally long elbow gloves are not removed during dinner, but this
is conspicuous and inconvenient. She should unfold her serviette and
place it on her lap. It is immaterial whether she places the bread on
the right or left-hand side of the cover when taking it from the
serviette.

A gentleman should do the same with his serviette and bread, placing
the one across his knees, and the other at his right or left hand.

When a lady is some little time taking off her gloves, she should remove
her serviette before doing so: otherwise a servant would offer her soup
before she had made room for the soup-plate by removing the serviette,
and she should decide quickly as to which of the two soups handed to her
she will take, so as not to keep the servant waiting; and so on through
every course throughout the dinner as regards fish, meat, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The guests should consult the menu= on first sitting down to dinner.
Eating soup comes first under notice. In olden days it was customary to
drink it out of a basin. In these days no one "drinks" soup, it is
"eaten"; whether it be mock turtle or the clearest julienne, it is eaten
out of a soup-plate at dinner, and with a table-spoon.

There is a reason for this choice of spoons; soup is nothing if it is
not hot, and as it is the custom to give only about half a ladleful to
each person, it is eaten quicker, and therefore hotter, with a large
spoon than with a small one.

There is also a good and sufficient reason for small quantities of soup
being given in lieu of large ones, viz. the extent of the menu; and when
a plateful of soup is handed to a guest accustomed to the regulation
supply, he fears that he is expected to dine off it, and that there is
nothing much to follow.

Again, small helpings require a smaller quantity of soup to be provided,
and a servant is less likely to spill plates containing a little soup
than plates that are half full.

At ball suppers, when soup is served in soup-plates, it is also eaten
with a table-spoon, but not when served in small cups.

Many years ago it was fashionable to eat fish with a fork and a crust of
bread; previous to this a table-knife and fork were considered the
proper things to use for this purpose. It was then discovered that a
steel knife gave an unpalatable flavour to the fish, and a crust of
bread was substituted for the knife. This fashion lasted a considerable
time, in spite of the fingers being thus brought unpleasantly near to
the plate, and to this day old-fashioned people have a predilection for
that crust of bread. One evening a well-known diner-out discarded his
crust of bread, and ate his fish with two silver forks; this notion
found such general favour that society dropped the humble crust and took
up a second fork. This fashion had its little day, but at length the two
forks were found heavy for the purpose and not altogether satisfactory,
and were superseded by the dainty and convenient little silver
fish-knife and fork which are now in general use.

Small pieces of fish should always be given, and two different sorts of
fish should not be placed on the same plate.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When oysters are given= they precede the soup, and should be eaten with
a dinner-fork, not with a fish-fork. In eating oysters the shell should
be steadied on the plate with the fingers of the left hand, the oysters
should not be cut, but should be eaten whole. Very many ladies do not
eat oysters at dinner simply because they do not like them, while others
refuse them under the impression that it is more ladylike not to eat
them. Perhaps with regard to young ladies it is a taste to be acquired.
Some men are very, if not over, fastidious, about the appetites
displayed by ladies, and would have them reject the _entrées_ and dine
upon a slice of chicken and a spoonful of jelly. Others, on the
contrary, respect a good appetite as giving proof of good health and
good digestion. There is of course a medium in all things, and as large
dinners are ordered mainly with a view to please the palates of men with
epicurean tastes, it is not expected that ladies should eat of the most
highly seasoned and richest of the dishes given, but should rather
select the plainest on the menu. This remark more particularly applies
to young ladies and young married ladies, whilst middle-aged and elderly
ladies are at liberty to do pretty much as they please, without
provoking comment or even observation.

       *       *       *       *       *

=With reference to entrées=, some are eaten with a knife and fork,
others with a fork only. All _entrées_ that offer any resistance to a
fork require the aid of both knife and fork, such as cutlets, _filet de
boeuf_, sweetbreads, etc., but when rissoles, patties, quenelles,
boneless curry, _vol-au-vents_, timbales, etc., are eaten, the fork only
should be used.

In the case of the lighter _entrées_, the contact of the knife is
supposed to militate against their delicate flavour; thus, for these
_bonnes bouches_ the fork is all-sufficient wherewith to divide and eat
them.

The leg of a chicken, pheasant, duck, or wild duck should never be given
to a guest save on those occasions when there are more guests present
than there is meat from breasts and wings to offer them. Under these
circumstances the carver is reduced to the necessity of falling back
upon the legs of the birds, but in this case only the upper part of the
thigh should be given, thus a guest has little difficulty in cutting the
meat from the bone. A wing of a bird is usually given to a lady.
Formerly it was thought a correct thing to sever the wing at the joint
and then to cut the meat from the bone; but this requires a certain
amount of strength in the wrist, and dexterity, should the bird not be
in its _première jeunesse_.

As regards small pigeons, golden plovers, snipe, quails, larks, etc., a
whole bird is given to each guest, and the proper way to eat these birds
is to cut the meat from the breast and wings and to eat each morsel at
the moment of cutting it; the bird should not be turned over and over on
the plate, or cut in half or otherwise dissected. The legs of Bordeaux
pigeons are not, as a rule, eaten, and half a bird only is given, as
there is sufficient on the wing and breast to satisfy an ordinary
second-course appetite. When the legs of smaller birds are eaten, such
as snipe or golden plover, the meat should be cut off as from the breast
or wing.

Young girls, as a rule, seldom eat a second course delicacy of this
description; a little chicken or pheasant on the contrary is usually
accepted by them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When large potatoes are served= in their skins a salad-plate should be
handed at the same time whereon to place them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When asparagus first comes into season= it is often given in the second
course instead of in the first, in which case it is eaten as a separate
dish. When handed with meat or poultry it should be eaten on the same
plate containing either.

In eating asparagus, some elderly gentlemen still adhere to the fashion
of their youth and hold the stalks in their fingers, but the younger
generation cut off the points with a knife and fork.

Seakale also is given in the second course when first in season, and
should be eaten with a knife and fork.

Mushrooms are also eaten with a knife and fork.

It need hardly be said that it would be a vulgarity to eat peas with a
knife, although those who reside abroad, or who are in the habit of
travelling on the continent, are not unaccustomed to seeing this done by
foreigners who are well-bred men.

Artichokes are, it may be said, an awkward and untidy vegetable to eat;
they are only given in the second course as a separate vegetable; the
outside leaves should be removed with the knife and fork, and the inner
leaves which surround the heart, or head of the artichoke should be
conveyed to the mouth with the fingers and sucked dry; epicures consider
this vegetable a dainty morsel; but at dinner-parties young ladies
should not attempt to eat these artichokes.

Savouries, when possible, should be eaten with a fork, but occasionally
a knife also is of imperative use.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards sweets=, _compôtes_ of fruit and fruit tarts should be eaten
with a dessert-spoon and fork, as should those dishes where juice or
syrup prevails to the extent of rendering a dessert-spoon necessary. But
whenever it is possible to use a fork in preference to a spoon it is
always better to do so.

Jellies, creams, blancmanges, ice puddings, etc., should be eaten with a
fork.

As a matter of course, young ladies do not eat cheese at dinner-parties.




CHAPTER XV

EVENING PARTIES


=Evening Parties= are styled receptions or "at homes" according to the
number of guests invited. In official and political circles they are
invariably styled "Receptions," but when given on a smaller scale in
general society they are styled "At Homes."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations= to evening parties should be issued on "at home" cards.

The name of the person invited should be written at the top of the card
at the right-hand corner, the words "at home" being printed beneath the
name of the lady issuing the invitation, the day and date beneath the
words "at home," the hour beneath the date. The address should be
printed at the bottom of the card.

When music is to be given it should be mentioned on the "at home" card,
thus, "Music."

The hour varies from 10 to 11 o'clock; in private circles 10 or 10.30 is
the usual hour; in official circles 10.30 or 11 o'clock.

When a foreign royal personage is expected, or a foreigner of
distinction, or a personage possessing public interest, the words "To
meet Her Serene Highness Princess D.," or "To meet Count C." should be
written at the top of the invitation cards.

When a reception or "at home" follows a dinner-party given by the
hostess, it is not usual to provide any special amusement for the
guests. But when an "at home" does not follow a dinner-party, it is
usual to provide some sort of amusement for the guests, such as
professional vocal or instrumental music.

The guests are expected to arrive from half an hour to an hour of the
time mentioned on the invitation card, although it is optional when they
do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Receiving the Guests.=--The hostess should receive her guests at the
head of the staircase, where she usually remains until the principal of
her guests have arrived; while the host welcomes the guests in the
drawing-room itself.

Receptions or "at homes" usually terminate shortly before one o'clock,
save on Saturdays, when the hour of departure is 12 o'clock precisely.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Making Introductions.=--A hostess should use her own discretion as
regards making introductions.

When a royal personage is present the most distinguished of the guests
should be presented by the host or hostess. When a celebrity is present
introductions should also be made; and as regards general introductions
they should be made whenever the hostess judges it expedient to do so,
and the principal guests when unacquainted should be introduced to each
other when the opportunity occurs.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Going in to Supper.=--The host should take the lady of highest rank in
to supper.

When a royal princess is present the host should take her in to supper.

When a royal prince is present he should take the hostess in to supper.
(See Chapter V.)

It is optional whether the hostess follows with the gentleman of highest
rank present, unless a foreign prince is present, when she should
follow the host, and in the case of a royal prince being present she
should precede the host.

When a royal prince or princess or a serene highness is present a table
should be set apart for the host and hostess and royal party, and any
among the guests whom the royal visitors may desire should join them at
supper.

When the supper-room is not sufficiently large to accommodate the whole
of the guests at the same time, the most distinguished guests should go
in first.

When the host is informed that supper is served he should tell the
principal gentlemen present which of the ladies he wishes them to take
into supper, and should himself lead the way with the lady of highest
rank present.

The hostess should also assist in sending the principal guests in to
supper, and when the general company observe the move towards the
supper-room, they should follow in the same direction.

When the general company are apparently not aware that the supper-room
is open, the hostess should ask the various gentlemen to take the ladies
in to supper, and should herself lead the way with one of the gentlemen.

When the general company find the supper-room crowded they should return
to the drawing-room for a quarter of an hour or so; but the hostess
should arrange for some instrumental or vocal performance to commence
when supper is first served, so as to occupy the attention of the guests
who remain in the drawing-room.

The guests frequently do not return to the drawing-room after supper,
but go to the cloak-room for their cloaks and wraps, and thence to their
carriages.

It is not usual to take leave of the host and hostess at receptions.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Royal Guests present.=--When a royal personage is present the host
should conduct her to her carriage.

When a foreign prince is present the host should accompany him to the
hall door.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Tea and Light Refreshments= should be served during the evening in the
library, or in an adjacent apartment.

Supper should be served at twelve o'clock, in the dining-room, and
should be similar in character to a ball supper.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations to Bridge Parties= are issued on "at home" cards when the
guests number upwards of forty, and on visiting cards when a lesser
number is invited.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Invitation Form= is, "Mrs. A---- At Home" in both instances. The
day, date, and hour are put beneath the words "at home," and "Bridge" in
the corner of the cards opposite the address. The usual hour for holding
these evening receptions is 9 o'clock p.m., which allows of three hours'
play before midnight. The guests arrive very punctually, rather before
than after the hour named on the invitation cards. The guests comprise
an equal number of both sexes, as husbands and wives are invited
together when both are known to be bridge players, and bachelors who do
not disdain playing for small stakes are in great request. Also
unmarried ladies of a certain age; not girls in their teens.

Prizes are given in some houses to the conquering players. One for the
ladies and one for the gentlemen, and occasionally a second prize for
the second best player of either sex. This is done when playing for
money does not commend itself to a host and hostess. The prizes consist
for the most part of useful articles. For instance, a box of gloves, a
box of bon-bons, a case of eau d'Cologne, a card-case, a bag purse, and
so on, all of which are acceptable to ladies; and a box of cigars or
cigarettes, a silver pocket-flask, a silver-mounted stick or umbrella,
are prizes the men winners are pleased to accept.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridge Tables= at which the guests are to sit are numbered, and the
hostess arranges by whom they are to be occupied. The names--four in
number for each table--are written or printed with the number of the
table upon small cards and given to the guests by the hostess on
arrival. This is done that good players may be placed together, and to
save confusion and loss of time in seating them at the various tables.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Refreshments= provided consist in the first instance of "coffee,"
which is brought into the card-room or drawing-room and handed to the
guests. No eatables are given with this after-dinner coffee. A supper is
given either at the conclusion of the play at 12 o'clock--this being the
more usual plan--or at 10.30, after which play is resumed for another
hour or so; but the latter is more of a provincial custom than a town
one, and is intended for those whose dinner hour is an early one--6.30,
perhaps.

When a supper is not given, very good light refreshments are substituted
for it, including cups of hot soup in the winter months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Going in to Supper= is arranged as far as possible on the following
lines, if precedence does not prevent its being carried out. The players
at each table who are partners when supper is served go in together. The
host leads the way with his partner, and all follow, the hostess and her
partner going last.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cards should be left= within a week or ten days after a reception.

A married lady should leave one of her own and two of her husband's
cards.

A widow should leave one of her own cards.

A bachelor or widower should leave two of his cards. (See Chapter III.)




CHAPTER XVI

WEDDINGS AND WEDDING LUNCHEONS


=Afternoon Weddings= are invariably solemnized at 2.30 o'clock. Only
very quiet weddings take place in the morning hours. Formerly, it was
only the few who were in a position to obtain special licences who could
have afternoon weddings.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Marriage by "Banns"= is greatly in favour in general society. The banns
must be published three consecutive weeks previous to the marriage in
the parish in which the bridegroom resides, and also in that in which
the bride resides, and both should reside fifteen days in their
respective parishes previous to the banns being published.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Marriages by Licence.=--When a marriage is solemnised by licence the
cost, with fees and stamps, amounts to £2. This should be obtained at
the Faculty Office, or at the Vicar-General's Office, Doctors' Commons,
and is available at any church in the parish where one of the parties
has resided for fifteen days previous to the application being made for
the licence, either in town or country.

When the licence is obtained in the country through a clerical surrogate
the cost varies, according to the diocese, from £1 15s. to £2 12s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Special Licences= can only be obtained from the Archbishop of
Canterbury, after application at the Faculty Office, and an especial
reason must be given for the application, and one that will meet with
the Archbishop's approval.

The fees for a special marriage licence average £29 5s. 6d.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Fees= to the officiating clergymen vary considerably, according to
the position and means of the bridegroom, from £1 1s. to £5 5s.
as the inclination of the bridegroom may dictate.

The fee to the verger is subject to a like variation, commencing at
2s. 6d.

All fees relating to a marriage should be defrayed by the bridegroom,
and paid by him, or by the best man on his behalf, in the vestry of the
church, previous to the ceremony; immediately after it, or some days
earlier.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Etiquette observed at Weddings= is invariably the same whether the
wedding takes place in the morning or in the afternoon, or whether it is
a grand wedding or a comparatively small one, whether the guests number
two hundred or whether they number twenty.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Invitations= should be issued from three weeks to a fortnight
before the wedding-day.

The wedding luncheon or wedding reception should be given by the parents
of the bride or by her nearest relative, and the invitations should be
issued in the names of both parents.

The invitations should be issued in notes printed in ink; they are now
seldom printed in silver. The form should be as follows: "Mr. and Mrs.
---- request the pleasure of Mr. and Mrs. ----'s company at the marriage
of their daughter Helen with Mr. John S----, at St. Peter's Church,
Hanover Square, on Tuesday, May 8th, at 2.30 o'clock, and afterwards at
---- Square. R.S.V.P."

If a stepdaughter, it should be "at the marriage of Mrs. A----'s
daughter Helen B----."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Wedding Presents.=--Every one who is invited to a wedding invariably
makes the bride or bridegroom a present; it is the received rule to do
so. Many send presents before the invitations are sent out--as soon as
the engagement is made known, if it is not to be a long one.

There is no rule as to the time before the wedding-day when the present
should be sent; but invitations are usually sent to those who have given
presents, even though they live at a considerable distance, and may not
be able to attend the wedding.

Wedding presents are displayed on tables of various sizes, according to
their number, and if very numerous and valuable, it is not unusual to
exhibit them at an afternoon tea, given for the purpose on the day
previous to the wedding. Each present should bear the card of the giver
attached to it. Presents of silver plate should be placed on a table
covered with dark cloth or velvet. It is not unusual to surround the
presents with flowers, notably roses, and this is often done by persons
of artistic tastes.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridegroom should provide= the wedding-ring and the bridal bouquet.

The bouquets for the bridesmaids are also the gift of the bridegroom,
and should be sent to them on the morning of the wedding. He is also
expected to make a present to each bridesmaid--either a brooch, a
locket, a bracelet, or a fan, which should either be sent the day before
the wedding or on the morning of the wedding-day.

The bridegroom should provide the motor-car to convey himself and his
bride from the church to the house where the wedding luncheon and
reception are to take place, and again from the house to the
railway-station, or, if the journey is made by road, to the place of
honeymoon; but frequently the bride's father places his own motor-car at
the disposal of the bride and bridegroom for this purpose, especially in
the country. The bridal carriage is the only one, according to
etiquette, which the bridegroom is expected to provide.

The invited guests should provide their own conveyances, and neither the
bridegroom nor the bride's father are ever expected to do so. This
should be thoroughly understood by the guests in every case.

The custom of having groomsmen to support the bridegroom is now very
general, as at royal weddings, a royal bridegroom being supported by
from four to six groomsmen. Two of the groomsmen usually act as ushers
and assist in seating the guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Best Man= should be a bachelor, although a married man could act in
this capacity. He should either accompany the bridegroom to the church
or meet him there. He should stand at his right hand during the
ceremony--a little in the rear--and should render him the trifling
service of handing him his hat at the close of it.

He should sign the register afterwards in the vestry, and should pay the
fees to the clergyman and to the verger, on behalf of the bridegroom,
either before or after the ceremony, if the bridegroom does not pay them
on arrival.

The bridegroom and best man should arrive at the church before the
bride, and await her coming, standing at the right-hand side of the
chancel gates.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride= should be driven to the church in her father's motor-car. If
she has a sister or sisters, and they officiate as bridesmaids, they,
with her mother, should precede her to the church. The motor-car should
then return to fetch the bride and her father; but when she has no
sisters, her father generally precedes her to the church, and receives
her at the church door, her mother accompanying her in the motor-car.

The bridesmaids should arrive some little time before the bride, and
form a line on either side of the church porch, or within the church
doorway. The mother of the bride usually stands beside them.

When the bride arrives she should take her father's right arm, or the
right arm of her eldest brother or nearest male relative, who is deputed
to give her away; he should meet her at the church door in the place of
her father, and conduct her to the chancel or altar.

At choral weddings the clergy and choir head the bridal procession and
lead the way to the chancel, singing a hymn the while.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridesmaids= should follow the bride and her father up the nave of
the church. When the number of bridesmaids is even, four, six, eight, or
twelve; but when the number is odd, as five, seven, or nine, and three
of them happen to be children, which is generally the case, the elder
bridesmaids should walk "two and two," following next after the
children.

At fashionable weddings one or two little boys act as pages, and
occasionally bear the bride's train.

The head bridesmaid is generally the bride's eldest unmarried sister or
the bridegroom's sister, and she should follow next to the bride with
her companion bridesmaid, when children are not included in the group.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride's Mother= should follow next to the bridesmaids, and walk by
the side of her son, or other male relative, in following them up the
nave of the church. Ladies and gentlemen do not walk arm-in-arm at a
wedding, but side by side.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride's Immediate Relatives= and the near relatives of the
bridegroom should seat themselves in pews or chairs, according to the
church in which the service is celebrated. In some churches the service
takes place at the entrance of the chancel, and the bridal party enter
the chancel and stand at the altar to receive the address, and the
concluding portion of the service only is there celebrated.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridegroom's Relatives= should place themselves on entering at the
right of the nave, thus being on the bridegroom's right hand, and seat
themselves in pews. The relatives of the bride should place themselves
on entering at the left of the nave, thus being on the bride's left
hand, and seat themselves in pews or chairs. Large cards with the words
"For the Relatives of the Bridegroom," "For the Relatives of the Bride,"
are frequently placed in the pews to indicate where they are to sit.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride= should stand at the bridegroom's left hand; the bride's
father, or nearest male relative, should stand at her left hand, in
order to give her away.

The bridesmaids should stand immediately behind the bride in the order
in which they pass up the church.

The bride should take off her gloves at the commencement of the service
and should give them with her bouquet to the head bridesmaid to hold.

The invited guests should sit in the pews or chairs.

Guests seldom take their prayer-books with them to the church to follow
the service therefrom. The hymns sung are usually printed on leaflets,
and placed in the pews or on the seats.

The bridegroom generally wears a flower in his button-hole, as he does
not wear a wedding favour.

The other gentlemen may, as a matter of course, wear button-hole
bouquets, if they please.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When the Service is concluded=, the bride should take the bridegroom's
left arm, and, preceded by the officiating clergyman, and followed by
her head bridesmaids, father, mother, and the most distinguished of the
guests, should enter the vestry, where the register should be signed by
the bride and bridegroom, two or three of the nearest relatives, and by
two or three of the most intimate of the friends, and principal of the
guests, including the best man and the head bridesmaid. The bride's
father should sign it, but it is optional whether the bride's mother
does so or not.

When the register has been signed, and those in the vestry have shaken
hands with the bride and offered their congratulations, the bride should
take the bridegroom's left arm and pass down the nave of the church
followed by her bridesmaids, in the same order as they have previously
passed up the nave.

The bride and bridegroom usually leave the church without pausing to
shake hands with many of their friends present if a reception is to
follow.

When the bride and bridegroom have driven off from the church, the
bride's mother should be the next to follow, that she may be at home to
receive the guests as they arrive. There is no precedence as to the
order in which the remainder of the company leave the church; it
entirely depends on the cleverness of their servants in getting up their
motor-cars.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Button-hole Bouquets= of natural flowers have entirely superseded the
old-fashioned wedding favours for both ladies and gentlemen, and are
sometimes offered to the guests before they leave their seats at the
conclusion of the ceremony, but not invariably so. Button-hole bouquets
should be worn on the left side, by both ladies and gentlemen.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Bride who is a Widow= should not wear a bridal veil, nor a wreath of
orange-blossoms, nor orange-blossom on her dress.

She should not be attended by bridesmaids, and wedding favours should
not be worn by the guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

=How the Invitations to the Wedding Reception of a Widow= should be
issued depends upon individual circumstances. For instance, if a young
widow resides with her parents, the invitations should be issued in
their names as at her first marriage, and the form of invitation should
be similar, save that the words "Their daughter, Mrs. A., widow of Mr.
A." should be substituted for her christian name. If, as is very
frequently the case, a widow resides in her own house, or if the
marriage is to take place from an hotel, the invitations should be
issued in her own name, and the form should be "Mrs. Cecil A. requests
the pleasure (or the honour) of Mr. and Mrs. B.'s company at her
marriage with Mr. Henry C., at St. George's Church on Tuesday, December
30th, at 2.30 o'clock, and afterwards at Eaton Gardens, R.S.V.P." "The
presence of" instead of "the company of" may be put if preferred.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is understood that a Widow should not have Bridesmaids=, but it is
open to her to have the attendance of pages, if a wedding is to be a
fashionable and smart one, although many ladies do not avail themselves
of this privilege. The bridegroom should have a best man, as a matter of
course; he may be the bride's brother if desired (the idea that this is
not permitted is an erroneous one). A married man might be asked to act
in the capacity of best man, there being no bridesmaids to require his
attention, although this is seldom done, and a bachelor brother or
friend is preferred.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Widow may be given away= by her father, uncle, brother, or even by a
friend; indeed, it is more usual to have this support than not. At a
first marriage "to be given away" is imperative, at a second it is
optional; and if a widow at a quiet wedding prefers not to follow this
custom she can do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Much Uncertainty exists as to whether a Widow should or should not
continue to wear her First Wedding Ring= when she marries a second time.
In point of fact there is no hard and fast rule with regard to it, and a
widow may continue or not continue to wear it, as she feels inclined. If
she has children, and has had some years of married life, she usually
retains it. If she is a young widow, she is likely to remove it, and
wear the second ring only; but when this is her intention, she should
not cease to wear it until she has arrived at the church, and has taken
off her gloves previous to the ceremony; but, take it all in all, it is
more usual to wear the two wedding rings than the second one only.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Formerly, Widows considered it Imperative to be married in Widow's
Colours=, grey or mauve, and that white was forbidden wear; but it is no
longer so regarded, and a widow may and does wear white or cream on her
wedding-day--not exactly a maiden bridal dress, as a tinge of colour is
introduced. The larger number still regard pale grey or pale heliotrope
as more suitable on the occasion of a second marriage, and doubtless
this is so when a widow is not in her first youth. A widow may not, of
course, wear a bridal veil; she must wear a hat or toque, white or
coloured, as she pleases. She can have a bouquet, not of white flowers
only, but mauve or pink, or violets, according to choice. It is quite
permissible to have a full choral service, and for the church in which
the ceremony is performed to be decorated with plants and flowers, but
wedding favours should not be given to the guests at its conclusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Widow has a reception the Newly Married Pair should receive
their Guests= standing together. The bride's mother, or near relative,
could assist them in receiving. If a luncheon is to be given, they
should lead the way to the dining-room, and sit at the head of the
table, side by side; but if a reception tea is given, the guests might
be sent in at the tea hour--that is to say, told that tea is going on,
and the bride and bridegroom could follow later should the numbers be
too great to admit of all going into the tea room at the same time.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is quite in Order for a Widow to have a Wedding Cake=, but it should
not be decorated with orange blossoms or with white flowers, merely with
icing and ornamentations. The display of presents at the marriage of a
widow is, as a rule, a very restricted one. The bridegroom and the
bridegroom's family being the principal donors, the presents are seldom
exhibited. The exception is when a widow has made many new friends, and
has received wedding presents from them. Presents, when made to a widow
having a house of her own, are expected to be of substantial value, and
there is a general reluctance felt to offering her trifles, even if
expensive ones, such as a girl-bride would appreciate; not so a married
lady of social standing.

       *       *       *       *       *

=On arriving at the House= where the wedding luncheon or reception is to
be held, the gentlemen should leave their hats in the hall. The ladies
should not remove their bonnets or hats at a wedding luncheon or
reception, neither should the bridesmaids do so.

Gentlemen should take off their gloves at wedding luncheons, but it is
optional whether ladies do so or not.

At receptions it is optional with both ladies and gentlemen whether they
take off their gloves or not.

The guests who have not already had an opportunity of speaking to the
bride and bridegroom, on being ushered into the drawing-room, where the
company assembles, should shake hands with them, having first gone
through that ceremony with the host and hostess, if they have not
already done so.

Previous to luncheon being announced the bride's father or mother should
tell the principal of the gentlemen present whom to take down to
luncheon. But this only applies to a sit-down luncheon.

At standing-up luncheons the guests are not sent in in couples, but go
in as they please, even two or three ladies together, and little or no
precedency, bridal or otherwise, is followed as a general rule.

The luncheon should be served in the dining-room, library, or large
marquee, as the case may be.

The bride's mother and the bridegroom's mother should take precedence of
all other ladies present on the occasion of a wedding luncheon.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At strictly Family Gatherings the Guests should go in to Luncheon in
the following order:=--The bride and bridegroom. The bride's father with
the bridegroom's mother. The bridegroom's father with the bride's
mother. The best man with the head bridesmaid. The remaining bridesmaids
with the gentlemen who are to take them in to luncheon.

The rest of the company should follow in the wake of the bridesmaids.
The bride should take the bridegroom's left arm.

Sitting-down luncheons and standing-up luncheons are equally
fashionable, although the latter are far more general, and little or no
bridal precedency is observed. When a standing-up luncheon is given,
small tables are arranged for the convenience of the bridal party on one
side of the room, while a long table occupies the centre of the room.

When a sitting-down luncheon is given the bride and bridegroom should
sit either at the head of a long table or at the centre of it--the bride
at the bridegroom's left hand. The bride's father should sit next the
bride with the bridegroom's mother. When the bride and bridegroom sit
at the centre of the table the bridesmaids should sit opposite to them
with the gentlemen who have taken them in to luncheon; each sitting at a
gentleman's right hand.

When the bride and bridegroom occupy the head of the table, the
bridesmaids, with the gentlemen who have taken them in to luncheon,
should place themselves next the parents on either side of the table,
dividing their number into two groups.

When the bride's father is dead, her eldest brother or nearest male
relative should take his place and should take the bridegroom's mother
in to luncheon.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Wedding Breakfast= is now termed a luncheon, champagne and other
wines take the place of tea and coffee, which beverages are not served
until towards the end of the luncheon. At weddings which take place
at 2.30 p.m., a luncheon is frequently given at 3, followed by a
"tea" at 4.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Luncheon Menu= generally comprises soup, entrées both hot and cold;
chickens, game, mayonnaises, salads, jellies, creams, etc., etc., and
other dishes of a like character.

The sweets should be placed on the table, fruit also.

The entrées, etc., should be handed by the servants, the sweets should
also be taken off the table by the men-servants and handed round in
turn.

At a standing-up luncheon the gentlemen should help the ladies and
themselves to the various dishes on the table, as dishes are not handed
at this description of luncheon; hot entrées and soup are not given. The
menu is in other respects similar.

The tables should be decorated with flowers at either a standing-up or a
sitting-down luncheon. Bottles of champagne should be placed the length
of the table at a standing-up luncheon; if not, the gentlemen should ask
the servants in attendance for champagne for the ladies they have taken
down, and for themselves. At a sitting-down luncheon the servants offer
champagne to the guests in the same order in which they hand the dishes.

When the sweets have been handed the bride should cut the wedding-cake.
This she does by merely making the first incision with a knife; it
should then be cut by the butler into small slices, and handed on
dessert plates to the guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Health of the Bride and Bridegroom= should then be proposed by the
most distinguished guest present, for which the bridegroom should return
thanks. He should then propose the health of the bridesmaids, for which
the best man should return thanks.

Occasionally the gentleman of highest rank present also proposes this
health in place of the bridegroom.

The health of the bride's father and mother should be proposed by the
bridegroom's father.

It is now the custom to confine proposing healths at wedding luncheons
within the narrowest limits. The health of the bride and bridegroom, and
that of the bridesmaids being, in general, the only healths proposed.

At standing-up luncheons and at wedding receptions, the health of the
bride and bridegroom only is proposed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride should leave the Dining-room= immediately after the healths
have been drunk, to change her dress for departure.

The head bridesmaid should accompany her, if related to her, and the
guests should adjourn to the drawing-room to await the bride's
reappearance, which should not be long delayed, and the adieus should
then be made. Leave-takings should not be prolonged more than is
absolutely necessary.

The parents should follow the bride and bridegroom into the hall, and
adieus to them should there be made.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Old-fashioned Custom= of throwing satin slippers after the bride is
sometimes observed, foolish as it is. It is the best man's or the head
bridesmaid's privilege to perform this ridiculous act.

When rice is thrown after a bride it should be scattered by the married
and not by the unmarried ladies present; but the custom, like that
of throwing the so-called "confetti," is now practically obsolete in
good society.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Strewing the Bride's Path with Flowers= from the church to the carriage
by village children is a custom much followed at weddings which take
place in the country.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Honeymoon= now seldom lasts longer than a week or ten days. Many
brides prefer spending their honeymoon in their future home, if it
happens to be in the country, instead of making a hurried trip to Paris
or elsewhere, or to spending it at the country house of a friend, lent
to them for the purpose. But it is entirely a matter of individual
feeling which course is taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride's Trousseau= should be marked with the initials of the name
she is to take.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridegroom should provide= the house-linen and all other things
appertaining to the bride's new home.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Wedding Presents= should be dispatched to the bride's residence
immediately after the wedding, and they should at once be put into their
several places, and not arranged for the purpose of being shown to
visitors.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridal Wreath= should not be worn after the wedding-day. The bridal
wreath, the bridal bouquet, and the orange blossoms from the
wedding-cake, if treasured as mementos of the happy event, should be
preserved in the recesses of a locked drawer in the bride's chamber, and
not exhibited under glass shades in the drawing-room.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Precedence= should not be accorded to a bride during the first three
months after marriage, although this old-fashioned custom is sometimes
followed at country dinner-parties on the occasion of a bride's first
visit.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Custom of sending Wedding Cake= to friends is an exploded one, and
only followed between near relations.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Wedding Cards= are, strictly speaking, out of date, and only sent by
people who adhere to old-fashioned customs.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Words "No Cards"= should not be inserted when the announcement of a
marriage is sent to the newspapers; neither should the intimation be
added that the bride and bridegroom will be "at home" on certain days.




CHAPTER XVII

WEDDING RECEPTIONS


=An Afternoon Wedding= usually takes place between 2 and 2.30 o'clock,
and the "reception" that follows is given from 2.30 to 5, on the return
from the church.

When a wedding is a choral one the choir and clergy frequently head the
bridal procession. This is arranged with the vicar of the church where
the marriage is solemnized.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations= to wedding receptions are no longer issued on "at home"
cards, but are included in the invitations to the wedding ceremony
issued in printed notes. (See Chapter XVI.)

The arrangements in the tea-room, and the refreshments given, should be
similar to those provided at large afternoon "at homes," with the
addition of wedding-cake and champagne.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ceremony= is, as far as possible, dispensed with as regards sending the
guests into the tea-room, and this is a great advantage gained over a
wedding luncheon, either a sitting-down or a standing-up one, when
people are doubtful as to the exact place belonging to each individual
relative.

The bride and bridegroom either enter first, followed by the bridesmaids
and a few of the principal guests, or they follow later, as they prefer.
The remainder of the company should make their way downstairs as space
permits, for a wedding reception is a crowded affair, even in the
largest of mansions. Not only is every one invited who has given a
wedding present to either bride or bridegroom, within visiting distance,
but even others who are not intimate enough to be expected to do so.

The guests should not make their way in the first instance to the
tea-room, but should proceed at once to the drawing-room and shake hands
with the host and hostess, and afterwards with the bride and bridegroom.
The bride and bridegroom should stand together within the drawing-room
and shake hands with all those with whom they are acquainted. The bride
and bridegroom should be the first to enter the tea-room. Flowers, as a
matter of course, are a great feature at wedding receptions.

The tea and coffee should be served by the maid-servants, generally by
the lady's maids, but men-servants should also be in attendance to open
the champagne as required. Very little wine is drunk at this hour of the
day. Ladies seldom care for it, and gentlemen avoid it on principle.
Still, out of compliment to the bride, the relatives quaff a cup of
sparkling wine, although her health is seldom proposed or speeches of
any kind made. The bride should put the knife into the wedding-cake, and
the butler should cut it up and hand it to the guests.

Seats should not be placed in the tea-room, and the tables should occupy
the top or side, or both the top and side, of the room, according to the
number of guests invited, so as to leave as much space as possible in
the centre of the room.

The bride and bridegroom are not always present at a wedding tea, as the
departure for the proposed place of honeymoon does not in every case
admit of it, and the mother holds the "at home," and the guests inspect
the presents after the newly-married couple have left.

An "at home" is sometimes given a few days previous to the wedding for
the inspection of the presents, if they are very numerous and beautiful;
but even when this is done they still form a centre of interest on the
afternoon of the wedding to the many guests. When jewellery and plate
to any great extent form a portion of the presents, it is sometimes
thought necessary to have a policeman on duty while the house is open to
so many comers, and when to effect an entrance under the pretext of
business would be an easy matter.




CHAPTER XVIII

WEDDING EXPENSES


=The Responsibilities of a Bridegroom= from a pecuniary point of view
commence from the moment of his engagement. He must at once present the
bride-elect with an engagement ring. A man of even moderate wealth finds
no difficulty in choosing and purchasing a handsome ring costing from
£50 to £100; but a poor man, possessing but a small income, is often
put to more expense than he can conveniently afford in the matter of an
engagement ring. He knows all the members of the bride's family will sit
in judgment upon it if it is but a modest gift worth about £10, which
is quite as much as he feels he is justified in spending; he knows that
both it and himself will be regarded as very mean, or as conveying a not
very inspiriting prospect of days to come. The engagement ring worn on
the bride's finger after marriage is a lasting memento, and if a poor
one she will not be proud of it--neither will he. Rich men take the
brides to choose engagement rings, expense being no object to them; but
poor men cannot do this, as the choice might fall on gems beyond their
means, therefore they make the choice themselves, according to the
position of the families they are about to enter. If the standing is
above their own, from a money point of view, the engagement rings have
to be chosen in accordance with the jewels worn by members of such
families, and a bridegroom would thus spend £40 at least on an
engagement ring suitable to a lady so placed. On the other hand, when
men with small incomes marry the daughters of parents of a similar
position to their own, the engagement rings given are not costly ones,
and a ten-pound note, or even less, would cover the cost of these
binding tokens. The wedding rings are within the means of all
bridegrooms, be they ever so poor.

       *       *       *       *       *

=During the Engagement= the question of presents to the brides-elect is
never absent from the thoughts of their bridegrooms. The wealthy please
themselves and their brides by giving costly jewels, which are often
chosen by the brides themselves in company with their bridegrooms. This
is very delightful shopping, but it does not fall to the lot of the
great majority. Men of moderate means give presents of moderate value
and few in number; they are not bound by etiquette during their
engagements to give any jewellery if their incomes do not warrant this
outlay; but a man must have very little money to go upon if he cannot
contrive to give a bracelet or necklet or some such trinket to the girl
he is about to marry.

       *       *       *       *       *

=To give Presents to the Bridesmaids= is another of the obligations of
bridegrooms. Here again, the wealthy exercise their generosity and good
taste with the concurrence of their brides, who assist them in the
choice of suitable presents in articles of jewellery. These average £5
and upwards for each bridesmaid, which bring it to a good total when the
bridesmaids are numerous. The point that affects the generosity of
bridegrooms, however, is not how much they ought to spend on these
presents, but rather, how little may be spent upon them with due
consideration for the fitness of things, viz. the position of the
bridesmaids. Two sovereigns would be a reasonable sum for a man of small
means to spend on each gift to the bridesmaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridal Bouquet and the Bridesmaids' Bouquets= come next on the list
of expenses a bridegroom defrays. Rich men spend liberally in this
direction, but average sums to give to meet ordinary incomes are two
guineas to one guinea for a bride's bouquet, and five and twenty to
fifteen shillings each for the bridesmaids' bouquets.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Fees connected with the Ceremony= are strictly the province of the
bridegroom to defray. If a marriage is by licence, he pays the cost,
which in town amounts to £2 2s. 6d., and in the country from £2
12s. 6d. to £3 3s. The fee to the vicar of the church where the
marriage is to be solemnised varies from £1 1s. to £5 5s.,
oftener £1 1s. than not with the majority of bridegrooms with
moderate incomes, the exception being £5 5s. The minor fees are very
trifling that a bridegroom is expected to pay. He pays the organist for
playing a wedding march at the conclusion of the service, if it is not a
choral one; the bell-ringers look to him for their fee, as do the
vergers, etc. Thus a bridegroom pays for what is absolutely necessary at
the marriage ceremony only, and very little besides.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a Friend of the Bride or Bridegroom performs the Ceremony= or
assists at it a fee is not given to him by the bridegroom, but a present
of some kind is made to him, either in silver plate or by a small
cheque, as circumstances dictate, for railway expenses or otherwise. It
is usual for the bridegroom to do this unless the clergyman in question
is a relative of the bride, when a joint present is usually given by
bride and bridegroom.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bride's Parents bear a Large Share of the Wedding Expenses=,
foremost of which is the bride's trousseau, the cost of this being
entirely dependent on position and income. The dinners and "at homes"
given before the marriage to introduce the bridegroom to the members of
the bride's family are given by the bride's parents. The wedding
reception is given by them, either at their own residence or at an
hotel. As concerns their share of the expenses connected with the
ceremony, it depends upon whether the wedding is to be a smart one or a
quiet one. If the former, the expenses that fall to them are somewhat
considerable; if the latter, they are almost nil. A choral service, for
instance, is paid for by the bride's parents, the organist, choirmaster,
and choir all being severally paid by them. If the hymns sung are
printed on leaflets this trifling expense also is included. All floral
decorations are paid for by the bride's parents, as is the hire of the
awning and the red felt at the church doors. When wedding favours or
buttonholes are given it is by them also.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For whom the Bride's Family are expected to provide Conveyances is
invariably a Misunderstood Detail.=--The bride's father has only to
provide carriages or cars to convey himself and bride to the church, and
for those members of his family residing under his roof, and for
visitors staying with him for the wedding. He is not required to provide
them for any other of the guests, save in the country, and then only for
those who arrive by train at a roadside station and cannot obtain
conveyances for themselves. In town the bridegroom has to provide the
motor-car to convey himself and bride from the church to her father's
house, and afterwards to the station. In the country the reverse is the
case, and the bride's father does this by lending one of his own
carriages or cars for the purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Bridegroom is expected to provide the Furniture= and all household
effects for the new home, including plate and linen, which latter
naturally form very important items. Many of the bridal presents,
however are made to lighten these expenses, and consist of plate to a
great extent, and occasionally of linen also, from the members of the
bride's family; still, the rule in England is that the bridegroom should
provide it as part of the necessaries of the home, and the gift of it by
relatives is altogether optional.




CHAPTER XIX

AFTERNOON "AT HOMES"


=Afternoon "At Homes"= are a great feature amongst the entertainments of
the day, large afternoon parties, and small afternoon parties; parties
so large that the number of guests equals those at a big crush or
evening reception, and so small that they might fairly come under the
denomination of afternoon teas.

At afternoon "at homes," ladies are present in a considerable majority,
there being usually from about ten gentlemen to thirty ladies on an
average present at these gatherings. Ladies have a decided partiality
for this class of entertainment, as it affords an opportunity for
meeting their friends and acquaintances, or for making new
acquaintances, and for forming future plans and interchanging
civilities; and even in the height of the London season, afternoon "at
homes" are fully attended by the members of the fashionable world.

There are various classes of afternoon "at homes": the large "at home"
of from fifty to two hundred guests, when usually professional vocal and
instrumental talent is engaged, and fairly good music given, although
the entertainment is not of sufficient importance to be termed a
concert; the "at home" of from fifty to a hundred guests when only
amateur talent is in requisition; and the small "at home" of from ten to
thirty people, when conversation usually takes the place of music, the
party being composed of friends rather than of acquaintances.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations to "At Homes"= should be issued in the name of the
hostess only, and not in the united names of the master and mistress
of the house.

Invitations should be issued on "at home" cards, large and small, and
also on visiting cards. The name of the person invited should be written
at the top of the card at the right-hand corner, the words "at home"
being printed beneath the name of the lady issuing the invitation, and
the day and date beneath the words "at home," and the hour beneath the
date. Any amusement to be given should be added at the bottom of the
card at the left-hand corner. The address should be printed at the
right-hand corner at the bottom of the card.

The letters R.S.V.P. are occasionally either written or printed on the
"at home" card, at the left-hand corner of the bottom of the card, but
it is not usual to write "R.S.V.P." in the corner of an afternoon "at
home" card, as it is immaterial how many guests are present at this
class of entertainment; but if an answer is so requested, an answer
should be sent. R.S.V.P. signifies "_répondez, s'il vous plaît_," or "an
answer is requested."

It is customary to include the head of the family, either husband or
father, in the invitation. Thus, at the top of the card, at the
right-hand corner should be written "Mr. and Mrs. A.," or "Mr. and Miss
A." The daughters of the house should be included in the invitation sent
to their mother. Thus "Mr. and Mrs. A.," "The Misses A.," but the sons
of the house should be invited separately.

When a family consists of a mother and daughters, the invitation should
be "Mrs. and the Misses A."

The title of "Honourable" should not be put on an invitation card, but
only on the envelope containing the card.

All other titles are recognised on invitation cards; but the letters
K.C.B., M.P., etc., should not be written on the cards, but only on the
envelopes in which they are enclosed.

If a lady is aware that she will be unable to be present, it would be
polite to send her excuses, although strict etiquette does not demand
it; both the invitation and the answer can in all cases be sent by post.

It is not now considered necessary to leave cards after afternoon
"at homes."

Invitations to large afternoon "at homes" should be issued a fortnight
previous to the day, and to small "at homes" within a week or so of
the day.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Arrival of Guests.=--When invited guests arrive, they should not
inquire if the hostess is at home, but at once enter the house; and they
should be ushered at once into the tea-room.

The gentlemen should leave their hats and overcoats in the hall.

At large "at homes" a cloak-room should be provided, so that a lady
could remove a cloak or fur-cape, usually worn during the winter
weather; but at small "at homes" a cloak-room is not necessary, as the
reception-rooms are neither so crowded nor so warm, neither are the
ladies' toilettes so elaborate.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Refreshments.=--At large "at homes" refreshments should be served in
the dining-room, on a long buffet at one end of the room, or on a long
table the length of the room.

The lady's-maids and other maid-servants should stand behind the table
to pour out and hand the cups of tea or coffee across the table as
asked for.

It is usual to have women-servants on these occasions to pour out the
tea, a man-servant or men-servants being also in attendance, in case
anything is required of them, although gentlemen usually help themselves
to claret-cup, wine, etc.

The usual refreshments given at these "at homes" are tea and coffee,
the latter served from large silver urns. (See chapter "Preparing
Afternoon Tea," in the work entitled "Waiting at Table.") Sherry,
champagne-cup, claret-cup, ices, fruit, fancy biscuits and cakes, thin
bread-and-butter, potted game, sandwiches, etc.

Ice plates are used for ices, dessert plates for fruit and fruit salads.

At small "at homes" champagne, claret-cup, and ices are not given. The
tea should be made in teapots, instead of in urns, at both large and
small "at homes."

At small "at homes" the tea is usually served in the smaller of the two
drawing-rooms, or in an adjoining boudoir or ante-room. The tea is then
poured out by the young ladies of the house, or by the hostess herself,
but seldom by maid-servants when served in the drawing-room.

The most convenient manner, however, of serving tea is to serve it in
the dining-room, unless the number of guests is limited, when it would
appear unsociable if they were to congregate in the dining-room, leaving
the hostess comparatively alone in the drawing-room.

When tea is served in the dining-room, the guests are usually asked by
the servant in attendance if they will have tea before being ushered
into the drawing-room.

At small teas, the cups of tea should be handed to the ladies by the
gentlemen present, or by the young lady officiating at the tea-table,
and gentlemen generally stand about the room, or near the tea-table, at
small "at homes."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Receiving Guests.=--The servant should precede the guests to the
drawing-room as in "morning calls."

At large "at homes" the hostess should receive her guests at the
drawing-room door, and shake hands with each on arrival. The
drawing-room door should remain open, and she should stand within the
doorway.

At small teas, the drawing-room door should not remain open, and the
hostess should receive her guests within the room, as at "morning
calls."

The guests should arrive from a quarter-past four until half-past five
or six o'clock. The guests are not expected to remain the whole three
hours specified, and are at liberty to remain as long or as short a time
as they please. The earliest arrivals are generally the first to leave.

When the hostess judges it expedient to do so, she introduces one or two
of the ladies to each other, either in a formal manner (see Chapter
II.), or in a semi-formal manner, by saying, "Mrs. A., I don't think you
know Mrs. B."; but she should not say this unless quite certain that
Mrs. B. desires the acquaintance of Mrs. A., or that Mrs. A. has no
objection to knowing Mrs. B.[5]

It is rather the exception than the rule to make general introductions
on these occasions. Introductions should only be made when the hostess
is aware that the persons introduced would be likely to appreciate each
other, or for any reason of equal weight.

The guests should go to the tea-room with any gentlemen of their
acquaintance present, or in the case of ladies with each other, if they
have not done so on arrival.

This move to the tea-room is usually made in the intervals between
music, recitations, etc.

Occasionally, the hostess introduces one or two of the gentlemen present
to the ladies of highest rank for the purpose of sending them into the
tea-room.

A lady should place her empty cup on any table near at hand, unless a
gentleman offers to put it down for her. It is optional whether a lady
removes her gloves or not, and many prefer not to do so.

At large "at homes," the hostess remains at her post the whole of the
time, and hardly ever sits down. At small "at homes," she should move
amongst her guests, conversing with them all more or less. When there
are daughters, they should assist their mother in entertaining the
guests.

When ladies are acquainted, they should take an opportunity of speaking
to each other. It is usual for ladies to move about the rooms at
afternoon "at homes" to speak to their various friends and
acquaintances; and they are by no means obliged to remain seated in one
spot unless desirous of doing so.

When music is given at afternoon "at homes," it is usual to listen to
the performance, or at least to appear to do so; and if conversation is
carried on, it should be in a low tone, so as not to disturb or annoy
the performers.

It is not necessary to take leave of the hostess at afternoon "at
homes," unless she is standing near the drawing-room door when the guest
is passing out, or unless she is a new acquaintance, and the visit a
first one at her house, when it would be polite to do so.

When it is late, and but a few guests still remain, these few should
make their adieus to the hostess.

At these afternoon teas or "at homes," the hostess should not ring to
order the door to be opened for the departing guest or for her motor-car
to be called, as at "morning calls." The guests make their way to the
hall, and the servants in attendance call up the motor-cars as they are
asked for.

Motor-cars should always be kept in waiting at afternoon "at homes," as
ladies are sometimes unable to remain longer than a quarter of an hour.

The guests either remain in the hall or in the dining-room until they
hear their motor-cars are announced.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gratuities= should never be offered to servants at these
entertainments, or, in fact, at any entertainment whatever.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Afternoon Concerts.=--When afternoon concerts are given, invitations
should be issued on the usual "at home" cards, which can be purchased
with the words "at home," etc., already printed, or they are printed to
order, with the name and address of the hostess. The name of the person
invited should be written above the name of the hostess at the
right-hand corner of the card.

The date under the line "at home" should be in the centre of the card
beneath the name of the hostess; the hour should be written at the
left-hand corner, and the letters R.S.V.P. The printed address should be
at the right-hand corner.

The names of the performers should be added at the bottom of the card at
the right-hand corner.

The hour usually fixed for a concert is 3 o'clock.

The hostess should receive her guests at the drawing-room door, when
they should at once seat themselves. The seats should be arranged in
rows down the centre of the room, and sofas and settees should be placed
around the room.

The programme of a concert is divided into two parts, and at the
conclusion of the first part the guests should repair to the dining-room
for refreshments, which are served as at large "at homes."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Afternoon Dances.=--Invitations to afternoon dances should be issued on
"at home" cards in the manner already described. "Dancing" should be
printed in the corner of cards, and the hour of "4 to 7" o'clock
substituted for that of "3" o'clock. The words "afternoon dance" should
not be written on an invitation card, and there is no other received
form of invitation for afternoon dances than the one already given.

Afternoon dances are very popular at watering-places, military stations,
small towns in the vicinity of London, etc., but are seldom given in
London itself.

Refreshments should be served during the whole of the afternoon, from 4
to 7, as at large "at homes."

The ladies should remove their jackets or wraps in the cloak-room, but
retain their hats or bonnets; the hostess should receive her guests at
the drawing-room door, as at an afternoon "at home."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bridge Teas= occupy an important place in social life. They are a
convenient form of entertainment, as they allow of a small number of
guests being invited, even as few as eight persons being considered a
reasonable number of players to invite, while twenty-four is distinctly
an outside one. The average number is in most instances sixteen,
all told.

The play usually commences at 3.30, sometimes earlier, and continues
until 7.30, allowing an interval for "tea" at 4.30.

The invitations to these informal gatherings are either issued in
friendly notes or on visiting cards. If on the latter, the words "at
home," day, and date are written under the name of the hostess, while
"Bridge, 3.30," or "3 o'clock" is put in the corner of the cards
opposite the address.

The hostess arranges beforehand the places the guests are to occupy at
the different tables; this is done that the good players may play
together. When all have arrived, the hostess tells her guests where to
sit, and is herself one of the players. On taking their seats they cut
for partners. She does not invite guests to look on, as it would
necessitate her not playing, but talking to them while they remain;
besides conversation is discouraged, as it distracts the attention of
the players from the game.

The ladies retain their hats, but remove their coats, furs, etc.,
on arrival.


FOOTNOTES:

[5] See chapter "Conversing with New Acquaintances," in the work
entitled "The Art of Conversing."




CHAPTER XX

"AT HOME" DAYS


=An "At Home"= day signifies that a lady is at home to her friends and
acquaintances on one particular day in the week. She should intimate
this fact by printing upon her visiting cards the days on which she is
at home. Thus: "Thursdays in March," or "Thursdays in March and April,"
or any day of the week she thinks proper to name. These cards she should
leave in person on those who are not at home when she calls, or they can
be sent by post. Those she finds at home she should inform that her "at
home" day is "Thursday." She should not leave her visiting card in this
case, only two of her husband's cards, and the "at home" day should not
be written upon them.

On the "at home" day, calls should be made from three to six, or from
four to six. The first comers should leave before the afternoon tea hour
and should limit their call according to the degree of intimacy
existing, remaining from a quarter of an hour to an hour, as the
case may be.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Hostess or her Daughter should pour out the Tea= on these "at home"
days when tea is not served in the dining-room as at "at homes," which
should be done when the number of visitors is very considerable.

The popularity of a hostess is tested on these "at home" days by the
number of visitors who call during the afternoon, and when "at home"
days are not a success, socially speaking, she should discontinue them
after a certain time, and should substitute an occasional "at home."

It depends not a little on the social standing of the lady who has an
"at home" day and upon the locality in which she lives, as to whether
the "at home" day is a failure or the reverse. In the outlying districts
of town it has its advantages, when to make a call amounts to almost a
journey, and when acquaintances are few in the immediate neighbourhood.
Again, it has its advantages when ladies are much occupied during the
week, and when their time is given up to an engrossing occupation,
charitable or artistic, at home or away from home, literary or
scientific, at studios, museums and public institutions, etc., work
undertaken for their own amusement, profit, or advancement, or for the
benefit of others. To these ladies an "at home" day is a convenience.
One day in the week is all they can allow themselves apart from their
important engagements, and to them quiet privacy and leisure are
indispensable. Fashionable ladies consider an "at home" day to be a
great tax upon their time and inclinations. Their engagements are too
numerous to admit of giving up one whole afternoon in every week on the
chance of people calling. Not only longstanding but impromptu
engagements preclude this sacrifice. It would be a breach of politeness
not to be at home to callers on an "at home" day, and many things might
occur to necessitate absence from home on that particular afternoon. If,
however, absence is unavoidable, a relative might take the place of the
hostess on the "at home" day in question.

The people who thoroughly enjoy "at home" days are those who have more
time on their hands than they know what to do with. The few calls they
have to make are soon made, the few friends they have to see are soon
seen, occupation they have none, and they are grateful for the
opportunity "at home" days offer of meeting their friends and finding a
hostess at home.




CHAPTER XXI

COLONIAL ETIQUETTE


Generally speaking, etiquette is followed in the colonies and in India
by English men and women very much as in the mother country as regards
its principles, rules, and observances. One marked difference occurs in
the hours of calling, it is true, they being regulated by climate. In
hot climates, the early morning hours, before noon, and late evening
hours, after sunset, are, according to the fashion of the place, the
chosen hours for calling; but in more temperate climes--resembling our
own--the afternoon hours are, as with us, the hours for calling. Again,
the rule that residents should call upon new-comers, whether they be
visitors of other residents or intending residents, holds equally good
both in civilian and military circles alike.

In all colonies and dependencies "Government House" is the centre to
which all society gravitates--that is to say, that all new-comers,
whether they are to become permanent or temporary residents, providing
their social position warrants the action, hasten to make known their
arrival by writing their names and addresses in the visitors' book kept
at each Government House for the purpose. The object of doing this is to
be received at Government House, and thus to obtain an entrance into the
society of the place. What follows upon this social observance--it
hardly merits the name of civility, such calls being actuated by
self-interest in the first instance--depends upon a variety of
circumstances, the position of the caller, and whether the stay is to be
permanent or temporary, whether introductions are brought or not, and so
on. The invitations extended to them are regulated accordingly. They may
be limited to afternoon "at homes"; or receptions, dinners, and dances
may be included; or a visit to the summer residence of the Governor and
his wife may also be reckoned amongst invitations, as this latter is not
an unusual display of hospitality accorded to certain individuals.

       *       *       *       *       *

=How the Governor of a Colony should be addressed= by his guests depends
upon his rank. As he represents the sovereign, it would be quite correct
to address him as "Sir," as being the most deferential mode, and
Governors as a body rather like to be thus addressed. In the case of a
Governor being a knight--a very usual contingency--it would be equally
correct to address him as "Sir George," and not as "Sir." When a
Governor has not received knighthood, he should be addressed as "Mr.
A----," when it is not desired to be too stiff and formal.

In conversation, when referring to the Governor--he being present--it
should not be "The Governor," but "Lord Blank," "Sir George," or "Mr.
A---- said so and so," unless strangers are present, before whom it
would seem right to be a little formal.

In addressing a Governor by letter, the envelope should be directed to
"His Excellency Sir George Blank," however friendly its contents may be;
but when writing to a Governor's wife, it has not been thought right to
style her "Her Excellency," but simply "Lady Blank," unless in the case
of a Viceroy's wife, as in India or Ireland; but as against this the
point was raised some years ago, and it was then decided that the wives
of Governors were entitled to be so addressed.

Colloquially, the members of a Governor's suite refer to both the
Governor and his wife as "His" and "Her Excellency," and style them
"Your Excellency," and all who approach them officially, being of
inferior rank, do likewise; but socially they are seldom so addressed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Colonial Bishop= should not actually be styled "My Lord," or referred
to as "The Lord Bishop," if it is desired to be quite correct; but "My
Lord" or "The Lord Bishop" is now often used by persons who know it is
not the proper style of address, but make use of these titles, wishing
to be more deferential than scrupulously correct. In writing to a
colonial bishop, the envelope should be addressed to "The Right Rev. the
Bishop of ----," and the letter commenced "Right Rev. Sir" or "Dear
Bishop Blank."

A colonial officer who has received the King's special permission to
retain the title of "Honourable" which he bore in his colony, is
accorded at Court, _i.e._ at a levée, Court ball, etc., the same
precedence as a peer's son, who is styled "Honourable," but this does
not practically give him any rank or precedence at ordinary social
gatherings, where that special grant is unknown or ignored. Also the
privilege confers no rank or precedence upon the wife or daughters of a
colonial Honourable, just as the wife of a Right Honourable here has no
special precedence.

The title of Honourable cannot continue to be borne by a retired
colonial officer or Legislative Councillor unless it has been specially
authorised by the sovereign on the recommendation of the Secretary of
State for the Colonies.




CHAPTER XXII

INDIAN ETIQUETTE


It is the custom that those who wish to be invited to Government House
(Viceregal House) at Simla, or elsewhere, should, immediately on
arrival, write their names in the visitors' book kept for that purpose,
and they are sure, if in general society, to be asked to one or more of
the receptions held during the season. They are introduced to the
Vice-Queen--as the wife of the Viceroy is termed--by one of the
_aides-de-camp_ in waiting.

When a lady is the wife of a Government official, it gives her a
position in society in India which perhaps she would not otherwise have,
and is in itself a passport to most functions. Official rank is
everything in India.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards attending the Viceregal Drawing-rooms=, they are only held
in Calcutta and in the evening. If a lady has been presented at a Court
in England, she can attend a Drawing-room in Calcutta; but, if she has
not been presented at home, she must be introduced by some other lady
who has been presented at the Viceregal Court.

In writing unofficially to the Governor-General of India, it would not
be correct to use the title of "Viceroy," and the proper superscription
is "His Excellency The Right Hon."; or, if a Duke, "His Excellency The
Duke of ----"; or, if a Marquis, "His Excellency The Most Honble.
Marquis of ----," etc.

To the wife of a Viceroy the address should be "Her Excellency the
Duchess of ----," "Her Excellency The Marchioness of ----," "Her
Excellency The Countess of ----"; or "Her Excellency The Lady Blank," if
the wife of a Baron.

When addressing a Viceroy or Vice-Queen colloquially or unofficially,
"Your Excellency" should not be used in either case. The title only in
both instances should be employed.

On being introduced to either of their Excellencies, it would be correct
to curtsy.




CHAPTER XXIII

GARDEN-PARTIES


Garden-parties are entertainments that are annually given. If the
weather is fine, the more enjoyable it is for the guests; if wet, a
garden-party resolves itself into a large "at home." In almost every
county a series of garden-parties is held by the principal ladies of
their respective neighbourhoods during August and September, nothing but
absence from home, illness, or some equally good reason being considered
sufficient excuse for the non-fulfilment of this social duty.

The county at large expects to be invited at least once a year to roam
about in the beautiful park of the lord of the manor, to row on the
lake, to play lawn-tennis on the lawn, to wander through the winding
paths of the shady, leafy shrubberies, to admire the brilliant hues of
the geraniums bedded out on parterre and terrace, or the variegated
asters, or the late Gloire-de-Dijon roses, which at the end of August
are in their fullest beauty. Then there are the conservatories through
which to saunter, and from which to beat a retreat, if the sun is too
powerful, into the mansion itself, the reception-rooms being generally
thrown open on the occasion of a garden-party.

A garden-party is an occasion for offering hospitality to a wide range
of guests--people whom it would not be convenient to entertain save at
this description of gathering. Invitations are on these occasions freely
accorded to ladies, from the energetic lady of eighty to the little lady
of eight.

One great advantage offered by a garden-party is that it is immaterial
to what extent ladies are in the majority, and it is a reproach to a
county rather than to a hostess if the muster of guests is eighty ladies
against twenty gentlemen.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations to a Garden-party= should be issued in the name of the
hostess, and within three weeks to a week of the date fixed. "At home"
cards should be used for this purpose, and the words "and party" should
be invariably added after the names of the invited guests.

"Croquet" or "Tennis" should be printed in one corner of the card, the
hour, 3 to 7 o'clock, above, the day and the date beneath the name of
hostess. "Weather permitting" is seldom written upon the card, and the
guests are expected to arrive even though the afternoon should be
showery and overcast, and only a thoroughly wet afternoon, with no break
between the showers, should prevent their appearing. In the country,
ladies think little of a drive of ten miles to attend a garden-party.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Arrangements for Garden-Parties.=--Garden-parties or croquet-parties
are given on different scales of expenditure, and the preparations are
regulated accordingly.

When a garden-party is given on a small scale, and the preparations are
comparatively few, refreshments should be served in the house. (For the
usual refreshments provided, and for the general arrangements, see work
entitled "Waiting at Table," p. 82.)

A good supply of garden-chairs and seats should be placed on the lawn
and about the grounds, rugs spread on the grass for those who sit out,
and several sets of croquet provided for players.

At large garden-parties a band is considered a necessary adjunct, and
the band of the regiment quartered in the vicinity is usually available
for these occasions.

A band gives _éclat_ to an out-door gathering and confers local
importance upon it. Apart from this, the strains of a band enliven an
entertainment of this description in no little degree. The place where
the band is stationed is a rallying-point for the company, and the
expense and trouble consequent upon engaging a band are repaid by the
amusement it affords.

The matter of engaging a military band is generally undertaken by the
master of the house, rather than by the mistress, as, in the first
place, the consent of the colonel of the regiment has to be obtained as
a matter of form and courtesy before the arrangements are completed with
the bandmaster.

Conveyance for the band has also to be provided and discussed with the
bandmaster, and also refreshments for the bandsmen; and these details
are more effectually carried out by a host than by a hostess.

Occasionally a large marquee is erected in which to serve refreshments,
but more frequently the refreshments for the general company are served
in the house, and only cool drinks dispensed in a tent to the cricketers
or lawn-tennis players.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Cricket-matches= are often the _raison d'être_ of a garden-party,
rendering it popular with both ladies and gentlemen. The cricket-match
in this case generally takes place in a field near to the grounds of the
mansion, the match commencing about twelve o'clock, and the general
company arriving about half-past three, or punctually at four, to
witness the finish.

Golf now ranks first amongst fashionable outdoor amusements with both
sexes. Private links are comparatively few, but club links exist in
almost every neighbourhood--ladies' clubs, men's clubs, and clubs for
both ladies and gentlemen.

Croquet or tennis tournaments are frequently the occasion of giving
garden-parties, and some very exciting play takes place.

When a tournament is held it takes the form of a garden-party; it
usually lasts two days. The arrangements made for holding it depend upon
circumstances, and it takes place, as do archery-matches, in either
private or public grounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Amusements.=--When a number of children are expected at a garden-party,
performances of marionettes, or Punch-and-Judy, or conjuring are given
for their amusement.

In districts remote from town, these shows are difficult to obtain;
therefore amateur showmen come bravely to the rescue, and their kindly
efforts to divert the juveniles meet with due appreciation on all sides.

Not seldom a little amateur music is given at a garden-party--not a
pre-arranged programme of music, but impromptu performances. These
good-natured efforts to enliven the company occupy about an hour, and
such performances take place in either the drawing-room or music-room
of the mansion.

Garden-parties seldom terminate with a dance, though occasionally
dancing closes the afternoon's amusements.

The time occupied by croquet or tennis precludes all desire on the part
of the players for further exertion in the shape of dancing, and young
people apparently prefer playing croquet from 3 to 7 on the lawn to
dancing in a marquee or in the drawing-room at that hour.

A host and hostess receive their guests at a garden-party on the lawn;
strangers should be introduced to the hostess by those who have
undertaken to bring them to her house, and she should shake hands with
all comers. It is also usual for guests to shake hands with the hostess
on departure, if opportunity offers for so doing.

Garden-parties commence from 3.30 to 4 o'clock, and terminate at 7
o'clock.

In making preparations for a garden-party, stabling for the
carriage-horses and motor-cars of the numerous guests should be taken
into consideration, and refreshments provided for the men-servants and
chauffeurs.

Public afternoon concerts, bazaars, and flower-shows are essentially
functions frequented by ladies _en masse_, and it is the exception,
rather than the rule, for gentlemen to accompany them; again, at private
afternoon gatherings, ladies usually appear unaccompanied by gentlemen.

When a garden-party is a very large function, it is not unusual to put
the words "garden-party" on the invitation cards in place of the words
"at home"; thus: "The Countess of A---- requests the pleasure of Mr. and
Mrs. B----'s company at a garden-party on----," etc.




CHAPTER XXIV

TOWN GARDEN-PARTIES


The first garden-parties in town are usually given early in June, and
continue during this and the ensuing month. The garden-parties at
Lambeth Palace and Fulham Palace are the pioneers of the garden-party
season, and the lead is followed by general society with more or
less alacrity.

Town garden-parties resolve themselves into large receptions held
out-of-doors, and those who know what crowded drawing-rooms imply in the
sultry days of June are particularly glad of this change of _locale_,
and willingly spend an hour or more at one of these out-of-door
_réunions_, instead of thinking a quarter of an hour's stay all too long
within doors, where it is a case of heat _versus_ draught, and difficult
to determine where it is the most objectionable, in the drawing-room,
tea-room, or on a staircase. Although these functions are designated
"garden-parties," yet the real style and title is "at homes," the
address being sufficient indication to the invited guests as to the
description of entertainment to be given, as the spacious gardens and
lawns in and around London where these annual parties are held are well
known to society at large. A band playing in the grounds where the
garden-party is given would appear to be a _sine quâ non_, but the
excellence of the same is merely a question of expense. Thus guests have
the pleasure of listening to the strains of splendid bands, and also the
disappointment of hearing others far below the average.

As this fickle climate of ours is not to be counted upon for twenty-four
hours at a stretch to remain fine, it is seldom considered advisable to
have the whole of the refreshment tables out-of-doors, and thus only
ices, strawberries and cream, and ice cups are served out-of-doors; tea,
coffee, and the rest, with ices, strawberries and cream, being
invariably served within doors.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Refreshment tables out-of-doors= considerably take off the strain from
the tables in the tea-rooms, especially during the first half-hour, when
the great rush is made in this direction. Again, should heavy rain set
in, the servants can easily remove pails of ice and bowls of
strawberries and cream out of harm's way. Even a large tent or marquee
is not considered altogether desirable for refreshments, as under a
burning sun the air within becomes over-heated and oppressive, while in
the case of a downpour the results are almost disastrous.

The popularity of garden-parties is incontestible in propitious weather.
A variety of reasons conduce to this; for one thing, movement is so
pleasant an exchange from the almost stationary position guests are
compelled to take up in a crowded drawing-room. Again, the number of
guests invited is so much greater than to an "at home," that the chance
of meeting a corresponding number of friends and acquaintances is
trebled; or, on the other hand, if but a few friends should be present
among the guests, yet the situation does not amount to isolation and
boredom; and the alternative of sitting under a shady tree or sauntering
about on the lawns listening to the strains of the band, is positive
enjoyment in comparison to sitting in the corner of a drawing-room
barricaded by a phalanx of ladies, or standing wedged in the midst of
the same. It is small wonder, therefore, that invitations to these
outdoor functions are hailed with satisfaction and pleasure.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Arrivals at a garden-party= are made almost simultaneously, or if not
quite this, they follow in rapid succession, so that host and hostess
have a short interval between arrivals and departures; and this offers
an opportunity to give more than a shake of the hand to many of the
guests, _i.e._ a little friendly conversation; while at an "at home" the
hostess has to be at her post from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m., as guests arrive
continuously, even close up to the hour named for departure.

The host is expected to be present at a garden-party, and almost always
is so; but his presence at his wife's "at home" is left a little
doubtful, and his absence is often accounted for on the ground of its
being unavoidable; but the trivial reasons that many men advance to
their wives for their non-appearance prove how glad they are to escape
from the ordeal on any terms. A man in the open air is at his best, and
therefore a garden-party appeals to a host almost as much as it does
to a guest.

Although the words "at home" are in general use when issuing invitations
to these functions, yet occasionally the words "garden-party" are
substituted in lieu of them on the "at home" cards, when the gatherings
are unusually large; thus: "Viscountess B---- requests the pleasure of
Mr. and Mrs. G----'s company at a garden-party on----," etc.




CHAPTER XXV

EVENING GARDEN-PARTIES


=The Garden-Party Season= has been widened out by the introduction of
"Evening Garden-Parties" into the list of country festivities, and this
form of entertainment has found great favour with all.

Invitations are issued on the usual "at home" cards, the hours from 9 to
12 p.m. Occasionally "dancing" is printed on the cards, but not often,
as it is not usual to combine an evening garden-party with a dance,
except when only young girls and young men are invited.

Some little perplexity is felt by the recipients of evening garden-party
invitations as to the style of dress that should be worn. Should ladies
wear morning dress or evening dress? Men are equally in doubt on this
point. Ought they to wear evening dress or not? Although this is not
stated on the invitation cards, yet it is tacitly understood that ladies
are expected to appear in the usual garden-party attire--smart, pretty
dresses and hats or bonnets, and small fashionable wraps carried in
place of sunshades in the event of the evening air proving somewhat
chilly. Evening dress, when worn at one of these "at homes," looks
particularly out of place. The thin evening shoes, which must of
necessity be worn with this style of dress, suit neither dewy grass nor
stony gravel; and although at the evening concerts at the Botanic
Gardens many ladies wear "evening dress" with smart evening cloaks, this
is beside the question. They go for a short half-hour or so, not for a
three hours' stay. Anyhow, at evening garden-parties, the rule is not
to wear evening dress as far as ladies are concerned. Men, on the other
hand, one and all, are expected to do so, morning dress being looked
upon as out of place on these occasions. A light overcoat is inseparable
from evening dress, therefore it is not considered risky wear for men
even on the chilliest of summer evenings.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As to the arrangements= for one of these evening garden-parties. It is
usual to have tea and coffee, and light refreshments during the whole of
the evening, from arrival to departure, and to give a light supper a
little before twelve o'clock. The gardens and grounds are illuminated
with coloured lamps and lanterns, extensively or moderately, as the case
may be. A band is considered indispensable, but a good one does not seem
to be equally imperative, to judge from the indifferent performances of
various bands heard on these summer evenings. However, country audiences
are not too critical, knowing that to engage a good band from a distance
entails considerable expense, and that evening garden-parties would be
singularly few if superior music was insisted upon. Thus the local band
is encouraged to do its best, and to allow long intervals to elapse
between each selection.

In the case of an evening turning out decidedly wet, guests invited from
a distance seldom put in an appearance, while the nearer neighbours do
so, and the evening garden-party becomes an evening reception within
doors, shorn of its numbers, it is true, but a pleasant gathering,
nevertheless, especially with those who know how to make the best of a
_contretemps_ caused by unpropitious weather.




CHAPTER XXVI

LUNCHEONS


=Invitations to Luncheon= are very much the order of the day in
fashionable society. Those who look back some few years remark the
importance now accorded to this midday meal, and contrast it with the
past. The lateness of the dinner-hour in a measure accounts for the
position now taken by luncheon in the day's programme, joined to the
fact that it offers another opportunity for social gatherings; and as
the prevailing idea seems to be to crowd into one day as much amusement
and variety and change as possible, invitations to luncheon have become
one of the features of social life.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations to Public Luncheons= are not now confined to the
celebration of local and civic events, but take a far wider range, and
are given on every available opportunity when the occasion can be made
to serve for assembling a large party of ladies and gentlemen. Luncheon
is by some considered to be rather a lady's meal than not, although in
reality invitations are given as frequently to the one sex as to the
other. Yet the predominance of ladies at luncheon is due to the fact
that the majority of gentlemen are too much occupied at this hour to be
at liberty to accept invitations to luncheon, while others, more idle,
breakfast at so late an hour that to them a two o'clock luncheon is a
farce as far as eating is concerned. Outside of those who are busy men
and those who are idle men, and consequently late risers, there is
another semi-occupied class of men who are always amenable to an
invitation to luncheon.

This institution of luncheon is invaluable to people who have many
friends, acquaintances, and relations to entertain, as invitations to
this meal are given for every day in the week, with or without ceremony,
with long notice or short notice, or on the spur of the moment.

Ladies enjoy the society of their hostess at luncheon far more than at a
dinner-party. At the former meal she makes general conversation with her
guests on both sides of the table; at the latter she is monopolised by
her immediate neighbours, by the gentleman who takes her down to dinner,
and by the one who sits at her right hand, while she leaves her guests
to be entertained by the gentlemen who take them in to dinner. At
luncheon things are different; there is no going in to luncheon,
conventionally speaking, save on official and public occasions.

Luncheon occupies a prominent place in the round of hospitalities.
Invitations to luncheon are not formally issued on invitation cards,
unless some especial reason exists for giving a large luncheon-party, in
which case it takes rank as an entertainment.

Large luncheon-parties are given on occasions such as lawn-tennis
tournaments and lawn-tennis parties, archery-parties, cricket matches
and bazaars, etc.

Semi-official luncheons are given on the occasion of laying the
foundation-stone of a church or public building, etc. This class of
luncheon is beside the question, as it is rather a banquet than a
luncheon, for which printed cards of invitation are issued.

In general society invitations to luncheon are issued by written notes
or are verbally given according to circumstances.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Invitations to Luncheon.=--A week's notice is the longest usually
given, very little notice being considered requisite.

Many hostesses give their friends _carte blanche_ invitations to
luncheon; but ladies as a rule seldom avail themselves of this _façon de
parler_, as they consider it, and prefer to await a more direct form of
invitation. Gentlemen, on the contrary, are expected to avail themselves
of this proffered hospitality without ceremony, as the presence of a
gentleman visitor at luncheon is considered an acquisition, the reason,
perhaps, being that ladies are usually in the majority at luncheon, and
also that the unexpected arrival of one or two ladies would call for a
greater amount of attention on the part of a hostess seated at luncheon
than would the unexpected arrival of gentlemen, ladies requiring
especial attention to be shown to them in the matter of a place at
table, etc., while gentlemen are ready to offer attention instead of
requiring it, and to take any place at table, whether convenient or
otherwise.

As a rule, the number of ladies present at luncheon greatly exceeds the
number of gentlemen present, unless at a luncheon-party, when a hostess
usually endeavours to equalise the numbers as far as possible; but it is
not imperative for her to do this, and it is immaterial whether there
are as many gentlemen as ladies present at luncheon or not.

Luncheon is a very useful institution to a mistress of a house, as it
enables her to show a considerable amount of civility to her friends and
acquaintances.

She can invite to luncheon those it might not, for various reasons, be
convenient to invite to dinner; as for instance, young ladies, single
ladies, elderly ladies, ladies coming to town, or into the neighbourhood
for a few days only, and so on.

The usual rule in houses where there are children old enough to do so,
is for the children to dine at luncheon with their governess, whether
there are guests present or not.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In Town the Usual Hour for Luncheon= is 1.30 to 2 o'clock; in the
country it is generally half an hour earlier. The guests are expected to
arrive within ten minutes of the hour named in the invitation, as
although punctuality is not imperative, it is very desirable.

A guest, on his or her arrival at a house, should not, if previously
invited, inquire if the mistress of the house is at home, but should
say, on the servant opening the door, "Mrs. A. expects me to luncheon."

When the guests are self-invited, they should inquire if the mistress of
the house is at home.

Guests are conducted to the drawing-room before luncheon. The servant
precedes them, as at morning calls.

When guests arrive after the hour named for luncheon, they should be at
once ushered into the dining-room, and their names announced.

When the guests are unacquainted with each other, the hostess should
make a sort of general introduction or introductions; that is to say,
she should introduce one gentleman to two or three ladies, thus, "Mr.
A., Mrs. B., Mrs. C., and Miss D.," making but one introduction in place
of three separate introductions, this being the less formal mode of
making unimportant introductions.

It is not always possible for a host to be present at luncheon, owing to
occupation and engagements, but courtesy to his wife's guests demands
his presence when practicable. He should either join them in the
drawing-room or in the dining-room, according to his convenience.

Guests are not sent in to luncheon as they are to dinner.

Ladies should not remove their hats at luncheon. They should remove
their fur coats and wraps. These should either be left in the hall on
arrival or taken off in the drawing-room or dining-room. Short gloves
should be removed; elbow gloves may be retained.

Gentlemen should not take their hats with them into the drawing-room,
but should leave them in the hall.

Ten minutes is the usual time allowed between the arrival of the guests
and serving luncheon, which is usually served at the hour named, the
received rule being not to wait for guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Going in to Luncheon.=--When the luncheon gong sounds the hostess
should say to the lady of highest rank present, "Shall we go in to
luncheon?" or some such phrase. (See "The Art of Conversing.") The
visitor should then move towards the door. If the host is present, he
should walk beside her; if not, the hostess should do so. The other
ladies should follow as far as possible according to precedency, the
gentlemen going last. Thus the hostess either follows with the ladies
or leads the way.

Guests should not go in to luncheon arm-in-arm as at a dinner-party, but
singly, each lady by herself, or, when space permits, side by side.
Gentlemen likewise, but on arriving in the dining-room, each gentleman
should place himself by the side of a lady, or between two ladies,
at table.

The hostess should sit at the top of the table and the host at the
bottom, as at dinner, but it is immaterial where the guests sit,
although as a rule the lady of highest rank sits by the host, and the
gentleman of highest rank by the hostess.

A late arrival should, on being ushered into the dining-room, make his
or her way to the top of the table to shake hands with the hostess,
making some polite excuse for being late.

A hostess should rise from her seat to welcome a lady, but she should
not do so to welcome a gentleman.

Luncheon is either served _à la Russe_ or not, according to inclination,
both ways being in equally good taste, although, as a rule, the joint is
served from the _buffet_ or side-table, while the _entrées_, game, or
poultry are placed on the table.

For further information respecting the arrangements for luncheon, see
the work entitled "Waiting at Table."

Formerly it was the custom in some houses for the servants to leave the
dining-room as soon as they had helped the various guests to the joint
or joints, and handed round the vegetables and the wine, in which case
the host and hostess helped the guests to the _entrées_ and sweets, or
the gentlemen present did so; but now it is invariably the rule for the
servants to remain in the room during the whole of luncheon, and to hand
the dishes and wine, etc., to the guests as at dinner-parties.

Luncheon usually lasts about half an hour, during which time the hostess
should endeavour to render conversation general.

As at dinner, it is the duty of a hostess to give the signal for leaving
the room, which she does by attracting the attention of the lady of
highest rank present by means of a smile and a bow, rising at the same
time from her seat.

The host, or the gentleman nearest the door, should open it for the
ladies to pass out.

The ladies should leave the dining-room as far as possible in the order
in which they have entered it, the hostess following last.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When the host is not present=, the gentlemen should follow the ladies
to the drawing-room; but when the host is present, the gentlemen should
remain in the dining-room with the host a short time before joining the
ladies in the drawing-room.

It is optional on the part of the host whether he returns or not with
the gentlemen to the drawing-room, although, if not particularly
engaged, it is more courteous to do so.

Coffee is sometimes served after luncheon in the drawing-room. It is
handed on a salver immediately after luncheon. The most usual way now,
however, is to have coffee brought into the dining-room at the
conclusion of luncheon, and handed to the guests on a salver.

The guests are not expected to remain longer than twenty minutes after
the adjournment to the drawing-room has been made.

Ladies should put on their gloves on their return to the drawing-room
after luncheon.

Ladies having motor-cars should previously desire their chauffeurs to
return for them from three to a quarter-past three o'clock, and the
servant should inform each guest of the arrival of her motor-car.

When a lady requires a cab, she should ask the hostess's permission to
have one called for her.

The subject of leave-taking is fully described in Chapter IV.




CHAPTER XXVII

BREAKFASTS


=Breakfast Parties= have in certain circles become a feature, and
invitations to breakfast are issued both by card and by note.

In official circles breakfast parties are frequently given, the morning
hours up to one o'clock being the only disengaged portion of the day,
and thus the opportunity is taken for offering and receiving
hospitality, and of enjoying the society of friends and acquaintances.
The breakfast hour varies from ten to eleven, according to
circumstances, and the meal somewhat resembles a luncheon, fish,
_entrées_, game, and cold viands being given, with the addition of tea,
coffee, and liqueurs.

Punctuality on these occasions is almost imperative, as breakfast cannot
be prolonged beyond a given limit, and therefore it is not considered
necessary to wait the coming of a late guest.

The guests go in to breakfast as to luncheon. When a party consists of
both ladies and gentlemen, the hostess should lead the way with the lady
of highest rank, followed by the other ladies, the gentlemen following
with the host.

When a party consists of gentlemen only, the host should lead the way
with the gentleman of highest rank, and should indicate to the
principal of the gentlemen present the places he wishes them to occupy
at table; the remainder of the company should seat themselves according
to inclination.

The table should be laid as for luncheon, and decorated with flowers and
fruit. Tea and coffee should be served from a side table by the servants
in attendance.

All dishes should be handed as at luncheon.

For the details of "Breakfast-table Arrangements and Serving Breakfast,"
see the work entitled "Waiting at Table."

The guests usually leave as soon as breakfast is over, unless the ladies
are invited by the hostess to accompany her to the drawing-room, or the
gentlemen are invited by the host to smoke a cigarette or cigar previous
to their departure.

       *       *       *       *       *

=House Party Breakfasts.=--In the country the breakfast hour varies from
9 to 10.30, and in some country houses it is an understood thing that
the guests are at liberty to come down to breakfast at any time between
nine and half-past ten. In not a few country houses the hostess and the
ladies breakfast in their own rooms, and the gentlemen of the party
breakfast with the host in the breakfast-room.

The breakfast gong is a signal for assembling in the breakfast-room or
dining-room, but it is not the custom to wait for any one beyond five or
ten minutes.

The host and hostess at once take their places at the breakfast-table.

When the house-party is a large one, and space permits, a number of
small tables should be arranged in the breakfast-room, in addition to a
long breakfast-table.

The servants should remain in attendance during breakfast to wait upon
the guests.

There is no general move made from the breakfast table as in the case of
luncheon or dinner; the hostess generally remains until the whole of the
guests have at least commenced breakfast, save in the case of very late
comers, for whom she would not be expected to remain at the head of the
breakfast-table.

The guests leave the breakfast-table as soon as they have finished
breakfast, without waiting for any intimation from the hostess to do so.




CHAPTER XXVIII

PICNICS AND WATER-PARTIES


Many things contribute to draw people into the country and away from
town in the month of September; therefore there is a far larger number
in each and every neighbourhood inclined for a picnic or a water-party
than in the three previous months, June, July, and August.

Picnic parties are sometimes invitation parties, and on other occasions
contribution parties, or parties which partake in a measure of the
character of both.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Picnics by Motor Car and Picnics by Rail.=--Almost every county has its
show place, or its ruins, its ruined abbey or its castle, its romantic
scenery, and its fine views, its hills or its dales, its waterfalls or
its glens. The southern and western counties are as rich in these
respects as the eastern counties are barren.

When a picnic party is to proceed to its destination by rail, a saloon
carriage is engaged beforehand, and arrangement is made at the nearest
hotel to supply the party with luncheon at from 5s. to 10s. per
head, according to the style of luncheon required; or hampers of
provisions are taken under the charge of one or two men-servants.

If the picnic party proceeds by road, a coach is the favourite mode of
conveyance, whether driven by the owner or hired for the occasion. This
is a more sociable way of going to a picnic than dividing the party into
detachments and conveying them in separate carriages. This is sometimes
unavoidable, and if the party is assembled for a start, it occasions no
little discussion as to how the party should be divided and conveyed in
the various carriages, and it takes no little tact to arrange this in a
satisfactory manner--to overrule objections, and to make things work
smoothly. Again, the members of a picnic party occasionally find their
way to the place of rendezvous independently of each other; but,
although this plan saves trouble, it does not promote sociability, and
parties of four or six are apt to clique together during the day,
instead of making themselves generally agreeable. The provision question
is a very important one, and the heads of a picnic party should arrange
in concert what each is to bring in the way of fish, flesh, fowl, fruit,
and wine.

The services of one or two men-servants at a large picnic party are
generally required to arrange the table, to open the wine, and last, but
not least, to collect and repack the articles used in the way of plate,
china, or glass.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A picnic luncheon in September= is not always the _al fresco_ spread
under the greenwood tree that it is in July, and oftener than not is
held in the best parlour of a rustic inn, or, by permission, in a barn
or shed, when the weather is not favourable for camping out.

Usually, when a large picnic party is arranged and got up by some three
or four ladies and gentlemen, they divide the expenses of the
entertainment between themselves, and determine how many shall be
invited, each having the privilege of inviting a certain number. Other
picnics are got up on a different system, each person contributing a
share towards the general expenses; but these gatherings are not so
sociable as are the invitation picnics.

Invitation picnics where everything is done _en prince_ are extremely
enjoyable and friendly affairs; they are big luncheons, given
out-of-doors instead of indoors, at a distance instead of at home. But
even these are not more pleasant than those well-arranged little
picnics given by officers in country quarters, when the regimental coach
conveys a favoured few to some favourite spot.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Water-Parties.=--There are many ways of arranging a water-party at
yachting stations and at all riverside places. At yachting stations, for
instance, a sailing yacht is hired to convey a party of from eighteen to
twenty-five to some point of interest on the coast, in which case
luncheon and tea are provided at an hotel in the vicinity of the place
where the party have landed, and the expenses are equally divided. Not
unfrequently, on the return journey, the yacht is becalmed, and does not
reach its destination until between two and three the following morning.
If it happens to be a fine moonlight night, this prolongation of a
water-party is an additional source of enjoyment; but if there is no
moon as well as no wind, and the calm betokens a storm, it is the
reverse of pleasant. But these little _contretemps_, when they do occur,
rather lend a zest to the day's pleasure, and are something to talk
about afterwards.

Water-parties are often given by owners of yachts. These are invitation
parties, and luncheon, tea, and sometimes dinner, are served on
board, and the party land and stroll about, but return to the yacht
to be entertained.

Picnic and water-parties in general include as many gentlemen as ladies,
whether they are invitation or contribution parties, although sometimes
a majority of ladies is unavoidable. Ryde is a favourite station for
water-parties, as the island itself, as well as the opposite coast,
offer innumerable points of interest for picnicing, and many are able to
combine the pleasures of the yacht with those of the launch in one and
the same water-party; thus a party sails from Ryde to Yarmouth, Isle
of Wight, and then proceeds in a steam, or other, launch to Alum Bay.
Launch parties are immensely popular, both on the river and on the
coast. Some picnic on board, and others on shore, as they feel disposed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Canoe-parties= on coast and river are also popular with both ladies and
gentlemen, and here again the useful launch is brought into requisition
to convey the party home, as an hour and a half to two hours is an
average time to paddle a canoe; after that time the party land either on
the rocks or on the shore, and light a fire and boil the kettle for tea.
If the tea-drinking and the after-tea ramble are unduly prolonged there
is a chance, if on the coast, of the steam-launch running out of coal,
and of the party having to return home in their own canoes considerably
later than was expected, and not a little fatigued.




CHAPTER XXIX

JUVENILE PARTIES


=Juvenile Parties= form a prominent feature in the entertainments given
during the winter months. There is scarcely a household the children of
which are not indulged with one large party at least, while others are
allowed as many as two or three children's parties during the winter
months. These parties offer no little elasticity as to their
arrangement, varying from a child's tea party, composed, perhaps, of
five or six children, to a juvenile ball, or fancy dress ball. Some
mothers object, on principle, to the latter entertainments, on the
ground that to give a large juvenile ball provokes a corresponding
number of invitations, and that a round of such gaieties is not good for
young children, either from a moral or from a hygienic point of view.
Morally, that such amusements are likely to destroy or impair the
freshness of childhood, and to engender artificial ideas in their young
minds in place of such as are natural and healthy, and that the
imitation of the manners and bearing of their elders causes them to
become miniature men and women, and divests them of the attributes of
artless and unaffected childhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The dresses worn by children= at these entertainments are of so
elaborate a character--and so much pride is exhibited when wearing
them--that a spirit of vanity and a love of dress are aroused at a
prematurely early age. From a physical point of view, late hours, heated
rooms, rich dainties, and constant excitement have a pernicious effect
upon children.

There is, of course, an opposite view taken by those who uphold juvenile
balls; they consider that children are the better for associating with
others of their own age outside of their own family circle, and that in
the case of only children such association is calculated to render them
lively and intelligent. Another argument in favour of these juvenile
parties is, that children who are in the habit of constantly attending
them acquire self-possessed and confident manners, and that all shyness,
_mauvaise honte_ and _gaucherie_, which distinguish many children when in
the company of strangers, are dispelled by frequent intercourse with
children of all ages. Thus, in place of the noisy game of romps, the
little gentlemen ask the little ladies to dance, pull costume bon-bons
with their favourite partners, and offer them similar attentions
throughout the evening. Of course, there are shy little gentlemen and
shy little ladies even at a juvenile ball; but it is the constant
endeavour of those who accompany them, whether mammas, elder sisters,
young aunts, or grown-up cousins, to persuade them to get the better of
this diffidence, and to induce taciturn Master Tommy to dance with timid
Miss Tiny. Sometimes Master Tommy is obstinate, as well as taciturn, and
his "won't" is as strong as his will. As with all things, so with
children's parties, the medium course is, perhaps, the wisest to take,
running into neither extreme--avoiding too much seclusion or overmuch
gaiety, and rendering such gaiety and amusement suitable to the ages of
the children invited. When an evening's entertainment consists of a
series of amusements, it is a mistake to crowd too great a variety into
the space of four hours, the usual limits of a child's party, for if so
the programme has to be hurriedly gone through, and is hardly finished
before the hour of departure. No little judgment is required when
organising juvenile parties. The hours usually selected for children's
parties, whether on a large or small scale, are from four to eight, five
to nine, six to ten, or from seven to eleven.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The children on their arrival= are received in the drawing-room. In
most cases their relatives, either mothers or grown-up sisters, are
asked to accompany them.

There is great punctuality observed as regards the hour of arrival, and
tea is usually served in the dining-room about half an hour after that
named on the invitation card. The interim is generally passed by
children in watching each fresh arrival, and in greeting their little
acquaintances, comparing notes with each other as to the teas and the
parties they are going to, or in amusing themselves with the toys
belonging to the children of the house, which are usually arranged on
tables for this purpose; and mechanical toys, walking and talking birds,
etc., musical toys, picture-books, and dolls, and the latest and newest
inventions in the way of playthings afford the little visitors an
opportunity for becoming at ease with each other.

Tea is generally dispensed at one end of a long table, and coffee at the
opposite end. The governess usually pours out the tea, and one of the
daughters of the house the coffee; or failing her, the head nurse or
lady's maid does so. Dishes of pound, plum, and sponge cake are placed
the length of the table, interspersed with plates of thin
bread-and-butter, biscuits, and preserves; either the ladies of the
family or the servants in attendance hand them to the children.

When the relatives accompany the children tea is usually served to them
in another room, but frequently they do not arrive until tea is over,
and the nurses accompany the children to the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Amusements.=--The arrangements for the evening's amusement are
regulated in a measure by the amount of accommodation a house affords,
premising that boisterous games are not allowed in drawing-rooms;
unless all valuable ornaments or things likely to be broken are removed
from the rooms.

If conjuring is one of the amusements provided, it generally takes place
in the drawing-room immediately after tea, and lasts about an hour. A
dancing-cloth is put down over the drawing-room carpet; rout seats or
cane chairs are arranged in rows. The youngest children are seated in
the first row. Performing birds, performing dogs, or performing monkeys
are also favourite amusements at these parties, and rank next to
conjuring in the estimation of children. Punch and Judy or marionettes
are popular drawing-room amusements, and either occupies the space of an
hour.

When a cinematograph show is the entertainment provided, it takes place
in the dining-room or library, or perhaps in the housekeeper's room, if
large enough for the purpose.

Dancing or games usually precede these amusements, and lasts from half
to three-quarters of an hour; little girls dance with each other round
and square dances, as little girls are, as a rule, more partial to
dancing than are little boys, although they one and all, great and
small, join with glee in a country dance, or in the Tempête, or in "Sir
Roger de Coverley."

Not longer than an hour is devoted to dancing, and this is usually
followed by games.

Impromptu charades is a favourite pastime with children; but to avoid
the juvenile audience becoming weary and impatient during the
preparation of the charades it is as well they should be amused with
some quiet game, such as "forfeits," "cross questions and crooked
answers," "proverbs," etc. At Christmas and New Year's parties the
distribution of presents is a very important feature; Christmas trees
are now rather discarded in favour of greater novelties. "Father
Christmas," "Santa Claus," "The Fairy Godmother," "The Fairies' Well,"
or the "Lucky Bag" and "The Magic Log," are some of the many devices for
the distribution of presents; these popular characters are represented
by grown-up persons, and provoke much wonder and admiration amongst
children. The presents are usually given at the close of the evening.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Light Refreshments= are provided in the dining-room--lemonade, wine and
water, every description of cake, sandwiches, crystallized fruits,
French plums, figs, almonds and raisins, oranges, etc. Bon-bons
containing paper caps, etc., which afford children much amusement, are
usually provided.

When a juvenile ball is given a supper is provided; otherwise light
refreshments are considered sufficient, and are served twice during the
evening. Sometimes the children of the family, if old enough and clever
enough, act a little play--some nursery fairy tale, condensed into one
act, such as "Beauty and the Beast," "Cinderella," etc.--which lasts
about an hour, and is followed by dancing.

When a juvenile fancy ball is given, one or two fancy quadrilles are
arranged beforehand, to be danced by the children in costume.




CHAPTER XXX

WRITTEN INVITATIONS


=Writing Letters of Invitation=, and answering letters of invitation,
often occupy far longer time in the composition than the writers would
care to confess. The difficulty does not lie in an invitation itself or
in accepting or refusing it, but rather in the form in which either
should be couched, the words that should be chosen, and the expressions
that should be used; one person is afraid of being too _empressé_,
another of being too formal or too stiff; one is fearful of saying too
little, another of saying too much.

When invitations are issued on dinner cards or on "at home" cards, the
note of acceptance should be as brief as is the printed card of
invitation, and to the printed card requesting the pleasure of Mrs.
Blank's company at dinner, the stereotyped answer is invariably Mrs.
Blank has much pleasure in accepting Mrs. Dash's kind invitation for
Saturday the 21st, or Mrs. Blank regrets that a previous engagement will
prevent her from having the pleasure of accepting Mrs. Dash's kind
invitation for Saturday, the 21st.

As regards those invitations that refer to visits of some days'
duration, those accustomed to give this description of entertainment,
know exactly what to say and how to say it. The conventional civilities
or affectionate cordialities, as the case may be, occur in their proper
places; but one point is made clear in either case, namely, the length
of the visit to be paid. There are people who are under the impression
that to specify the exact length of a visit is in a degree inhospitable,
and not sufficiently polite; and they, therefore, as a sort of
compromise, use the ambiguous term "a few days" in lieu of distinctly
defining the limit of these invitations. So far from vague invitations
such as these being an advantage to invited guests, they not seldom
place them at a disadvantage at more points than one. They are uncertain
on what day they are to take their departure. They do not wish by
leaving a day earlier to disarrange any little plans that their hostess
may have contemplated for their amusement; neither do they wish to
prolong their visit a day later, lest by so doing they should break in
upon any engagements that she may have formed on her own account
independently of her visitors. It is also not a little awkward for
guests to tell their hostess that they think of leaving on Thursday by
12.20 train. It might have suited the hostess very much better that her
visitors should have left on the Wednesday, and in her own mind she had
perhaps intended that the visit should end on that day; but, having left
the invitation open, more or less, by saying "a few days," there is
nothing left for her but to sacrifice her own arrangements to the
convenience of her guests, as without discourtesy she could hardly
suggest to them that they should leave a day earlier than the one they
had named, and the visitors remain unconscious of having in any way
trespassed upon the good nature of their hostess.

"A few days" is also an unsatisfactory wording of an invitation to
visitors themselves; as a rule, it means three or four days, but there
is also an uncertainty as to whether the fourth day should be taken or
not. Those who interpret "a few days" to mean three days, make their
plans for departure accordingly; failing this, they are compelled to
leave their plans open, and stay from three to five days, according as
chance and circumstances may dictate. A lady would perhaps require a
little addition to her wardrobe in the matter of a five days' visit over
that of a three days' stay; but this is a trifling detail, although it
helps to swell the list of minor inconveniences which are the result of
vague invitations. There are, of course, exceptions to every rule, and
there are people who use this phrase of "Will you come and see us for a
few days?" in the _bonâ fide_ sense of the word, and to whom it is
immaterial whether their guests remain three days or six days; but such
an elastic invitation as this is usually given to a relative, or to a
very intimate friend, whose footing in the house is that of a relation,
and with whom the hostess does not stand on ceremony, as far as her own
engagements are concerned; and people on these friendly terms can talk
over their departure with their hostess, and consult her about it
without the faintest embarrassment.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The most satisfactory invitation= is certainly the one that mentions
the day of arrival and the day of departure. Thus, after the _raison
d'être_ of the invitation has been stated, the why and the wherefore of
its being given follows the gist of the letter: "We hope you will come
to us on Wednesday the 23rd, and remain until the 27th." It is, of
course, open to a hostess to ask her visitors to prolong their stay
beyond the date named if she sees reason for so doing; but this is the
exception rather than the rule in the case of short visits, and guests
take their departure as a matter of course on the day named in the
invitation. Hostess and guests are perfectly at ease upon the subject,
and guests do not feel on delicate ground with their hostess, or fear to
outstay their welcome. When a visit has been paid it is polite, if not
imperative, to write to the hostess and express the pleasure that has
been derived from it. Oftener than not some little matter arises which
necessitates a note being written apart from this; but whether or not,
good feeling and good taste would dictate that some such note should be
written, and, as it can always include little matters of general
interest in connection with the past visit, it need neither be over
ceremonious nor coldly polite.

       *       *       *       *       *

=To write a letter asking for an invitation=, or to answer a letter
asking for an invitation, is in either case a difficult letter to write,
as many have ere this discovered. When a married lady asks for an
invitation for a young relative or friend staying with her, to some
dance or "at home" to which she herself is invited, the note is simple
enough, and the answer is generally a card of invitation or a written
permission to bring her. Again, in the case of asking for invitations
for gentlemen, if a lady is going to a ball, she can without hesitation,
ask for cards of invitation for one or two gentlemen friends of her own,
mentioning their names in the note. In this case also the answer is
generally in the affirmative, as men are always acquisitions at a ball.
The awkwardness of the situation arises when a good-natured person is
solicited to obtain an invitation to a smart ball for a lady and her
daughters, or for the young ladies only, the latter knowing some one who
would chaperon them if they could only get an invitation. If the lady
who asks for the invitation is a fashionable ball-giver, the probability
is that her request will be granted; but if the contrary, the reverse
will most likely be the case. Even when writing to an intimate friend,
there is always a delicacy in asking for an invitation for a third
person, and society appears to become, year after year, still more
exclusive on this point. Many people are reluctant, or decline
altogether, to put themselves under an obligation of this nature, even
for those with whom they are most intimate; it may be that the number of
refusals good-natured people have received from their friends when
trying to render services of this description, have made them chary of
putting themselves forward again in a similar manner: it is chilling to
be told that the list is over full, or that so many people have been
refused already, or that there is not a card to spare. But a few years
ago a ball was not considered a success unless it was an over-crowded
one; the popularity of the ball-giver was shown by the guests scarcely
being able to find standing-room. Thus, invitations were given right
and left to the friends of those who asked for them.

But the fashion of to-day is to style a crowded ball-room a
"bear-garden," and to confine the invitations, with but very few
exceptions, to those who are strictly on the visiting list of the
ball-giver; and pretty girls may sigh in vain for an invitation to a
ball given even by a relative or acquaintance of their own, if not on
their visiting list. Still, invitations are constantly asked for by
people for their friends, and sometimes they are given and sometimes
they are refused, as the case may be, but much depends upon the position
of the one who solicits the favour.

If the giver of an entertainment wishes to oblige the petitioner, she
will stretch a point to do so; if not, she will write a polite note of
excuse, giving one of the reasons before mentioned. It is thoroughly
understood people do not ask for invitations for themselves, whatever
they may do for their friends, and that they would not do so unless they
were themselves invited. Living at a distance modifies, however, this
latter rule; and friends in the country often ask for invitations for
friends in town, and _vice versâ_.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Dinner invitations= are, as a matter of course, never asked for; but
invitations to garden-parties, afternoon "at homes," and afternoon teas,
are frequently asked for and readily given. Some are intimate enough at
the house where they visit to take a relative or friend with them to
those afternoon gatherings without observing the punctiliousness of
asking for an invitation; others, on less intimate terms, do not venture
upon doing so.

In all cases when an invitation is asked for, a hostess should never
neglect to send a reply, and should not take for granted that her
friends will naturally understand that silence gives consent, for
under the circumstances it is very possible to interpret it to
signify a refusal.




CHAPTER XXXI

REFUSING INVITATIONS


Many reasons exist for declining invitations other than the plea of a
prior engagement.

"Mrs. M. regrets ('much regrets,' or 'very much regrets') that a
previous engagement prevents her having the pleasure of accepting Mrs.
N.'s 'invitation,' or 'kind invitation.'" When on more intimate terms,
Mrs. M. should write in the first person when declining an invitation.
It is an open question whether the nature of the engagement should be
stated or not. Even intimate friends often confine themselves to the
statement of the bare fact only that a prior engagement exists; others,
on the contrary, state the nature of the engagement, and there is no
doubt that this latter course considerably softens a refusal and lessens
the disappointment experienced, and therefore, when practicable, should
always be followed.

When a prior engagement cannot be made the basis of a refusal, then the
refusal must rest on other lines; ill health, a severe cold, etc., are
valid excuses. Failing these, the refusal should be as follows:--"Mrs.
Z. regrets she is unable to accept Mrs. X.'s kind invitation, etc."

It occasionally happens that it is desirable to break an engagement,
circumstances having changed the aspect of things. The invitation,
perhaps, was a verbal one, and a refusal was not easy at the moment.

Again, impromptu invitations are sometimes refused, having been too
hastily accepted--the servant who brought the note waited for an
answer, and on the impulse of the moment an affirmative answer was
given; the wife had not time to consult her husband, and accepted for
him as well as for herself; or perhaps some potent domestic reason that
could not be explained induced a subsequent refusal.

The fashionable world accepts refusals as a matter of course, and fills
up the gaps with other invitations.

Refusals of dinner invitations from those for whom a dinner party was
partly originated are always disappointing, even to the most popular of
dinner givers, in the same way that the absence of the principal
neighbour from a county entertainment is felt to cast a shadow over the
proceedings of the day.

Although printed cards of acceptance and of refusal are in general use,
yet many cases arise which render written refusals imperative.

As regards the refusal of invitations asked for, such requests should
not be made unless on very safe ground, and with a certainty of meeting
with acquiescence, yet occasionally these requests are either unwelcome
or inadmissible, and refusals are consequently given; but, unless worded
with tact and good nature, they are often the cause of strained
relations between both friends and acquaintances.




CHAPTER XXXII

WALKING, DRIVING, AND RIDING


=The Usual Hours for Walking= in the Park are from 9 until 10.30 a.m.
The hours for afternoon walking and sitting in the Park are from 4 to
7 p.m. during the summer months.

The fashionable hours for walking in the Park on Sunday are from 1
to 2 p.m., both in winter and summer; and from 5 to 7 p.m. in the
summer months.

Married ladies can, if they please, walk out unaccompanied or unattended
in places of public resort in town or on the parades of fashionable
watering-places; but married ladies, especially if they are young,
usually prefer the society of another lady, not so much, perhaps, for
propriety as for companionship, as to walk alone, either in town or at
fashionable watering-places, renders a lady more or less conspicuous,
especially if she is attractive and well dressed.

A young lady can now also walk by herself in the Park for the purpose of
joining her friends and acquaintances, both in the morning and in the
afternoon, but she should not sit alone.

Again, young ladies may walk alone in the fashionable streets, but they
should not loiter when alone at shop-windows as they pass, but walk at a
quick pace from shop to shop, or from street to street.

In the quiet neighbourhoods of towns, suburban towns, and
watering-places, young ladies walk unaccompanied and unattended to
visit their friends residing in the near vicinity of their homes, or to
attend classes, or for the purpose of shopping, etc. Indeed, great
independence is generally accorded in this respect, the line being drawn
at evening hours--that is to say, at walking alone after dusk.

At watering-places, and at all public promenades, it is usual for
gentlemen to join ladies with whom they are acquainted, and to walk with
them for a short time when it is apparent that their company is desired,
but not otherwise.

Ladies and gentlemen, whether related or not, should never walk
arm-in-arm, unless the lady is an elderly one, or an invalid, and
requires this support.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Driving.=--From 3 to 6.30 are the received hours for the afternoon
drive during the summer, and from 2.30 to 4.30 during the winter.

The following rules as regards entering and leaving a carriage apply to
a motor-car or an electric brougham as far as the construction, make,
and size of the same render it possible.

When driving in an open or close carriage or motor-car it is quite
immaterial whether the owner occupies the right-hand or the left-hand
seat. The seat she occupies depends upon which side she enters, as the
lady driving with her should enter before her and should seat herself on
the furthest seat.

A visitor should always enter the motor-car or carriage before the
hostess.

When three ladies enter a motor-car or carriage the young unmarried lady
should take the back seat and the two married ladies should occupy the
front seat; this is a matter of courtesy on the part of a young lady due
to married ladies and not strictly demanded by etiquette.

A husband should sit with his back to the horses, or by the side of the
chauffeur in the case of a motor-car, when a lady is driving with his
wife.

A gentleman should be the first to get out of a motor-car or carriage,
with a view to assisting the ladies to do so.

As a rule the hostess should leave the carriage or car after her guest
and not before her, unless it is more convenient to do otherwise.

When a lady is merely calling for an acquaintance to take her for a
drive, she should not descend from her car or carriage for the purpose
of allowing her to enter it before her.

In the afternoon young ladies may drive alone in the public
thoroughfares, unaccompanied by married ladies. It is permissible for a
young lady to drive alone in the Park or in the streets. A married lady
can, as a matter of course, drive unaccompanied.

It would be unconventional were a lady to drive alone with a gentleman
in his motor-car, unless he were nearly related to her, or unless she
were engaged to be married to him.

It is usual for the owner of a carriage to sit with her face to the
horses; when a married lady is driving with her she should sit beside
her. When young ladies are driving with her in addition to the married
lady they should sit with their backs to the horses.

When a lady is driving with her husband, and a young lady accompanies
her, she should not offer the front seat to the young lady, but should
retain it herself, and even should the offer be made, a young lady
should not avail herself of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Riding.=--As regards riding in town, the hours for practice in the Row
are from 8 to 10 a.m. in summer and 9 to 11 a.m. in winter, for
inexperienced riders and beginners; young ladies ride with a
riding-master or with a riding-mistress, or with a relative, as the
case may be.

The hours for riding in the Park range from 9.30 to 10.30 a.m.

It is thoroughly understood that a lady may ride in the Park alone--that
is, unaccompanied or unattended--for the purpose of joining her friends.
It is argued, in these days of woman's emancipation, that no possible
harm or annoyance can arise from the fact of a lady riding unattended,
beyond the always possible chance of an accident.

Although great latitude is now allowed to young ladies with regard to
riding alone, many parents still prefer that their daughters should be
attended by their grooms.

Two ladies frequently ride together, unaccompanied by a gentleman and
unattended by a groom.




CHAPTER XXXIII

BOWING


As regards the recognition of friends or acquaintances, it is the
privilege of a lady to take the initiative, by being the first to bow. A
gentleman should not raise his hat to a lady until she has accorded him
this mark of recognition, although the act of bowing is a simultaneous
action on the part of both lady and gentleman, as a lady would hardly
bestow a bow upon a gentleman not prepared to return it.

The bow between intimate acquaintances takes the character, when given
by a lady, of a familiar nod in place of a stiff bow.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a gentleman returns the bow= of a lady he should do so by
distinctly taking his hat off and as quickly replacing it, not merely
raising it slightly, as formerly, and if he is an intimate acquaintance
or friend, he should act in a similar manner.

In France and on the Continent generally, the rule of bowing is
reversed, and the gentleman is the first to bow to the lady, instead
of the lady to the gentleman.

Between ladies but slightly acquainted, the one of highest rank should
be the first to bow to the other; between ladies of equal rank it is
immaterial which of the two bows first.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A lady should not bow= to persons only known to her by sight, although
she may frequently have seen them in the company of her friends.

A lady should bow to a gentleman, either a friend or acquaintance,
even when he is walking with either a lady or gentleman, with whom
she is unacquainted.

Gentlemen do not raise their hats in recognition of each other, but
simply nod, when not walking with ladies, save when a vast difference
exists in rank or age.

When a gentleman meets another--a friend of his--walking with a lady or
ladies, with whom he himself is unacquainted, he should raise his hat
and look straight before him, not at the lady or ladies.

A lady should not bow to another who, being a stranger to her, has
addressed a few remarks to her at an afternoon party, as the fact of
meeting at the house of a mutual friend does not constitute an
acquaintanceship, and does not authorise a future bowing acquaintance.

Ladies, as a rule, are not too ready to bow to those whom they have
merely conversed with in a casual way. In the first place, they are not
quite certain of being remembered, and nothing is more disconcerting and
disagreeable than to bow to a person who does not return it through
forgetfulness of the one who has given it, or through shortsightedness,
or through actual intention. Short-sighted people are always offending
in the matter of not bowing, and almost every third person,
comparatively speaking, complains of being more or less short-sighted;
thus it behoves ladies to discover for themselves the strength and
length of sight possessed by their new acquaintances, or the chances are
that their bow may never be returned, or they may continue to labour
under the impression that they have received a cut direct; thus many
pleasant acquaintances are lost through this misapprehension, and many
erroneous impressions created.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A bowing acquaintance= is a difficult and tiresome one to maintain for
any length of time, when opportunities do not arise for increasing it.
The irksomeness of keeping it up is principally experienced by persons
meeting day after day in the Park or on public promenades, riding,
driving, or walking, more especially when it is tacitly understood that
the acquaintance should not develop into a further acquaintance.

It would be considered discourteous to discontinue a bowing acquaintance
which has once been commenced.

To know a gentleman by sight through having frequently seen him at balls
and parties, does not give a lady the right to bow to him, even though
she may have stood beside him for some twenty minutes or so on a crowded
staircase, and may have received some slight civility from him.

A lady who has received a little service from a stranger would gladly
acknowledge it at any subsequent meeting by a pleasant bow, but as
bowing to a gentleman argues an acquaintance with him, and as in such
cases as these an acquaintance does not exist, etiquette provides no
compromise in the matter. Therefore, if a young lady takes her own line,
and rather than appear ungracious bows to a gentleman who has not been
introduced to her either directly or indirectly, it is a breach of
etiquette on her part; and as to do an unconventional thing is not
desirable, the innumerable little services which ladies receive in
general society are not further acknowledged beyond the thanks expressed
at the moment of their being received.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Bows vary materially:= there is the friendly bow, the distant bow, the
ceremonious bow, the deferential bow, the familiar bow, the reluctant
bow, and so on, according to the feelings that actuate individuals in
their intercourse with each other.

When a bowing acquaintance only exists between ladies and gentlemen, and
they meet perhaps two or three times during the day, and are not
sufficiently intimate to speak, they do not usually bow more than once,
when thus meeting in park or promenade.




CHAPTER XXXIV

THE COCKADE


=Cockades are worn= by servants in livery of officers in the army and
navy, and all those who hold His Majesty's commission; also
lords-lieutenants and deputy-lieutenants.

Retainers of the Crown are entitled to the use of the cockade as a badge
of the reigning dynasty.

The fact that cockades are now so frequently worn by men-servants may be
accounted for thus:

Deputy-lieutenants are far more numerous now than was formerly the case;
almost every country gentleman is a deputy-lieutenant, and consequently
his servants are entitled to the use of the cockade. The privilege of
appearing in uniform at levées instead of in Court dress has been and is
an incentive to many to seek for and obtain the appointment of
deputy-lieutenant. Again, all justices of the peace claim the use of the
cockade as being "Civil retainers of the Crown"; and although there is
no clearly defined rule on this head, according to the late Sir Albert
Woods, Garter-King-at-Arms, it has long been tacitly conceded to them.

The custom of livery servants wearing cockades dates from the
commencement of the eighteenth century, and was at first purely a
military distinction.

The cockade worn by the servants of the members of the Royal Family, and
by all who claim to be of Royal descent, is slightly different in shape
from that known as the badge of the reigning dynasty, _i.e._ the
Hanoverian badge, and is round in shape and without a fan. The military
cockade is of an oval shape, terminating in a fan. The civil cockade is
of an oval shape also, but without the fan. The naval cockade is
identical with the civil cockade.

The white cockade is the badge of the House of Stuart. The black cockade
that of the House of Hanover. The servants of foreign ambassadors wear
cockades in colour according to their nationalities. Black and white
for Germany; black and yellow for Austria; the tricolour for France;
scarlet for Spain; blue and white for Portugal; and black and yellow
for Belgium.

The word cockade, according to a well-known authority, was borrowed from
the French _cocarde_, having originally been applied to the plumes of
cock's feathers worn by Croatian soldiers serving in the French army.
Some such plume, or in its place a bunch of ribbons, came to be used in
pinning up the flaps of the hat into a cocked position, and thus
gradually the word passed for the name of the "cocked" hat itself.




CHAPTER XXXV

COUNTRY-HOUSE VISITS


September is actually the commencement of the country visiting season,
the few visits that are paid in August are but a prelude to the
programme that is to follow during the succeeding five months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The visitors received in August= are principally relatives. The
exceptions to the August family parties are the August cricket parties
in the counties where cricket is made a great feature during that month,
where the cricket weeks and consequent large country-house parties are
of annual recurrence, and where balls and private theatricals form part
of the week's amusement. It often follows that people visit at the same
houses year after year, they arrange their tour of visits with regard to
those invitations which they annually receive; new acquaintances and new
houses whereat to visit are added to the list from time to time and take
the place of those which, as a matter of course, drop out of it.
Sometimes the invitations fit into each other admirably, like the pieces
of a puzzle; at others there is an awkward interval of a day, or two or
three days, to be filled up between leaving one house and arriving at
another. If the hostess is, in either case, a relation or an intimate
friend, this difficulty is easily surmounted by staying on at one house
until the day fixed for arrival at another, or _vice versâ_; but if a
guest is on ceremony with her hostess, or if, as is often the case, new
arrivals are expected for the following week, the alternative is to
spend a few days in town, as although the house where the next visit to
be paid might be within twenty or thirty miles of the house the visitor
is about to leave, it would be unusual to spend the interval at an hotel
in the adjacent town, as to do so might reflect upon the hospitality of
the hostess. On the other hand, invitations are sometimes given
independently of dates, but this friendly style of invitation is not
given when a large party is invited, and it is understood to mean that
the hostess may be quite alone, or may have guests staying with her, as
the case may be. This form of invitation is frequently given to people
visiting in Scotland, on account of the great distance from town.

It is a very general custom to give shooting parties the third week in
September, harvest permitting. If the harvest is late on account of
unfavourable weather the shooting parties are postponed until the first
week in the ensuing month. The guests, or at least the crack guns, are
usually invited for partridge driving, which is what partridge shooting
now actually amounts to.

There are large shooting parties and small shooting parties, shooting
parties to which royalty is invited and shooting parties restricted to
intimate friends or relations, but in either case the period is the
same, three days' shooting.

       *       *       *       *       *

=If a party is limited to five guns=, seven ladies is the average number
invited, the hostess relying upon a neighbour or a neighbour's son to
equalise the balance at the dinner-table. The success of house-parties
mainly depends upon people knowing each other, or fraternising when they
are introduced or have made each other's acquaintance. The ladies of a
country-house party are expected, as a rule, to amuse themselves, more
or less, during the day. After luncheon there is usually a drive to a
neighbouring town, a little shopping to be done there, or a call to be
paid in the neighbourhood by some of the party, notably the married
ladies, the young ladies being left to their own resources.

At the close of a visit game is offered to those of the shooters to whom
it is known that it will be acceptable.

The head gamekeeper is usually instructed to put up a couple of brace of
pheasants and a hare. But in some houses even this custom is not
followed, and the whole of the game killed, with the exception of what
is required for the house, finds its way into the market, both the local
market and the London market.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shooting parties as a rule give a hostess little anxiety on the score of
finding amusement for the ladies of the party, as so many aids out of
doors are at her command at this season of the year. This is a great
advantage, as although some few ladies possessing great strength of
nerve have taken up shooting as an amusement and pastime and acquit
themselves surprisingly well in this manly sport, yet ladies in general
are not inclined for so dangerous a game, and even those intrepid ladies
who have learnt how to use their little gun would never be permitted to
make one or two of a big shooting party, even were they so inclined.

The hostess and the ladies of the party invariably join the shooters at
luncheon, and some of the ladies go out with the shooters in the morning
to watch their prowess in the field; but this entails a great deal of
walking where partridge shooting is concerned, which is quite another
thing to covert shooting in November and December.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A good hostess has great opportunities= for distinguishing herself when
entertaining a country-house party, from the arrival of the first
motor-car to the departure of the last. Her consideration and tact are
so successfully exerted that somehow her guests always find themselves
doing exactly what they like best and in company with those who are
most congenial to them, to say nothing of the comfort of the general
domestic arrangements, which seem to have been arranged exclusively for
their convenience. If they wish to drive, there is a carriage or
motor-car at their disposal; if they prefer a constitutional, there is
some one very agreeable desirous of walking with them. The daily papers
are always to be found, the post-bag goes out at a most convenient hour
by the hand of a special messenger, the dinner is of the best, and the
evening is of the cheeriest. Bridge as a rule is played in most houses,
and several tables are arranged in the drawing-room to accommodate the
would-be players.

Occasionally, when the birds are wild and sport is slack, a sort of
picnic luncheon is held in the vicinity of a keeper's lodge, under the
shade of some wide-spreading trees, when the ladies join the party; but
in September keen sportsmen rather despise this playing at shooting, and
resent the interruption caused by the company of ladies at luncheon, and
prefer to take it in the rough and smoke the while. Every day of the
week is not thus given up to shooting, and there are few owners of
manors who would care to provide five days' consecutive sport for their
guests, and two days' hard shooting is probably followed by what is
called an idle day. On these off days in September the hostess often
gives a garden-party, or takes her guests to one given by a neighbour at
some few miles distant; or she holds a stall at a bazaar and persuades
her guests to assist her in disposing of her stock; or she induces her
party to accompany her to some flower-show in which she takes a local
interest; or the host and one or two of the best shots start early after
breakfast to shoot with a neighbour, and the remainder of the guests
drive over to a picturesque ruin, where they picnic, and return home in
time for the eight-o'clock dinner. If the owner of a mansion has a coach
the whole party is conveyed on it, otherwise the motor-cars are brought
into requisition, while saddle horses are provided for those who care
to ride. A country-house party occasionally resolves itself into two or
more cliques, as far as the ladies are concerned; gentlemen, as a rule,
are not much given to this sort of thing. On the first evening, as soon
as the ladies have left the dining-room for the drawing-room, these
little cliques are tacitly formed, and continue unbroken until the close
of the visit. There are many reasons which call these cliques into
existence--old intimacies revived, new acquaintanceships to be
strengthened, unwelcome acquaintanceships to be avoided, and so on.
These cliques are by no means agreeable to the hostess, indeed, quite
the contrary--but she is powerless to prevent their being formed, and
she is herself sometimes drawn into one or other of them, and sometimes
altogether excluded from them. Any one who is at all conversant with
country-house visiting is aware how thoroughly the influence of the
clique pervades the atmosphere of the drawing-room; and yet, perhaps, at
country-house parties more friendships are formed and intimacies
cemented than at any other gatherings.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The evening amusements= at country-house parties vary very much
according to the proclivities of the hostess or those of her daughters.
At some houses dancing is the order of things for a couple of hours or
so after dinner, but this mode of spending the evening does not always
commend itself to the gentlemen, who, after a long day's walking through
wet turnips and over heavy ploughed land, or a hard day's riding over
stiff fences, rather incline towards the _dolce far niente_ of a
luxurious armchair than to the pleasures of the mazy valse, and are
proportionately grateful to a hostess who does not call upon them to
undergo any further exercise than what they have already gone through
for their own pleasure.

In most country-house parties bridge forms the chief if not the only
amusement, and is played not only after dinner but in the afternoon
also. Amateur theatricals and _tableaux vivants_, impromptu charades,
thought reading, conjuring, etc., are fashionable amusements and easy of
accomplishment: the first-named of these demands considerable study and
plenty of time for rehearsal, therefore theatricals are generally
engaged in when the party is composed of relatives rather than of
acquaintances, and when the visit would be perhaps prolonged to ten days
or a fortnight.

Some hostesses prefer keeping late hours to early hours, and do not
retire until after twelve; this does not commend itself to the
gentlemen, as they are not supposed to adjourn to the smoking-room until
the ladies have left the drawing-room, and gentlemen like to spend a
couple of hours in the smoking-room after dinner.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In hunting counties= the breakfast is usually an early one, varying
from nine o'clock to half-past nine, according to whether the ride to
covert is likely to be a long or a short one; but, as a rule, the
nominal breakfast hour is 9.30 o'clock. A certain amount of latitude is
allowed to guests as regards coming down to breakfast; they do not
assemble in the morning-room, but all make their way to the
breakfast-room, and seat themselves at once at table, while many ladies
breakfast in their own rooms.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In Scotland, an invitation to shoot= often means a visit of three
weeks. The accommodation of the shooting-box or lodge may be limited or
primitive, and it is very often both of these; but it matters very
little to the sportsman what sort of bed he sleeps on, or how he is made
to rough it, providing the grouse are plentiful. On some of the moors
there are but cottages and farmhouses for the occupation of the
sportsmen, but on others the houses are excellent, and let with the
moors, as many take a moor season after season and invite their friends
to shoot between the 12th of August and October. The grand shooting
parties that are annually given in Scotland by owners of large estates
and fine shootings extends throughout the whole of the shooting season,
and guests come and go without intermission; as one leaves another
arrives. Certain houses or castles are much gayer than others; to some
very few ladies are asked, the majority of the guests being
gentlemen--probably the hostess and two ladies and eight men--in others,
the numbers are more equal; in others, again, the party sometimes
consists entirely of men with a host and no hostess. Ladies generally
ask their most intimate friends to Scotland rather than acquaintances,
as they are left to themselves the whole of the day, dinner being often
postponed until nine o'clock, on account of the late return of the
sportsmen.

       *       *       *       *       *

=South of the Tweed, September invitations= are usually given for three
or four days, from Tuesday till Saturday; married couples, young ladies,
and young men, are all asked, and the ladies find amusement in
lawn-tennis, or in attending or assisting at some neighbouring bazaar or
fancy fair, as in this month county bazaars are very popular, and the
visitors at one house lend their services in conjunction with the
visitors at another, to hold stalls at a bazaar got up by a third
influential lady; and thus the stalls are well stocked, and the
fashionable stall-holders give an impetus to the whole affair.

Ladies see very little of the gentlemen between breakfast and dinner.
The shooters start about eleven, and seldom return much before seven.

When it is dark at four, those who prefer ladies' society and tea to the
smoking-room and billiards, make themselves presentable and join the
ladies.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As regards the Etiquette of Visiting at Bachelors' Houses.=--It is
thoroughly understood that ladies should be accompanied by their
husbands, and young ladies by their father and mother, or by a married
couple with whom they are on terms of great intimacy, in which case the
married lady acts as chaperon to the young ladies. Young ladies cannot
stay at the house of a bachelor unless chaperoned by a married lady, or
by a female relative of their host. A widow and her daughter could of
course join a party of ladies staying at a bachelor's house, or stay on
a visit to him were he alone, or entertaining bachelor friends.

When a bachelor gives a country-house party, and nominally does the
honours himself, occasionally one of the married ladies of the party
tacitly takes the lead.

The position of a young widower is similar to that of a bachelor as
regards society. Later in life, the contrary is the case; a widower with
grown-up daughters gives entertainments for them, and the eldest
daughter does the honours, thus reducing the position again to that of
host and hostess.




CHAPTER XXXVI

HUNTING AND SHOOTING


=Ladies in the Hunting-Field.=--There is no arena better fitted to
display good riding on the part of women than the hunting-field, and no
better opportunity for the practice of this delightful accomplishment
and for its thorough enjoyment. It is urged, however, that it argues
cruelty of disposition and unwomanly feeling to join in the pursuit of a
poor, miserable, hunted fox, and worse still to be in at the death, and
that women are liable to be carried away by the enthusiasm of the hour
to applaud and to witness what they would otherwise shrink from. This
argument has a certain weight, and deters many from actually hunting who
would otherwise join in the sport, and they make a compromise by
regularly attending the meets, and even witnessing a throw-off of a
fox-break covert. Every strong point that a rider possesses is brought
out in the field. The canter in the Row, the trot through the
country-lanes, or the long country ride are very feeble substitutes for
the intense enjoyment experienced when taking part in a good run; the
excitement felt and shared in by the whole field exhilarates and
stimulates, and renders fatigue a thing out of the question, not to be
thought of until the homeward ride is well over.

Considering the number of ladies who hunt, the accidents that occur are
surprisingly few, for the obvious reason that ladies do not attempt to
hunt unless their skill as good horsewomen is beyond all question. Their
husbands, their fathers, their brothers would not allow them to
jeopardise their lives, unless their riding and experience, their
courage, their nerve, and their instruction justified the attempt.

There are also two other weighty considerations necessary to success--a
good mount, and a good lead. The father or husband invariably selects
the one, and the friend--either of the fair rider or of the husband or
brother--gives the all-important lead, without which few ladies venture
upon hunting, save those few who are independent enough to cut out
their own work.

Ladies, who are naturally fond of riding, cannot always indulge in the
pleasure of hunting, on the ground of expense, for instance. A lady may
possess a fairly good horse for ordinary purposes, to ride in the Row,
or for country exercise, but very few gentlemen of moderate means can
afford to keep hunters for the ladies of their families as well as for
themselves, although, in fiction, this is freely done. If a lady has one
good hunter of her own, she may expect two days' hunting a week,
providing the country is not too stiff, and the meets are fairly
convenient. Occasionally, a mount may be obtained from a good-natured
friend, whose stud is larger than his requirements; but this is not to
be depended upon in every-day life, and popular ladies and first-rate
riders are more in the way of receiving these attentions than the
general run of ladies.

As regards the presence of young ladies in the hunting-field, there are
two opinions respecting its advisability, apart from the question of
whether it is or is not a feminine pursuit. The long ride home in the
November and December twilight, in the company of some member of the
hunt, who has become the young lady's cavalier for the time being, is
not to the taste of many parents; chaperonage must of necessity be
greatly dispensed with in the hunting-field, and this is an objection
which many fathers advance against their daughters hunting.

Some husbands entertain equally strict views on this head, and are of
opinion that the boldest rider and the best lead to follow in the
field is not always the guest they would most desire to see at their
own firesides.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Hunt-Breakfasts.=--A lady should not go to a hunt-breakfast at the
house of a country gentleman if unacquainted with him, or some member of
his family, unless asked to do so by a mutual acquaintance. All
gentlemen riding to hounds, whether strangers to the host or not, have
the privilege of entering any house where a hunt-breakfast is given and
accepting the hospitality offered. The breakfast, which is in reality a
cold collation, with the addition of wine, liqueurs, ale, etc., is
usually laid out in the dining-room, and no ceremony whatever is
observed; the gentlemen come and go as they please.

The mistress of the house should either be present at a hunt-breakfast
and receive the ladies who arrive in the hall or dining-room, or she
should receive them in the drawing-room, where refreshments should be
brought to them.

When a hostess intends riding to hounds, she is often mounted before her
neighbours arrive, in which case she invites them to enter the house for
refreshments, if they care to do so.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Gentlemen who go down into a County= for a few days' hunting only
seldom wear "pink," and prefer riding to hounds in black coats.

The members of the hunt wear pink as a matter of course, but it is
considered better taste for a stranger to wear a black coat than to
appear in a _new_, _very new_, unspecked red one.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Sporting Terms.=--Persons unversed in matters appertaining to "country
life" and "country sports," town bred, and who have had little or no
opportunity of acquiring a knowledge of the subject from personal
experience, can hardly fail to commit many and various mistakes when
brought into contact with sportsmen and their sports.

A knowledge of sporting matters and sporting terms, and the etiquette
observed by sportsmen, is only arrived at by associating with those
thoroughly conversant with the subject, and with whom "sport" has formed
part of their education so to speak.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Shooting Season commences= on the 12th of August with grouse
shooting in the north of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Partridge
shooting commences on the 1st of September and terminates on the 1st of
February.

The finest partridge shooting is allowed by general consent to be found
in the eastern counties.

Partridge driving does not take place until January to any great extent.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Pheasant Shooting= commences the 1st of October and terminates the 1st
of February.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Hares= may be shot up to the 1st of March.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Rabbits= may be shot all the year round.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Rooks= are shot during the spring and summer.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is difficult to make a would-be sportsmen comprehend the strict
etiquette maintained between the owners of manors; that is to say, he
would think nothing of crossing the boundary of his host's manor, "gun
in hand," if he felt inclined to follow a bird or hare he had wounded,
oblivious of the fact that, in the first place, the greatest
punctiliousness is observed between gentlemen in the matter of
trespassing on each other's land when out shooting; and, that unless the
greatest intimacy existed, a sportsman would hardly venture to pick up
his dead bird if it had fallen on a neighbour's manor, and would on no
account look for a wounded bird, but for a dead one only. In the second
place he would carefully observe the rule of leaving his gun on his own
side of the boundary, and would certainly not carry it with him to his
neighbour's land. Those are points that strangers invited for a few
days' shooting very often fall foul of, creating thereby much
unpleasantness for their host through their ignorance and inexperience.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a gentleman is invited to join= a shooting-party, it would not be
necessary for him to take a loader with him, as his host would find a
man to perform that office for him, unless he had a servant with him
capable of performing that duty; but if he were residing in the
neighbourhood he would, as a matter of course, take his loader with him
when asked to join a shooting-party, and in both cases he would shoot
with two guns; as to shoot with one gun only causes a vexatious delay.

A frequent cause of offence to sportsmen is for a gentleman to be noisy
when out shooting, that is to say, to be "loudly talkative," or
"boisterously merry," or given to indulge in exclamations when a bird
rises, or when a bird is missed; your true sportsman maintains a strict
silence.

There are numberless other points relating to field sports wherein the
"inexperienced sportsman" is apt to give offence, but which would take
up too much space to enter into in a work of this description.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Fees, or Tips to the Gamekeepers=, vary from 10s. to £5,
according to the number of days' shooting enjoyed or the extent of the
bag.

For one day's partridge-shooting the tip to the head gamekeeper would be
a sovereign; for a good day's pheasant-shooting, as much as two
sovereigns would probably be given. A gentleman who does not tip or fee
up to this mark is not likely to find himself too well placed in a
battue.

The cost of a game licence is £3, and lasts twelve months, from 1st
August to the 31st of July the following year, or £2 from the 1st of
August to the 31st of October, or £2 from the 1st of November to the
31st of July in the following year, or £1 for fourteen days.




CHAPTER XXXVII

SHAKING HANDS


The etiquette with regard to shaking hands is not an open question, it
is distinct enough and simple enough for all exigencies, but yet there
is individual temperament to be taken into account which in many drives
etiquette out of the field, if by etiquette is understood not merely
stiff propriety of action, but politeness in the truest sense of the
word, and doing that which is exactly the right thing to do. Etiquette
rules when to shake hands and when not to do so, when to bow and when
not to bow; but in spite of this knowledge, which is within every one's
reach, there are many mistakes made on this head.

For instance, one does not offer to shake hands when expected to do so;
another offers to shake hands three times; one displays unwarrantable
warmth in shaking hands; another extends two fingers only; one shakes
hands in a limp and uncomfortable manner, and takes the extended hand
merely to drop it; another literally pumps the extended hand, or crushes
the rings into a lady's fingers when shaking hands with her.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A lady who does not shake hands= when expected to do so is actuated by
one or other of the following reasons--she did not wish to shake hands
with a certain acquaintance, and preferred to bow only, or she was not
aware whether she should have shaken hands or not.

The gentlemen who shake hands with great warmth and _empressement_ are
two distinct individuals; the one is cordial and large-hearted, and has
a friendly grasp for every one--a grasp indicative of kindliness,
geniality, and good fellowship--the other wishes to ingratiate himself
in certain quarters, and loses no opportunity of demonstratively
shaking hands, but no one is deceived by this spurious imitation of
the real thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When a lady gives but two fingers= to people whom she does not care
about, she is always a person who fancies herself, and who feels very
fine; she doubtless is, but her good breeding and her good feeling are
both in question when she takes this method of showing the superiority
of herself and her position over that of other people.

There are other eccentricities indulged in by different people who shake
hands when they should not, and people who do not shake hands when they
should.

It depends upon whom a lady is introduced to, or upon who is introduced
to her, whether she should or should not shake hands. She should not
shake hands on being casually introduced to a person altogether a
stranger to her; but yet there are so many occasions when it is both
proper and correct to shake hands on being introduced, that the rule on
this head is a very elastic one.

For instance, a host and hostess should shake hands with every stranger
introduced to them at their house.

A lady should shake hands on being introduced to the relations of her
intended husband.

A lady should shake hands on being introduced to the friend of an
intimate friend.

When a lady has entered into conversation to any extent with some one to
whom she has been introduced, and finds she has much in common with her,
she should shake hands on taking leave; but if she has only exchanged a
few commonplace sentences, a bow would be all that is necessary.

A lady usually takes the initiative with regard to shaking hands as with
bowing; but in reality it is a spontaneous movement, made by both lady
and gentleman at the same moment, as the hand ought not to be extended
or the bow given unless expected and instantaneously reciprocated.

A young lady should not offer to shake hands with one not expectant of
the honour.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Shaking hands on taking leave= is, with some few people, a graceful and
pleasant fashion of saying good-bye; intimate friends hold the hand
while the last words are being said. Women hold each other's hands thus
on parting, and some few men take each other's hands; but with them it
is rather a foreign fashion, and is principally followed by those who
have lived much on the Continent; for, as a rule, an Englishman prefers
the hearty English shake of the hand.

A lady having once shaken hands with another, should continue to do so
at subsequent meetings, unless a coolness of manner warns her that a bow
would be more acceptable.

With regard to shaking hands at a dinner-party with acquaintances: if
the dinner-party is a small one, and there is time to shake hands, it is
correct to do so; but when there is little time before dinner, and no
good opportunity for shaking hands, bows to acquaintances at distant
parts of the room, or when seated at the dinner-table, are sufficient
recognition for the time being.

At an evening-party it depends upon opportunity whether acquaintances
shake hands or not.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The fashion of raising the arm= when shaking hands is followed by very
few in the exaggerated style in which it was first introduced, but a
modification of it has distinctly become the fashion in general society.

The hand, instead of being extended straight out, is now offered on a
line or parallel with the chest, a trifle higher than the old-fashioned
style, and the fingers of the hand are held and gently shaken, but the
palm is not grasped or even touched.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

CHAPERONS AND DÉBUTANTES


An unmarried lady, unless she be a maiden-lady of a recognised age and
standing, cannot act as an orthodox chaperon; but, on the other hand,
a young married lady could do so with the greatest propriety, as could
a brother from the age of eighteen; of other relatives it is not
necessary to speak.

Young ladies are now frequently asked to dinner-parties without a
chaperon, a hostess constituting herself chaperon for the occasion.
Dances are also given to which it is understood chaperons are _not_
invited, the hostess again acting in that capacity, but at large balls
and dances chaperonage is considered indispensable for young ladies. At
theatres and evening concerts chaperonage is distinctly required; but at
morning concerts and _matinées_, companionship rather than chaperonage
is needed.

As regards morning hours. Young ladies may now walk together in the Park
and elsewhere; ride together, attend classes together or alone, go to
luncheon or afternoon tea alone or together at the houses of friends and
acquaintances, quite unaccompanied by a chaperon. They may also visit at
country houses without a chaperon, the hostess performing this duty.

At all out-door gatherings, such as garden-parties, tennis-parties,
cricket-matches, golf-meetings, etc., the chaperonage required is of the
slightest, and for which any might be made available.




CHAPTER XXXIX

PRESENTATIONS AT THE VICEREGAL COURT, DUBLIN CASTLE


The Drawing-rooms at Dublin Castle are held by the Lord-Lieutenant of
Ireland and his wife, in St. Patrick's Hall, at 10.15 o'clock p.m.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady who desires= a presentation at the Viceregal Court must be
presented by a lady who has herself been presented thereat, and it is
necessary that she herself should be present on the occasion, save
under exceptional circumstances. A lady is not allowed to present
more than _two_ ladies, except in special cases to be sanctioned by
His Excellency.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady who proposes being presented= at a Viceregal Drawing-room must
send to the Chamberlain's office by five o'clock, three days previous to
the Drawing-room, a card with her name and address both in town and
country, and the name and address of the lady by whom she is to be
presented distinctly written thereon, and stating which Drawing-room she
wishes to attend, to be submitted to the Lord-Lieutenant and his wife
for their Excellencies' approval. Also two Presentation Cards must be
obtained at the Chamberlain's office two days before the
Drawing-room--if they have not previously been sent by post--and must be
filled in with the necessary particulars, and taken to the Castle on the
evening of the Drawing-room, one to be delivered to the official
stationed in the Corridor, and the other to be handed to the
Chamberlain, who will announce the name. It is requested that the names
may be very distinctly written upon the cards, that there may be no
difficulty in announcing them.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Lady attending= a Viceregal Drawing-room, who has been already
presented at the Viceregal Court, must leave at the Chamberlain's
office, three days previous to the Drawing-room, a card with her name
and address, both in town and country, distinctly written thereon, and
stating which Drawing-room she wishes to attend. She must bring with her
two similar cards on the evening of the Drawing-room, one to be given to
the official in the Corridor, and the other to the Chamberlain, who will
announce the name.

A lady on entering the Castle on the evening of a Drawing-room towards
ten o'clock, finds the hall lined with soldiers, and repairs at once to
the cloak-room to leave wraps, etc., and to have her train dexterously
arranged over one arm by a female attendant. She then proceeds up the
grand staircase, lined with servants in gorgeous liveries, and enters
the Corridor, where one of the Presentation Cards is given up to the
official in attendance, and she passes down the Corridor into the Long
Drawing-room, where a barrier of wood, enclosing a space, is erected at
the end. One of the gentlemen of the Household lifts this barrier at
intervals to allow of a certain number passing through to the
Throne-room, at the door of which her train is let down and arranged by
men-servants. If she is to be "presented," the Chamberlain tells her to
take off her right-hand glove, and, if royalty is present, informs her
that she must make three bows, and says, "Three bows, please." She gives
up her second Presentation Card to him, and he calls out her name, and
it is passed along to His Excellency by the gentlemen of the household.
The Lord-Lieutenant and his wife stand on a daïs, he standing in front
of the Throne, which is a grand chair of State, and on either side--in
what are known as the "Pens"--are grouped the visitors staying at the
Castle, those who have the private _entrée_, and the members of the
Household. The name of the lady who makes the presentation is also
called out. The lady presented advances, the Lord-Lieutenant shakes
hands with her, but does not now kiss her on the cheek; she then makes
him a bow, and bows to his wife, who bows in return. She then retires
back to the door leading into the Long Drawing-room, where her train is
replaced over her arm. She then proceeds to St. Patrick's Hall, or to
the Picture Gallery.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Ladies who attend= the Drawing-room only bow to the Lord-Lieutenant and
his wife; he bows to them, but he does not shake hands with them or kiss
them. In Ireland men invariably accompany their wives to the
Drawing-room, having previously attended the Levée; they pass along
the base of the semi-circle, and make their bows at the same time as
do the ladies.

When all have been received and have assembled in St. Patrick's Hall,
a procession is formed, the Lord-Lieutenant walking first, followed
by his wife, whose train is carried by pages. The visitors staying at
the Castle follow next, and then the members of the Household, the
band stationed in the gallery playing "God Save the King" the while.
All those present form up in two lines to make a passage for the
procession to pass through, and bow low to His Excellency and his wife
as they pass.

A supper is not given, only light refreshments of every description.
These refreshments are arranged on long tables on one side of St.
Patrick's Hall, and at the lower end, under the gallery, tables are
placed for tea, coffee, wine, etc. On the opposite side of the hall
red-cushioned seats are placed, and the company promenade in and around
the Picture Gallery and St. Patrick's Hall during the remainder of
the evening.

Ladies wear full Court dress as at Buckingham Palace, and gentlemen
uniform or Court dress.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Levées.=--Every nobleman or gentleman who proposes to attend a Levée,
and who has not yet been received at the Viceregal Court, must be
introduced by a nobleman or gentleman who has himself been previously
presented thereat.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Gentleman who proposes= to be presented must send to the Gentleman
Usher's office by five o'clock, two or three days before the Levée, a
card with his name and address, both in town and country, and the name
and address of the gentleman by whom he is to be presented distinctly
written thereon, to be submitted for the Lord-Lieutenant's approval. He
must also obtain two Presentation Cards from the Gentleman Usher's
office, and must take them to the Castle on the day of the Levée, the
one to be given to the official in the Corridor, and the other to be
handed to the Gentleman Usher, who will announce the name to the
Lord-Lieutenant.

Any gentleman who proposes to attend a Levée, having been previously
presented, must also take two cards with him to the Castle on the day of
the Levée, with his name and address, both in town and country, clearly
written thereon, to be given up as before mentioned. Again, a gentleman
who, having previously attended the Levée, proposes attending the
Drawing-room, is requested to bring with him _one_ card, with his name
distinctly written upon it, to be left in the Corridor. All those
entitled to the private _entrée_ at Dublin Castle, and availing
themselves of the privilege, are permitted to be accompanied only by
their wives and unmarried daughters.

Gentlemen wear Court dress or naval and military uniforms, or the
uniforms of Lords-Lieutenants of Counties, or of the Royal Irish
Constabulary, etc. The Academical habit cannot be worn except when
presenting an address from a university. Foreign orders and decorations
cannot be worn at the Court of Dublin by British subjects without
special authority under His Majesty's royal licence.

The right-hand glove should be removed before Presentation.

Gentlemen who, having previously attended the Levée, are desirous of
accompanying the ladies of their families to the Drawing-room, are
requested to apply to the Chamberlain's office for an Attendance Card,
which should be brought to the Castle on the evening of the Drawing-room
and given up in the Corridor.

Presentations in London do not count as Presentations at the
Viceregal Court.




CHAPTER XL

HOSTESSES


=The Art of receiving Guests= is a very subtle one, difficult to
acquire; but when acquired and thoroughly mastered it confers upon
a mistress of a house an enviable reputation--that of being a
perfect hostess.

With some this is in-bred, and grace and composure and all the attendant
attributes which are to be found in this type of hostess sit naturally
upon them; but the individuals so gifted represent the few rather than
the many. A far greater section of society has to rely upon experience
to teach them this useful accomplishment, while with others time alone
can aid them in overcoming natural reserve, and want of confidence in
themselves, which stand in the way of their assuming this character with
anything like success. Those ladies who are innately thoughtless and
careless in this respect, neither time nor experience can mould, and
what they are at the commencement of their career, they remain to the
end of the chapter--very indifferent hostesses. There are varieties of
hostesses, according to individual capabilities, and who are known
amongst their friends by these appellations: first ranks the perfect or
"charming hostess," either title suits her equally well; next to her
comes the "good hostess," she is followed by the one who is "not a good
hostess"; and the rear is brought up by the one who is decidedly "a bad
hostess." Amongst the salient points which distinguish the perfect or
charming hostess are perhaps, foremost, a certain facility of putting
each individual guest at ease, conveying that the welcome she accords is
a personal if not an especial one. Simultaneously with these agreeable
impressions is conveyed a sense of the hostess's genial qualities; her
charm of manner, her graciousness and her courteous bearing evincing so
plainly that she is entirely mistress of the situation: these qualities
insensibly react upon the guests, and evoke a corresponding desire to
please on their part.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The perfect hostess= possesses yet another advantage, viz. a readiness
of speech, a faculty of saying the right thing at the right moment and
to the right person, and of identifying herself, so to speak, with the
susceptibilities of each of her guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The good hostess= is essentially what is known as a considerate
hostess; she makes up for the brighter qualities in which she is lacking
by her extreme consideration for her guests. In the charming hostess
this consideration is eclipsed by her more brilliant powers of pleasing,
it permeates all she does, while in the good hostess it is her strongest
point, and upon which is founded her claim to the name. The lady who
bears the undesirable reputation of being "not a good hostess" is not
"good" in a variety of ways; she means well and does her utmost to
succeed, but by some contrariety of the laws which regulate domestic and
social affairs, the results of her efforts are always the reverse of
what she would have them be. The lady who is not a good hostess
sometimes suffers from shyness and reserve which renders her stiff in
manner when she would most desire to be cordial, silent when she would
be most loquacious, and awkward when she would be at ease.

As there are many reasons why ladies prove to be good hostesses, so
there are many reasons why they prove bad hostesses, selfishness and
want of consideration for others contribute to these, as do
procrastination and a vague idea of the value of time. Ladies with such
faults and weaknesses as these produce very much the same impression
upon their guests, although, perhaps, one is a little less culpable than
is the other.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The selfish hostess is a bad hostess=, because, providing she is
amused, she is utterly indifferent as to whether her guests are amused
or not, her own pleasure and gratification being of paramount
importance. Instead of being in readiness to receive her guests she
descends late to the drawing-room to welcome them, and is indifferent as
to whether there is any one to greet them or not.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The procrastinating hostess=, although she is equally in fault, yet, as
she hastens to excuse herself, when lacking in politeness to, or
consideration for her guests, her excuses are sometimes admitted; but
the selfish hostess, if she deigns to excuse herself, does so with such
a palpable show of indifference as to her guests' opinion of her
actions, that the excuse is oftener than not an aggravation of the
offence. A lady who has no regard for time goes to her room to dress at
the moment when she should be descending to the drawing-room; or she
remains out driving when she should be returning; or she puts off making
some very important arrangement for the comfort or amusement of her
guests until it is too late for anything but a makeshift to be thought
of, if it has not to be dispensed with altogether. Everything that she
does or projects is on the same scale of procrastination; her
invitations, her orders and engagements, are one and all effected
against time, and neither herself nor her guests gain the value or
satisfaction of the hospitality put forth. The bad hostess walks into
her drawing-room when many of her guests are assembled, either for a
dinner-party or afternoon tea, and shakes hands in an awkward, abashed
manner, almost as if she were an unexpected guest instead of the
mistress of the house.

The host is not at his ease; he is provoked at having to make excuses
for his wife, and the guests are equally constrained.

If the host is of a sarcastic turn of mind, he never refrains from
saying something the reverse of amiable to the hostess on her entrance.
"My dear," he will perhaps remark, "you are doubtless not aware that we
have friends dining with us this evening." This remark renders the
guests even more uncomfortable and the hostess less self-possessed, and
this is often the prelude to an inharmonious evening, with a host whose
brow is clouded and a hostess whose manner is abashed.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The mode of receiving guests= is determined by the nature of the
entertainment. A welcome accorded to some two or three hundred
guests cannot be as personal a one as that offered to some ten to
thirty guests.

Whatever disappointment a hostess may feel she should not allow it to
appear on the surface, and should not be _distrait_ in manner when
shaking hands with her guests. At large or small gatherings
disappointments follow in the course of events, and very few hostesses
can say that they have not experienced this in a larger or smaller
degree at each and all of their entertainments.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At a ball or evening-party= a hostess should receive her guests at the
head of the staircase, and should remain there until the majority, if
not all, of the guests have arrived.

As the names of the guests are announced the hostess should shake hands
with each, addressing some courteous observation the while, not with a
view of inducing them to linger on the staircase, but rather of inviting
them to enter the ball-room to make way for other guests.

At a ball given at a country house the hostess should stand at the door
of the ball-room and receive her guests. When the guests have duly
arrived, a hostess at a country-house ball or country-house theatricals
should exert herself to see that all her guests are amused. If she sees
that the young ladies are not dancing she should endeavour to find them
partners. In town she is not required to do this. If the chaperons have
apparently no one to talk to she should introduce one of her own
relatives, if she cannot give much of her own attention to them, and she
should arrange that all her guests are taken in to supper.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At large afternoon "at homes"= the hostess receives her guests at the
open door of the drawing-room, and has little more time to bestow upon
each than at a ball or an "at home." At small afternoon "at homes" she
should receive them in the drawing-room, and should rise and shake hands
with each arrival.

A hostess should receive her dinner guests in the drawing-room, and
should shake hands with each in the order of arrival. She occasionally
finds it a trying ordeal to sustain conversation between the arrival of
dinner guests and the dinner being served; sometimes this is prolonged
for three-quarters of an hour through the non-appearance of a guest who
must be waited for. A hostess should, although she knows that her dinner
is spoilt by being thus kept back, endeavour to make the time pass as
pleasantly as possible, by rendering the conversation general and by
making the guests acquainted with each other. The hostess who can tide
over these awkward occurrences so that the postponement of dinner from
half to three-quarters of an hour is hardly perceived, proves herself to
be entitled to be considered a good hostess.




CHAPTER XLI

THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF LADY PATRONESSES OF PUBLIC BALLS


=Ladies are frequently solicited= to allow their names to be placed on
the lists of lady patronesses of charity balls. A ball committee is
desirous of obtaining a list of influential names to lend _éclat_ and
prestige to the ball, and a charity ball often numbers amongst its lady
patronesses the names of many of the leading members of the nobility,
followed by those of the wives of the leading county gentry, or by the
principal residents of a watering-place or county town; but it is
understood, as a rule, that the duty of giving vouchers or tickets for a
charity ball is undertaken by those ladies who are more directly
interested in it, whose husbands are on the committee, who make a point
of annually attending it, and thus are principally concerned in keeping
it select; and although in many counties and in many towns lady
patronesses, members of the nobility, do attend, yet it not unfrequently
happens that out of a long list of great ladies only three or four are
present at a ball.

The members of the leading nobility and gentry of a neighbourhood
invariably lend their names to local charity balls, and head the list of
patrons and patronesses, but beyond lending their names, and in some
cases sending a subscription of money towards the funds of the charity,
or a present of game towards the supper, they have very little to do
with the ball itself, which is practically in the hands of the local
stewards. The exceptions to this rule are the charity balls held in town
during the season, such as the Royal Caledonian Ball, the Yorkshire, the
Wiltshire, and the Somersetshire Societies' Balls. On these occasions
many of the great ladies give vouchers and attend the balls.

When ladies consent to become lady patronesses of a ball, they usually
notify to the committee whether they will or will not undertake the duty
of giving vouchers or tickets, as the case may be. Some ball committees
arrange that vouchers are to be given by lady patronesses, to be
subsequently exchanged for tickets, signed and filled in with the name
of the person to whom the ticket is given. The lady patronesses in this
case receive the money charged for the tickets, and forward it to the
committee after the ball, with any tickets that they may not have
disposed of.

The ladies who exert themselves to sell tickets are generally those who
possess a large acquaintance, whose husbands are members of clubs;
therefore, if any person ought to be tabooed for some good social
reason, the lady patronesses reap the benefit of their husbands'
knowledge, and are thus able to give a polite refusal when tickets are
applied for for persons who are not altogether desirable.

It is no doubt a difficult and delicate task for the lady patronesses of
a large ball to keep it thoroughly select, and if not very particular
respecting those for whom tickets are granted, a ball, though a full
one, is likely to prove a very mixed affair, if not somewhat
objectionable, by reason of the presence of persons to whom tickets
should never have been granted, on moral if not on social grounds; and
though the funds of a charity may gain considerably by the increase of
numbers, through a general willingness on the part of the committee or
the lady patronesses to grant tickets to every one who may apply for
them, yet such policy is very short-sighted, and is seldom practised
by those who possess any practical knowledge in the matter, as it is
fatal to the reputation of a ball if persons who are objectionable are
present at it.

In the case of a ticket being applied for for a person of doubtful
antecedents, a lady patroness's best course is to refer the applicant to
the ball committee for tickets or vouchers.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Persons not well received in society=, or who have ostracised
themselves, have a predilection for public balls, and make every effort
to obtain tickets of admission; and in some cases, when a refusal has
been pronounced by the committee of a ball, the committee has been
threatened with legal proceedings.

Unmarried ladies seldom or ever act as lady patronesses, it not
being considered advisable to place the discretion of granting
tickets in their hands, lest their ignorance of the world should be
taken advantage of.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The lady patronesses of a charity ball= who undertake to give vouchers
or to sell tickets, usually exert themselves to the utmost in inducing
as many of their friends as possible to attend the ball.

It depends upon the committee of a charity ball whether tickets are
presented or not to the lady patronesses and stewards; but if the funds
of the charity are not at a very low ebb, this is generally done in
recognition of their services.

The responsibilities of lady patronesses of private subscription balls
are light in comparison with those of public charity balls, as persons
who attend subscription balls are usually on the visiting lists of
one or other of the lady patronesses, while with regard to county
balls, lady patronesses are not usually concerned in the disposal of
the tickets.




CHAPTER XLII

PERIODS OF MOURNING


=The Various Periods of Mourning= for relatives have within the last few
years been materially shortened, and the change generally accepted; but
as some still prefer to adhere to the longest periods prescribed by
custom, in the present chapter both periods are given, and it entirely
depends upon individual feeling and circumstances which of the two
periods is observed.

The time-honoured custom of wearing crape has greatly declined, and with
the exception of widows, many do not wear it at all, while others wear
it as a trimming only.

A slighter change has also taken place in favour of half-mourning
colours, which are now more worn than black and white during the
half-mourning period.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Court Mourning= when enjoined is imperative, the orders respecting
which are minutely given from the Lord Chamberlain's office and
published in the official _Gazette_; but these orders only apply to
persons connected with the Court, or to persons attending Courts,
Levées, State Balls, State Concerts, etc.

When the order for general mourning is given on the death of any member
of the Royal Family, the order applies to all, although it is optional
whether the general public comply with it or not.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Longest Period for a Widow's Mourning= is two years. The shorter
period is eighteen months. Formerly crape was worn for one year and
nine months; for the first twelve months the dress was entirely covered
with crape. The newer fashion in widows' mourning is to wear crape as a
trimming only, and to discontinue its wear after six or eight months,
while some few widows do not wear it at all during their mourning, it
being optional wear.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Half-Mourning= in the longer period commences after a year and nine
months, and is worn for three months. In the shorter period
half-mourning may commence after fifteen months, and be continued for
three months.

The period for wearing the widow's cap and veil is a year and a day. The
veil may be _crêpe lisse_ or _chiffon_ in place of crape. It is now the
fashion for young widows to wear the cap as a head-dress only, while
others do not wear it at all.

Lawn cuffs and collars are worn during the first year, or for six months
only, or not at all. After the first year white neckbands and white
strings to the bonnet may be worn. Also hats in place of bonnets.
Further touches of white may follow during the next three months.

After a year gold ornaments may be worn; diamonds earlier.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Widowers= should wear mourning for one year; they usually enter society
after three months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Parent= the period of mourning is twelve months; ten months
black, two months half-mourning, or eight months black and four months
half-mourning. The black may be relieved with touches of white after
three months. Crape is optional; many prefer not to wear it at all,
others as a trimming.

Diamonds--earrings, brooches, etc.--before gold, at the end of
three months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Son or Daughter= the period of mourning is identical with
the foregoing.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For very Young Children or Infants= the mourning is frequently
shortened by half this period, or even to three months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Stepmother.=--The period of mourning depends upon whether the
stepdaughters reside at home or not, or whether their father has been
long married, or whether their father's second wife has filled the place
of mother to them, in which case the period of mourning would be for
twelve months, otherwise the period is six months--four months black
relieved with touches of white after two months, followed by two months
half-mourning.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Brother or Sister= the longest period of mourning is six months,
the shortest period four months.

During the longest period, viz. six months, black should be worn for
five months, with a little white after two months, half-mourning for one
month. After one month diamonds, pins, and brooches, etc.; gold after
two months.

During the shortest period, viz. four months, black should be worn for
two months, half-mourning two months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Sister-in-law or a Brother-in-law= the period of mourning was
formerly the same as for a brother or sister, but the four months'
period is now the one usually chosen.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Grandparent= the longest period of mourning is six months, the
shortest four months.

During the longest period black should be worn for three months,
relieved with white after six weeks, half-mourning for three months;
diamonds after one month, gold after six weeks or two months.

During the shortest period black should be worn for two months,
half-mourning for two months.

The custom of wearing crape may now be said to have gone out of fashion
as regards etiquette, black being considered adequate mourning, save in
the case of widows.

The former crape periods were six months for parents and children, three
months for brothers and sisters, three months for grandparents.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For an Uncle or Aunt= the longest period of mourning is three months,
the shortest period six weeks.

During the longest period black (no crape) should be worn for two
months, half-mourning one month.

During the shortest period black for three weeks, half-mourning for
three weeks; diamonds after three weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Nephew or Niece= the periods of mourning are identical with
the foregoing.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For an Uncle or Aunt by Marriage= the period is six weeks black, or
three weeks black and three weeks half-mourning.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Great Uncle or Aunt= the longest period is two months, the
shortest one month.

During the longest period black for one month, half-mourning for
one month.

During the shortest period black for one month.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a First Cousin= the longest period is six weeks, the shortest
one month.

During the longest period black for three weeks, half-mourning for
three weeks.

During the shortest period black for one month.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Second Cousin= three weeks black. Mourning for a second cousin is
not obligatory, but quite optional, and often not worn.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Husband's Relations= the periods of mourning chosen are
invariably the shorter ones.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Daughter-in-law or Son-in-law= the periods are now shortened to
six months; four months black and two months half-mourning, or three
months black and three months half-mourning.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For the Parents of a Son-in-law or Daughter-in-law= the period is one
month, black.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For the Parents of a First Wife= a second wife should wear mourning for
one month, black relieved with white.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Brother or Sister of a First Wife= a second wife should wear
mourning for three weeks, but this is not obligatory, and depends upon
the intimacy existing between the two families.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Much Latitude is allowed to Men= with regard to the foregoing periods
of mourning.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Hat-band should be worn= during the whole of each period, but it is
not imperative to wear suits of black longer than half the periods
given, save in the case of widowers.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Servants' Mourning.=--It is customary to give servants mourning on the
death of the head of the house, which should be worn during the period
the members of the family are in mourning. Mourning given to servants
on the death of a son or daughter is quite an optional matter.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Seclusion from Society.=--The question as to how soon persons in
mourning should or should not re-enter society is in some measure an
open one, and is also influenced by the rules that govern the actual
period of mourning adopted.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Widow is not expected to enter into Society= under three months, and
during that time she should neither accept invitations nor issue them.
Her visiting should be confined to her relations and intimate friends.
After three months she should commence gradually to enter into society,
but balls and dances should be avoided during the first year.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Daughter mourning for a Parent= the period of seclusion is six
weeks as far as general society is concerned; but invitations to balls
and dances should not be accepted until after six months.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Parent mourning for a Son or Daughter= the period of seclusion is
the same as is that of a daughter for a parent.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For a Brother or Sister= the period of seclusion is three weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For Grandparents= the period of seclusion is from a fortnight to
three weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For an Uncle or Aunt= the period is a fortnight to three weeks.

       *       *       *       *       *

=For all Other Periods of Mourning= seclusion from society is not
considered requisite.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When Persons in Mourning= intend entering again into society, they
should leave cards on their friends and acquaintances as an intimation
that they are equal to paying and receiving calls.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When Cards of Inquiry have been left=, viz. visiting cards with "To
inquire after Mrs. A----" written on the top on right-hand corner of the
cards, they should be returned by cards with "Thanks for kind inquiries"
written upon them (see Chapter III.).

Until this intimation has been given, society does not venture to
intrude upon the seclusion of those in mourning.

Relations and intimate friends are exempt from this received rule.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Funerals.=--When a death occurs in a family, as soon as the day and
hour for the funeral are fixed, a member of the family should write to
those relatives and friends it is desired should follow, and should ask
them to attend, unless the date, time, and place of the funeral, and the
train by which to travel to the cemetery, are mentioned in the
newspaper, together with the announcement of the death.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is a Mistake to suppose that Friends= will offer to attend a
funeral, even if they are aware of the date fixed, as they are naturally
in doubt as to whether the mourners are to include the members of the
family only, or whether friends are to be included also.

       *       *       *       *       *

=In the Country, when a Doctor= has attended a family for some years,
it is usual to invite him to attend the funeral of one of its members.
In town this is seldom done, unless a medical man is the intimate friend
of the family.

In the country the clergyman of the parish reads the funeral service,
but in town, when the funeral takes place at Kensal Green, Brookwood
Cemetery, or elsewhere, a friend of the family is usually asked to
officiate; in which case it is necessary to make an early application
at the office of the cemetery for the use of the chapel at a
particular hour.

       *       *       *       *       *

=It is customary for Ladies to attend= the funeral of a relative if
disposed to do so, in which case they wear their usual mourning attire,
and follow in their own carriages.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Doctor's Certificate= as to the cause of death is of primary
importance, and should be obtained at the earliest possible moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Memorial Cards should not be sent= on the death of a relative, being
quite out of date as regards fashion and custom.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Wreaths and Crosses= of white flowers are very generally sent by
relatives and friends to a house of mourning the day of the funeral,
unless "No flowers, by request" follows the announcement of the death.

When the funeral takes place before two o'clock, the friends should be
invited to luncheon. When it takes place in the afternoon, they should
be asked to return to the house for tea or light refreshment.




CHAPTER XLIII

ENGAGED


It greatly depends upon the views held by parents as to the freedom of
action accorded to a daughter during her engagement. Some entertain the
strictest ideas on this head, and strenuously put them in force.

By "strict ideas" is meant that an engaged couple, except in the
presence of a chaperon, are never, under any circumstances, permitted to
enjoy a _tête-à-tête_, sit together, walk together, ride together, or
meet during any part of the day.

Wisdom and common-sense dictate a middle course of action for the
consideration of parents, neither granting too much nor withholding
too much.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The length of an engagement= determines in most instances the degree of
latitude allowed. If it is to last two months, or even less, it is usual
to permit the engaged couple to be much in each other's society. The
circumstances under which this is accomplished depend upon the position
of the parents; if wealthy, and a country house is part of their
possessions, the young lady's father should invite the gentleman engaged
to his daughter on a visit, or one or two visits, during the engagement.

Or the mother of the bridegroom-elect should invite her future
daughter-in-law to stay with her for ten days or a fortnight.

Etiquette prescribes that a young lady must be chaperoned by one of her
near relatives at all public places of amusement.

If an engaged couple move in the same set, they meet frequently at the
houses of mutual friends; they are sent in to dinner together when
dining out.

To dance with each other at a ball, or dance more than three or four
times in succession, and when not dancing to sit out in tea-rooms and
conservatories, renders an engaged couple conspicuous, and this is
precisely what many mothers are most anxious that their daughters should
avoid being, and would rather that they were over-prudent than that they
should run the gauntlet of general criticism.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The usual course for engaged couples= to take is to go as little into
society as possible during their engagement, and to make the engagement
as brief as circumstances will permit. If from various causes it must of
necessity be a long one, the only alternative for an engaged couple is
to render themselves as little conspicuous in general society as a
mutual understanding will permit.

       *       *       *       *       *

=When an engagement is first announced=, if the families are not
previously acquainted, the father, mother, and relatives of the
bridegroom-elect should call on the father and mother of the bride-elect
at an early date, to make the acquaintance of the bride and her family,
and they should write to the bride-elect expressing their approval of
the engagement.

The calls should be returned and the letters answered with the least
possible delay.

The engagement should be announced to relatives and intimate friends by
the mother of the engaged young lady, and if the announcement is to
appear in the papers it should be sent by her.

The bride should ask the sisters and cousins of the bridegroom to act as
bridesmaids in conjunction with her own sisters and cousins.

When an engagement is broken off, all letters and presents should be
returned on both sides.

All wedding presents received by the bride-elect should be likewise
returned to the donors.

The mother of the bride should announce to all whom it may concern, the
fact that the engagement is at an end.




CHAPTER XLIV

SILVER WEDDINGS


The German custom of celebrating Silver Weddings has become thoroughly
recognised in this country. It is an interesting custom to celebrate the
first twenty-five years of married life under the poetic title of a
Silver Wedding, but those who can do so must be for many reasons the
few, rather than the many; Royal personages, and distinguished and
prominent ones for instance, and again, those in humbler walks of life
"far from the madding crowd," are also inclined to do so; but the
"crowd" that divides them, formed of different classes and different
sets in society, will hardly avail itself of the opportunity of
celebrating this period of married life. Husbands as a rule dislike the
fuss and parade and prominency it entails, and wives are disinclined to
announce to their friends and acquaintances that they have been married
five and twenty years, and are consequently not so young as they were.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The entertainments given to celebrate a Silver Wedding= are: An
afternoon reception and a dinner-party. A dinner-party followed by an
evening-party. A dinner-party followed by a dance. Or a dinner-party
only, of some twenty or thirty covers.

The invitations are issued on "at home" cards some three weeks
beforehand, the cards being printed in silver, and the words "Mr. and
Mrs. White at home, To celebrate their Silver Wedding" printed on them,
with day and date, etc. The dinner cards should also be printed in
silver, with the words "Mr. and Mrs. White request the pleasure of
Mr. and Mrs. Black's company at dinner to celebrate their Silver
Wedding," etc.

For a dance the invitations should be worded "Mr. and Mrs. White at
home, To celebrate their Silver Wedding." "Dancing" printed in the
corner of the card.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Each person invited= is expected to send a present in silver, costly
or trifling as the case may be, whether the invitation is accepted or
not. These presents should be exhibited in the drawing-room on the day
of the Silver Wedding with a card attached to each bearing the name of
the giver.

At the afternoon reception the husband and wife receive the
congratulations of their friends as they arrive. They enter the tea-room
together almost immediately afterwards followed by those guests who have
arrived. Refreshments are served as at an afternoon wedding tea. (See
page 143) A large wedding-cake is placed in the centre of the table,
and the wife makes the first cut in it as a bride would do. The health
of the husband and wife is then proposed by one of the guests, drunk in
champagne, and responded to by the husband.

At the dinner-party the husband and wife go in to dinner together,
followed by their guests, who are sent in according to precedency.
The health of the husband and wife is proposed at dessert and responded
to. A wedding-cake occupies a prominent place on the table, and
the dinner-table decorations consist of white flowers interspersed
with silver.

       *       *       *       *       *

=At the Silver Wedding dance=, the husband and wife dance the first
dance together, and subsequently lead the way into the supper-room
arm-in-arm, and later on their health is proposed by the principal guest
present.

The wife should wear white and silver, or grey and silver.

In the country, when a Silver Wedding is celebrated, the festivities
sometimes range over three days, but this only in the case of prominent
and wealthy people; balls, dinners, and school-treats being given, in
which the neighbours, tenants, villagers and servants take part.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Golden Weddings.=--The celebration of a Golden Wedding is rather an
English custom, and one that from circumstances can be but seldom
observed. It denotes that fifty years of married life have passed over
the heads of husband and wife, and is a solemn rather than a festive
epoch. Presents on this occasion are not so generally given, and
children and grandchildren rather than acquaintances make up the circle
of those who offer congratulations.




CHAPTER XLV

SUBSCRIPTION DANCES


=Subscription= dances are now an established fact, but whether they will
ever really become a rival to the dance proper remains to be seen; yet
as they supply a want felt, and are recognised by society, the
arrangements necessary for carrying them out should be duly noted.

During the winter months they are a feature in certain sets:
Subscription dances, private Subscription dances and public Subscription
dances, the latter got up for charitable purposes.

The moderate expenses incurred by giving private Subscription dances
commend them to many, and there are other reasons to account for their
popularity. They are without pretension to being considered smart or
exclusive, and are essentially small and early dances. Fashionable
ball-goers are not expected to attend them. They commence at 9 o'clock
and terminate at 12, light refreshments in lieu of supper are provided,
as at an afternoon "at home." (See p. 153.) A piano band is considered
sufficient for the purpose, and floral decorations are scarcely ever
attempted. The invitations are issued on "at home" cards, with the words
"Subscription Dance" printed in one corner.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Subscription dances= are sometimes invitation dances and sometimes not.
Tickets for these dances are charged for singly or by the series as the
case may be. A certain number of ladies form a committee and agree to
give a certain number of dances, and the expenses are either borne by
the ladies themselves or covered by the sale of the tickets. If
invitation dances, a certain number of invitations are allotted to each
lady. When otherwise, the ladies dispose of the tickets among their
friends. These dances are usually held in a mansion hired for the
purpose, and there are several available in different parts of the West
End, where spacious rooms can be hired on very moderate terms; in some
instances a piano, seats, and other accessories are also included.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Public Subscription= dances are held in public rooms or Town Halls, and
vouchers are given by ladies on the committee previous to tickets being
granted.

The same etiquette holds good at Subscription dances as at other public
dances. The early hour at which these dances take place recommends them
to some and altogether renders them impossible to others, notably to
those who dine late, and who are not inclined to dance at nine o'clock
or even at ten o'clock, and who rather resent the frugal style of
refreshments offered, and consider that a champagne supper is an
indispensable adjunct to a dance.

It should be remembered that Subscription dances were first originated
for the amusement of very young people, and it was never expected that
they would compete with the fashionable small dances of the day; their
popularity was a surprise, and if ball-goers are disposed to hold them
in contempt there are others less fashionable and less wealthy who find
them very much to their taste.

The great difficulty, however, that ladies have to contend with is the
fact that very few men can be induced to attend them, and that those who
do accept invitations or purchase tickets are very young men, who have
their way to make in the world, and are as yet on the lower rungs of
the ladder, and as young ladies are very much in the majority at these
Subscription dances, to dance with partners younger than themselves is
an almost inevitable result for those who are no longer in their teens.




CHAPTER XLVI

GIVING PRESENTS


As regards presents in general it should be understood that a present
demands a note of thanks in all cases when the thanks cannot be verbally
expressed. The notes to slight acquaintances should be written in the
third person. To friends, in the first person. This applies equally to
presents of game, poultry, fruit, or flowers. Some few people entertain
the erroneous idea that presents of this nature do not require thanks.
This is not only ungracious but raises a doubt in the mind of the giver
as to whether the present sent has been duly received.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Wedding Presents.=--When an engagement has been duly announced to
relatives and friends, and it is understood that it is to be a short
one, wedding presents may be sent until the day before the wedding-day,
and the earlier they are sent the more convenient it is for the bride,
as she is expected to write a note of thanks to each giver. In each case
a letter should be sent with the present expressing the congratulations
and best wishes of the donor, and, if possible, a card with the name of
the giver should be attached to it for identification when the presents
are exhibited.

The friends of the bridegroom, and unacquainted with the bride, should
send their presents to him, and he should send them to the house of the
bride's mother after having written notes of thanks to the givers.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Christening Presents.=--With regard to christening presents the
godfathers and godmothers are expected to make presents to their
godchild; these should be sent the day before the christening, and
should consist of a silver mug and silver fork and spoon from the
godfathers, while a lace robe or handsome cloak are usual presents from
the godmothers. A present of money from 5s. to £1 should be made to the
nurse on the day of the christening when the godparents are relatives,
but oftener than not the sponsors are represented by proxy.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Giving Tips to Servants.=--The tips expected from ladies at the
conclusion of a visit of some days, are: To the head housemaid from 2s.
6d. to 5s. according to the length of the visit. The same to the butler
or single-handed man servant, and the same to the chauffeur. Young
ladies give less when visiting by themselves.

The tips expected from gentlemen are: To the butler or footman who
valets them, to the chauffeur if he drives them to and from the station,
to the groom if he takes charge of their hunters, also to the head
housemaid. The tip to the butler or footman who acts as valet is for a
long visit from 5s. to 10s., and for a short visit from 3s. to 5s. To
the chauffeur 5s. in the first case, and from 2s. 6d. to 5s. in the
second. To the housemaid, 2s. 6d. to 5s. For tips to gamekeeper, see p.
223.

The tips given to hotel servants vary according to the length of the
visit. To the head waiter from 5s. to 10s. To the second waiter from 2s.
6d. to 5s. To the hall porter, 2s. to 3s. To the luggage porter, 1s. to
2s. To the head housemaid in attendance, 2s. 6d. to 4s.




CHAPTER XLVII

CHRISTENING PARTIES


=Christening Parties= may be said to be strictly family gatherings, only
the near relatives of the parents being invited on these occasions.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Invitations= are given in friendly notes, and are not issued on "at
home" cards. The notice averages from a week to ten days according to
circumstances, meaning the health and strength of the infant's mother.

       *       *       *       *       *

=As a Rule Six Weeks= are allowed to elapse between the birth of the
child and the date of the christening.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Relatives are either invited= to luncheon after the ceremony, or to
a reception tea, or to a dinner-party to be given the same evening. If a
luncheon is decided upon it generally takes place at 1.30, or earlier,
immediately on the return from the church. The meal usually consists of
hot viands--game or poultry--not substantial joints. Hot and cold
sweets. Fruit to follow. A smart christening cake should occupy the
centre of the table. Champagne, claret, and sherry are given, although
the former is probably the only one of the three drunk on the occasion;
this, when the health of the infant is proposed--the only health which
finds acceptance at these gatherings.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Guests go in to Luncheon= quite informally, the ladies and hostess
entering first, followed by the men guests and the host. They should be
seated at table by the help of name cards, each lady being placed at the
right hand of a gentleman. The clergyman who performs the ceremony, if a
friend, should sit at the hostess's left hand, and should be asked to
say grace; but in town he seldom joins these family gatherings unless
well acquainted with his parishioners.

       *       *       *       *       *

=A Reception Tea=, when given, is served in the dining-room; but in this
case the guests are received on arrival by the hostess in the
drawing-room, and when all have arrived, she accompanies them to the
tea-room and remains there with them. The maid-servants should pour out
and hand the tea and coffee across the tea-table, but the hostess should
hand the cakes, etc., to her relatives, assisted by the host, if
present. The refreshments consist of the usual variety in confectionery
seen at all smart "at homes," a christening cake being the addition.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Christening Dinner-Parties= closely resemble all other family functions
of this nature, with the exception that the infant's health is drunk at
dessert, and that a christening cake is placed opposite the hostess when
the table is cleared for dessert.

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Christening Ceremony= takes place in the afternoon, usually at
2.30. The relatives on arrival at the church seat themselves in pews or
on chairs near to the font. The godmother holds the infant during the
first part of the service, and then places it on the left arm of the
officiating clergyman. One of the godfathers should name the child in
response to the clergyman's question. If the child is a girl, two
godmothers and one godfather are necessary. If a boy, two godfathers and
one godmother are required. These godparents are usually the intimate
friends of the child's mother. In certain instances the relatives are
chosen for the office of godfather and godmother, but oftener not for
family reasons.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Christening Presents= vary according to means and inclination, and
often comprise gifts of jewellery when the infant is a girl, and money
and silver plate if a boy; silver spoons, forks, mugs, bowls, etc. The
selection is a wide one, and nothing comes amiss, from a robe with fine
lace to a chain and pendant or a jewelled watch. These presents are
usually sent the day previous to that of the christening.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Fees and Tips.=--Only minor fees are given to those assisting at the
ceremony. The officiating priest receives some little gift in old silver
or china, but not of money; if, however, the parents of the child are
wealthy a cheque is sometimes given with a request that he will devote
it to the needs of his parish.

Tips to the nurse from the child's godparents vary from five shillings
to a sovereign according to individual means.




INDEX


  AFTERNOON "at homes," 151

  Afternoon dances, 157

  Afternoon tea, 42

  Afternoon weddings, 28

  Amusements at children's parties, 192;
    at country-house parties, 215;
    at garden-parties, 169

  "At home" days, 159;
    "at homes," 151, 238


  BACHELORS' Balls, 87

  Balls, 87;
    patronesses of, 239

  Best man, duties of, 131

  Bowing, 206

  Breakfasts, 183

  Bridal wreath, 141

  Bride, 131, 133, 140

  Bridegroom's relatives, 133

  Bridegroom's responsibilities, 130, 141, 146, 149

  Bridesmaids, 132;
    presents to, 147

  Bride's relatives, 132

  Bridge parties, 125, 158;
    refreshments at, 126;
    teas, 158


  CALLS, paying, 32;
    after entertainments, 113

  Canoe parties, 189

  Cards, gentlemen's, 27;
    ladies, 19;
    memorial, 31;
    "P.P.C.," 26

  Cards, leaving, 19;
    after entertainments, 24, 28;
    on new-comers, 25;
    returning, 23;
    routine of leaving, 21, 28;
    "to inquire," 26

  Chaperons, 228

  Charity Balls, 93

  Christening luncheons and teas, 262;
    parties, 261;
    presents, 260, 263

  Clergy, how to address, 59

  Cockades, 209

  Colonial etiquette, 161

  County Balls, 93

  Country dinner-parties, 114

  Country-house visits, 211

  Court, attending, 73;
    presentation at, 73

  Court dress for gentlemen, 85;
    for ladies, 80

  Cricket matches, 168


  DANCES, invitation, 256;
    public, 257

  Débutantes, 228

  _Dîner à la Russe_, 106

  Dining out, 100

  Dinner guests, 101

  Dinner invitations, 99

  Dinner-table decorations, 107;
    etiquette, 108, 116

  Drawing-room, retiring to, 111

  Drawing-rooms at Viceregal Court, Dublin, 229

  Driving, 203


  ENGAGEMENTS, 250;
    etiquette of, 251;
    presents, 147

  _Entrée_ at Court, 77

  Etiquette, 1;
    at balls, 91;
    at dinner-table, 108, 116;
    colonial, 161;
    Indian, 164;
    in regard to royalty, 61;
    of visiting at bachelors' houses, 217;
    when travelling abroad, 65

  Evening parties, 122;
    garden-parties, 174


  FOREIGNERS of rank, how to address, 57

  Funerals, 248

  Funeral wreaths, 249


  GAMEKEEPERS, tips to, 223

  Game licence, 224

  Garden-parties, 166;
    in the evening, 174;
    in town, 171

  Giving presents, 259

  Going in to luncheon, 180;
    to supper, 123, 126

  Golden weddings, 255

  Gratuities to servants, 97, 113, 156, 223, 260, 263


  HONEYMOON, 141

  Hostesses, 234

  Hunt Balls, 87, 95

  Hunt breakfasts, 221

  Hunting, 219


  INDIAN etiquette, 164

  Introductions, 6;
    correct formula for, 8;
    at afternoon calls, 17;
    at country-house parties, 11;
    at dinner-parties, 9;
    at evening parties, 123;
    at Public Balls, 12, 90

  Invitations, 96, 122, 125, 152, 167, 177, 194


  JUVENILE parties, 190


  LADIES in the hunting-field, 219

  Levée dress, 85

  Levées, 82;
    at Viceregal Court, Dublin, 232;
    presentations at, 84;
    who may attend, 83

  Licences, marriage, 128

  Luncheons, 176


  MARRIAGE by banns, 128;
    by licence, 128, 148;
    fees, 129, 148

  Memorial cards, 249

  Menus, 106, 139

  Military Balls, 87, 95

  Mourning, 242;
    Court, 242


  "NOT at home," 41


  OFFICERS, how to address, 59

  Opening a ball, 90


  PATRONESSES of Public Balls, 239

  Pheasant shooting, 222

  Picnics, 186

  Plumes in Court dress, 81

  Politeness, graces of, 4

  Precedency amongst royalty, 44, 50;
    at ball suppers, 91;
    at dinner-parties, 49, 105;
    of ambassadors and diplomats, 45;
    of army and navy, 45;
    of baronets and knights, 45, 51;
    of bishops, 51;
    of clergy, 45, 48;
    of esquires, 48;
    of ladies, 52;
    of legal profession, 45, 48;
    of peers, 50;
    of widows, 46

  Presentation at Court, 73;
    at foreign Courts, 65;
    at levées, 82;
    at Viceregal Court, Dublin, 229

  Presents, christening, 260;
    giving, 259;
    wedding, 130, 141, 259

  Public Balls, 87


  RECEIVING guests, 101, 123, 154, 234

  Refreshments for "at homes," 153;
    at bridge parties, 126;
    at children's parties, 194

  Refusing invitations, 200

  Responsibilities of patronesses, 239

  Riding, 204

  Royal guests present, 90, 123

  Royalty, how to address, 53


  SAYING grace, 114

  Sending in to dinner, 103

  Shaking hands, 225

  Shooting, 219

  Signing the register, 134

  Silver weddings, 253

  State Balls, 97

  State mourning, 97

  Subscription dances, 256

  Supper, going in to, 123

  Surnames of peculiar pronunciation, 69


  TEA for afternoon callers, 42

  Titles, how to use in speaking, 53

  Town garden-parties, 171

  Trousseau, 141


  UNDESIRED introductions, 6


  WALKING, 202

  Water parties, 188

  Wedding cake, 137, 142;
    cards, 142;
    etiquette, 129;
    expenses, 146;
    favours, 134;
    fees, 129, 148;
    golden, 255;
    invitations, 129;
    luncheon, 137;
    of widow, 134;
    presents, 130, 141, 259;
    receptions, 136, 143;
    ring, 130;
    service, 131;
    silver, 253

  Widow's wedding, 134

  Writing invitations, 195


THE END




Transcriber's Notes:


Passages in italics are indicated by _underscore_.

Passages in bold style are indicated by =bold=.

Currency symbols such as £, d., and s. are italicised in the original
text, this format has been removed in the current text version for a
smoother reading experience.

C[=o]burn (page 70) and P[=y]tch'ley (page 71) have diacritical marks.
They are marked as [=o] which represents a marcron (straight line) above
the o and [=y] which represents a macron above the y.

The following words have been retained in both versions:

  table-cloth and tablecloth
  out-door and outdoor
  solemnized and solemnised

The following misprints have been corrected:

  changed "AT THE VICE-REGAL COURT," into "AT THE VICEREGAL COURT,"
          page viii
  changed "refusal, and the profered" into "refusal, and the proffered"
          page 8
  changed "by a manservant or" into "by a man-servant or" page 21
  changed "to the manservant silently," into "to the man-servant
          silently," page 22
  changed "Villiers" into Villiers." page 72
  changed "a tablespoon for soup," into "a table-spoon for soup,"
          page 108
  changed "a box of bonbons," into "a box of bon-bons," page 125
  changed "chickens, game, mayonaises," into "chickens, game,
          mayonnaises," page 139
  changed "at dinner-table, 80, 116;" into "at dinner-table, 108,
          116;" page 266
  changed "Levées, 82," into "Levées, 82;" page 266

Other than the corrections listed above, printer's inconsistencies
in spelling, punctuation, hyphenation, and ligature usage have
been retained.




