produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive.)









  CHINA AND POTTERY MARKS


  GILMAN COLLAMORE & CO. INC.


  15 EAST 56th STREET
  NEW YORK




_Traditions and Old China_

_Copyright, 1920, Gilman Collamore & Company, Inc._




_Traditions and Old China_


From early days when the ancients showed their appreciation of fine
pottery and old glassware by burying "these most esteemed possessions"
with the dead, fine china has been synonymous with culture and breeding.
With our ancestors for generations we share the tradition that, just as
first editions give prestige to one's book shelves, old china or the
finest work of the modern kilns express readily that good taste and
discrimination that is characteristic of our old families.

A wealth of association and historic data is to be acquired from the study
of the "fabrique marks" and periods of the master craftsmen. If in America
there was a general tendency toward acquiring, even a smattering, of this
knowledge, there would be less of these drawing-room atrocities which
Arthur Hayden in his "Chats on English Earthenware" points out, "To have a
modern set of vases adorning a Georgian cabinet is like putting new wine
in old bottles."

For the convenience of the seasoned collector, as well as the beginner,
in this book is a representative list of better known marks by which china
can be identified. While it is not possible to include a complete list,
particularly those of extremely rare specimens, those compiled have
particular reference to the marks of English china which is greatly in
demand by collectors. These will suffice to enable the reader to identify
pieces whenever encountered.

The signatures or mark which the master craftsmen in earth or clay signed
their products, just as a painter signs his work, were often specially
designed devices of various kinds, often a combination of initials and
dates. Each "fabrique mark" stands for a certain potter's art just as the
modern trade-mark.

Beginning more than a half century ago in the old La Farge House in lower
Broadway (where John La Farge was born) the house of Gilman Collamore and
Company has done much to develop an appreciation of fine china in America.
It was one of the first houses to bring over from England and France
china, both modern and old, for its American clients. At this time many
fine specimens of old china are on view as well as complete stocks from
the modern English and Continental manufacture.

  GILMAN COLLAMORE & COMPANY, INC.
    15 EAST 56TH STREET
      NEW YORK




Germany and Austria


[Illustration]

DRESDEN

MEISSEN. Established in 1709. Mark used to 1712, in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

Mark used from 1712 to 1720, in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

About 1720, mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

1730, mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

1796. MARCOLINI (Director) PERIOD. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

Royal pieces only. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DRESDEN

Present mark. This mark with two scratches across it shows imperfect
pieces which may or may not have been decorated in the factory. Hard
paste.

[Illustration]

VIENNA

Established in 1718. This mark first used in 1744. Hard paste.

Royal factory discontinued in 1864.

[Illustration]

BERLIN

Established in 1751. Wegeleys' mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

BERLIN

In 1763 became a royal establishment. Mark in blue. Sometimes an eagle
added.

[Illustration]

BERLIN

Different kind of sceptre. In blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

BERLIN

An extra mark used in 1830 with the sceptre, which is the present mark.
This mark complete is never used except with perfect pieces decorated in
the factory. Decorated pieces bearing the blue sceptre mark only are
decorated outside of the factory.

[Illustration]

HOCHST, near MAYENCE

Founded in 1720. This mark, used about 1740, in gold, red, or blue. Hard
paste.

[Illustration]

HOCHST, near MAYENCE

Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

1755 to 1761. First period. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

1799, second period. Carl Theodore. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

Phillipp Hanong (Director). Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

Joseph Adam Hanong (Director). Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

John Hanong (Director). Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANKENTHAL

1800. Franz Bartolo (Director). Hard paste.

[Illustration]

NYMPHENBURG

Established in 1747. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

NYMPHENBURG

Hard paste.

[Illustration]

NYMPHENBURG

An early mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FURSTENBURG

Established in 1750. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FURSTENBURG

1758. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LUDWIGSBURG or KRONENBURG

Established in 1758 to 1806. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LUDWIGSBURG

First period. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LUDWIGSBURG

Second period. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LUDWIGSBURG

Hard paste. Mark in blue.

[Illustration]

FULDA

Established in 1763 to 1780. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FULDA

Hard paste. The arms of Fulda.

[Illustration]

RUDOLSTADT

Established in 1758. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

RAUENSTEIN

Established in 1760. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LIMBACH

Established about 1761. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LIMBACH

Another mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LIMBACH

Another mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

GROSBREITENBACH

Established about 1770. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

GROSBREITENBACH

Hard paste.

[Illustration]

VOLKSTEDT

Established 1762. C. V. sometimes added with the arms. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

VOLKSTEDT

Another mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

VOLKSTEDT

Another mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ANSPACH

Established about 1718. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ANSPACH

Generally accompanied by letter A. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ANSPACH

Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ANSPACH

Hard paste.

[Illustration]

GOTHA

Founded in 1780. Hard paste. Various marks.

[Illustration]

GERA

Established about 1780. Marks in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ALT HALDENSTEBEN

The factory of M. Nathusins. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

CHARLOTTENBURG

Established in 1790. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

BADEN-BADEN

Established in 1753 to 1788. The edge of the ax in gold. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

COLOGNE

Factory of M. L. Cremer. Enameled Fayence.

[Illustration]

POPPLESDORF, near BONN

Fayence and porcelain.

[Illustration]

STRASBOURG

Established about 1752. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

NIDERVILLER

Established in 1768. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ELBOGEN in BOHEMIA

Established in 1815. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

SCHLAKENWALD

Established about 1800. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

LEHAMMER or PIRKENHAMMER, near CARLSBAD

Founded in 1802. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

HEREND

Established 1839.

[Illustration]

HEREND

Another mark.




Russia and Poland


[Illustration]

KORZEC

Established about 1803. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

Moscow

Established in 1787. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ST. PETERSBURG

Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ST. PETERSBURG

Mark of Empress Catherine II. 1762 to 1796. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ST. PETERSBURG

Monogram of Nicholas I. 1825 to 1855.

[Illustration]

ST. PETERSBURG

Established 1744. Mark in blue.




Denmark


[Illustration]

COPENHAGEN

Established in 1772. Mark in blue. Hard paste.




Holland and Belgium


[Illustration]

AMSTERDAM

Established in 1782. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

AMSTERDAM

Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

AMSTERDAM

Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

TOURNEY

Mark in gold represents a potter's kiln. Established in 1750. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

TOURNEY

Mark in gold used after 1755. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

TOURNEY

Used about 1755. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

HAGUE

Factory established about 1775; ceased in 1785. Mark in gray. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

DELFT

Joost Thooft and Labouchere. Present mark Fayence.




Switzerland


[Illustration]

NYON

Established in 1790. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

ZURICH

Established about 1759. Mark in blue. Hard paste.




Italy and Spain


[Illustration]

NOVE

1752. Mark in blue or red. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

VENICE

Mark in red. Majolica.

[Illustration]

VENICE

Soft paste.

[Illustration]

VENICE

1720 to 1740. Soft paste. Mark in red.

[Illustration]

VENICE

Soft paste. Mark in red.

[Illustration]

TURIN

Vineuf. Established about 1770. Dr. Gioanetti (Director). Soft paste.

[Illustration]

TURIN

Vineuf. Another mark. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

DOCCIA

Founded in 1735. Hard and soft paste.

[Illustration]

DOCCIA

Hard and soft paste. Another mark.

[Illustration]

DOCCIA

Hard and soft paste. Another mark.

[Illustration]

CAPO DI MONTE

Founded in 1736. This mark used from 1759. Factory abandoned in 1821. Soft
paste.

[Illustration]

CAPO DI MONTE

Mark used from 1759. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

CAPO DI MONTE

Soft paste. Other marks.

[Illustration]

MILAN

Mark in blue. Fayence.

[Illustration]

MADRID

BUEN RETIRO. Monogram of Charles III. Established in 1759 to 1812. Soft
paste.

[Illustration]

MADRID

Soft paste. Another mark.

[Illustration]

MADRID

Mark in blue. First quality. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

MADRID

Mark in blue. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

MADRID

Mark in blue. Mark under crown is another form of the monogram of Charles
III., the founder.

[Illustration]

OPORTO

Established about 1790. Hard paste. Mark in gold or colors.




England


[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established in 1769. This mark both stamped and printed.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

WEDGWOOD, present mark on decorated china.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established about 1756.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established about 1780.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Imitations of WEDGWOOD.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established in 1730.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established 1790.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established in 1793 by Mr. John Davenport.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established about 1770, by Josiah Spode.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Copeland successor of Spode in 1833.

[Illustration]

LIVERPOOL

Established in 1750.

[Illustration]

LIVERPOOL

Established in 1756.

[Illustration]

LIVERPOOL

Established in 1790.

[Illustration]

LIVERPOOL

This mark was used from 1822 to 1833.

[Illustration]

PLYMOUTH

Established 1760. William Cookworthy.

[Illustration]

YARMOUTH

Absolon, only a decorator.

[Illustration]

SWANSEA

Established 1790. This mark used about 1815.

[Illustration]

SWANSEA

Mark in red.

[Illustration]

WALES

Established about 1813. Mark in red.

[Illustration]

LEEDS

Hartley Greens & Co. Established about 1770.

[Illustration]

BRISTOL

Established about 1770, by Richard Champion.

[Illustration]

BRISTOL

[Illustration]

BRISTOL

Ceased in 1777.

[Illustration]

BOW

Established about 1730. Ceased in 1775.

[Illustration]

BOW

[Illustration]

BOW

[Illustration]

CHELSEA

The oldest mark. About 1747.

[Illustration]

CHELSEA

Mark in red.

[Illustration]

CHELSEA

First quality mark in gold.

[Illustration]

DERBY

Established 1751. This mark used before 1769.

[Illustration]

DERBY-CHELSEA

This mark in gold 1773.

[Illustration]

CROWN DERBY

Mark in blue used about 1780.

[Illustration]

DERBY

Mark used in 1830. Bloor (Director).

[Illustration]

DERBY

Mark used in 1830. Bloor (Director).

[Illustration]

DERBY

Mark used in 1860.

[Illustration]

ROYAL CROWN DERBY

Present mark.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Established 1751. Oldest mark.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Mark imitation of Dresden.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Generally on Chinese patterns.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

About 1751.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Used 1783 to 1788.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Used 1807 to 1813.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Used 1857 to 1862.

[Illustration]

WORCESTER

Present mark.

[Illustration]

CAUGHLEY. SHROPSHIRE

Established about 1751.

[Illustration]

CAUGHLEY. SHROPSHIRE

An early mark in blue.

[Illustration]

COALPORT

Established between 1780 and 1790.

[Illustration]

COALPORT

[Illustration]

COALPORT

Present mark.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Established in 1791 by Mr. Thomas Minton.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Present mark.

[Illustration]

LAMBETH and BURSLEM

Doulton & Co.

[Illustration]

STAFFORDSHIRE

Brown-Westhead, Moore & Co.




France


[Illustration]

ST. CLOUD

Established about 1695. Factory destroyed by fire in 1773; not rebuilt.
Soft paste.

[Illustration]

ST. CLOUD

This mark used from 1730 to 1762. Either in blue or graved in ware. The
letter T stands for Tron, the name of the director. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

CHANTILLY

Established in 1735. Mark in blue or red. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

ARRAS

Established in 1782. Mark in blue. Factory ceased in 1786. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

MENECY

Established in 1735. This mark is usually impressed; sometimes traced in
blue. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

ETIOLLES, near CORBEIL

Established in 1768. Monnier, manufacturer. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

BOURG LA REINE

Established in 1773. Jacques & Jullien. Soft paste.

[Illustration]

SCEAUX-PENTHIEVRE, near PARIS

Established in 1750 by Jacques Capelle. These letters are engraved on the
soft clay.

[Illustration]

SCEAUX-PENTHIEVRE, near PARIS

The latter mark in blue. This mark occurs more frequently on Fayence.

[Illustration]

CLINGNANCOURT

Established in 1775 by Pierre Deruelle. Mark in blue. Soft and hard paste.

[Illustration]

CLINGNANCOURT

Used on pieces of Chinese style. Mark in red. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

CLINGNANCOURT

Mark of Monsieur Comte de Provence.

[Illustration]

ORLEANS

Established in 1753 by M. Gerré. Hard and soft paste.

[Illustration]

ORLEANS

This mark used from 1808 to 1871, in blue or gold.

[Illustration]

SARREGUEMINES

Soft paste.

[Illustration]

SARREGUEMINES

Soft paste and Fayence.

[Illustration]

VINCENNES

Soft paste. Established in 1786.

[Illustration]

VINCENNES

Soft paste. Another mark.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE FONTAINE AU ROY

Established in 1773 by Jean Baptiste Locré. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. FAUBOURG ST. LAZARE

Founded in 1773. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. FAUBOURG ST. ANTOINE

Established in 1773. Morelle, manufacturer. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DE LA ROQUETTE

Established in 1773. Souroux, manufacturer. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. GROS CAILLON

Established in 1773 by Advenir Lamarre. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DE CLICHY

Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

FRANCE

A mark found on biscuit groups. Factory unknown.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE THIROUX

Established in 1778. André Marie Lebeuf, manufacturer. Under the
protection of Marie Antoinette. Mark in red. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DE BONDY

Established in 1780. Dihl and Guerhard, manufacturers. Under the patronage
of Duc d'Angoulême. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DE BONDY

Another mark. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DU FAUBOURG ST. DENIS

Established in 1769. Under the protection of Charles Philippe Comte
d'Artois, afterward Charles X. Factory discontinued in 1810.

[Illustration]

BELLEVILLE

Established in 1790 by Jacob Petit. Mark in blue. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS. RUE DE BONDY

Hard paste. Mark in blue.

[Illustration]

ROUEN

Under the reign of Louis XV. Fayence.

[Illustration]

LILLE

Established in 1784 by Leperre Durot. Mark in red. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS

M. Nast, manufacturer. Mark in red. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

PARIS

Halley, manufacturer. First Empire mark in gold. Hard paste.

[Illustration]

NANCY

Emile Gallé, manufacturer. Fayence and glass.




Sevres

Established at Vincennes in 1740.

Removed from there to Sevres in 1756.

King Louis XV. became sole proprietor in 1760.

Soft paste was made until 1805. Since then only hard paste.


The Sevres Marks

FIRST ROYAL EPOCH

1745 to 1792

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: VINCENNES.

The letter A denotes the year 1753, continued to 1777. (Louis XV.)]

[Illustration: SEVRES.

Ornamented LL's. Date 1764.]

[Illustration: SEVRES. Date 1778. (Louis XVI).

Double letters continued to 1793.]


FIRST REPUBLICAN EPOCH

1792 to 1804

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: 1792 to 1799.]

[Illustration: 1801 to 1804.]


FIRST IMPERIAL EPOCH.

1804 TO 1814.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON. 1804 to 1809.]

[Illustration: NAPOLEON. 1809 to 1814.]


SECOND ROYAL EPOCH.

1814 TO 1848.

[Illustration: Louis XVIII 1814 to 1823.]

[Illustration: Charles X. 1824 to 1829.]

[Illustration: Charles X. 1829 and 1830.]

[Illustration: Charles X. 1830.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Louis Philippe. 1831 to 1834.]

[Illustration: Louis Philippe. 1834-1835.]

[Illustration: On services for the Palaces.]

[Illustration: Louis Philippe. 1845-1848.]

[Illustration: After 1848, this mark in green was used for white
porcelain.]


SECOND REPUBLICAN EPOCH

1848 TO 1851.

[Illustration: The S stands for Sèvres, and 51 for 1851.]


SECOND IMPERIAL EPOCH.

1852 TO 1872.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Napoleon III. From 1852.]

[Illustration: This mark used for white pieces; when scratched it denotes
issue undecorated.]

[Illustration: The marks used at the present time.]


Unknown Marks

[Illustration]


Chronological Table

Used in the Manufactory of Sevres

  A (Vincennes) 1753
  B (ditto)     1754
  C (ditto)     1755
  D             1756
  E             1757
  F             1758
  G             1759
  H             1760
  I             1761
  J             1762
  K             1763
  L             1764
  M             1765
  N             1766
  O             1767
  P             1768
  Q          [1]1769
  R             1770
  S             1771
  T             1772
  U             1773
  V             1774
  X             1775
  Y             1776
  Z             1777
  AA            1778
  BB            1779
  CC            1780
  DD            1781
  EE            1782
  FF            1783
  GG            1784
  HH            1785
  II            1786
  JJ            1787
  KK            1788
  LL            1789
  MM            1790
  NN            1791
  OO            1792
  PP            1793
  QQ            1794
  RR            1795

    [1] This comet was sometimes substituted for the ordinary mark of the
    letter Q.

    [Illustration]

  Year IX       1801     T9
    "   X       1802      X
    "   XI      1803     11
    "  XII      1804     [Illustration]
    " XIII      1805     [Illustration]
    "  XIV      1806     [Illustration]


  1807                    7
  1808                    8
  1809                    9
  1810                   10
  1811    (onze)        o.z.
  1812    (douze)       d.z.
  1813    (treize)      t.z.
  1814    (quatorze)    q.z.
  1815    (quinze)      q.n.
  1816    (seize)       s.z.
  1817    (dix sept)    d.s.

From this date the year is expressed by the last two figures only.--thus,
18 for 1818, etc.,--up to the present time.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHINA AND POTTERY MARKS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

