








  TELLING FORTUNES
  BY CARDS

  A SYMPOSIUM OF THE SEVERAL ANCIENT AND MODERN
  METHODS AS PRACTICED BY ARAB SEERS AND SIBYLS
  AND THE ROMANY GYPSIES, WITH PLAIN EXAMPLES AND
  SIMPLE INSTRUCTIONS TO ENABLE ANYONE TO ACQUIRE
  THE ART WITH EASE

  Gathered From Authentic Sources By
  MOHAMMED ALI

  (_EDITED BY CARLETON B. CASE_)

  [Illustration]

  NEW YORK
  SHREWESBURY PUBLISHING CO.
  PUBLISHERS




  COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY
  CHARLES SHREWESBURY




CONTENTS


                                                PAGE
  THE STORY OF JOSEPHINE                           5
  RESEARCHING GYPSY LORE                           7
  HOW TO ACQUIRE THE ART                           9
  CARDS TO BE USED                                 9
  THE CONSULTANT CARD                             10
  THE ANCIENT ORACLE                              12
  METHOD A                                        17
  MODERN USE OF FIFTY-TWO CARDS                   20
  METHOD B                                        28
  METHOD C                                        28
  METHOD D                                        30
  METHOD E                                        31
  METHOD F, THE STAR                              32
  METHOD G, A SHORTER STAR                        32
  METHOD H                                        33
  METHOD I                                        33
  METHOD J                                        34
  METHOD K                                        35
  METHOD L                                        37
  METHOD M                                        38
  THE PREFERRED ORACLE, WITH THIRTY-TWO CARDS     40
  DICTIONARY OF PRIMARY DEFINITIONS               42
  DICTIONARY OF SECONDARY DEFINITIONS             49
  GROUPS OF CARDS                                 93
  COMBINATIONS OF TWO CARDS                       96
  A WORD OF ADVICE                               101
  SPECIAL NOTE                                   101
  DEALING THE CARDS BY THREES                    102
  DEALING THE CARDS BY FIVES                     109
  DEALING THE CARDS BY SEVENS                    111
  DEALING BY FIFTEENS                            113
  THE TWENTY-ONE CARD METHOD                     117
  THE WAY TO TELL A FORTUNE                      122
  THE ITALIAN METHOD                             126
  THE FLORENCE MODE                              131
  PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE                       133
  THE MATRIMONIAL ORACLE                         136
  THE STAR METHOD                                140
  SHORTER STAR METHOD                            142
  WISHES                                         143
  WISH NO. I.                                    143
  WISH NO. II.                                   144
  WISH NO. III.                                  146
  WISH NO. IV.                                   146
  WISH NO. V.                                    147
  WISH NO. VI.                                   150
  CURIOUS GAMES WITH CARDS                       154
  LOVERS' HEARTS                                 154
  LOVE'S LOTTERY                                 154
  MATRIMONY                                      155
  CUPID'S PASTIME                                155
  WEDDING BELLS                                  157
  MARRIAGE QUESTIONS                             158




TELLING FORTUNES BY CARDS


The art of telling fortunes by cards, known professionally as
CARTOMANCY, has been practiced for centuries.

In our day and generation divination by cards is chiefly employed for
amusement and pastime, for the entertainment of one's self or one's
company, or at church fairs, charity bazars, and the like; but in the
days of the ancients it was practiced by prophets and sibyls as a
serious business, and so accepted by all, from king to peasant.

Certainly there were some remarkable coincidences, to call them by no
other name, in the fulfillment of many cartomantic divinations, of
which history maintains a record. To cite but one:


THE STORY OF JOSEPHINE, EMPRESS OF THE FRENCH.

Josephine Tascher de la Pagerie, while in her native land of
Martinique, had been approached by an aged negress, who astonished her
through declaring to her: "You will ascend upon the loftiest throne in
the world."

Always treasuring the memory of this prediction, Josephine, when the
widow of Gen. Beauharnais, during the bitter days of the Reign of
Terror, was induced to consult a distinguished seeress of the Faubourg
St. Germain, who relied upon cartomancy as a means for elucidating the
mysteries of the past, present, and future. Although her visitor was
disguised as a waiting woman, the seeress, through a simple resort to
her pack of cards, read most correctly the entire past existence of
her consultant. Then, by the same means, she laid bare the gloomy
picture of Josephine's present situation; how the prison doors of the
Luxembourg stood ready to receive her; how the guillotine thirsted for
her life's blood; how, nevertheless, she would be saved from all these
impending dangers through intercession of a young soldier, to her at
the time personally a stranger. Subsequently, by a fresh appeal to her
cards, the seeress threw aside the veil obscuring Josephine's future
destiny, predicting her marriage, the onward march of her husband
towards fame and power, until finally, after a studious observation of
the cards, the cartomancian announced to her skeptical consultant that
on a given day, within the cathedral church of Notre Dame, the unknown
man she was destined to marry would place upon her head an imperial
diadem, and furthermore that she would be hailed, in the presence of
the highest ecclesiastical potentate on earth, as "Empress of the
French," and as such would be respected until her death.

The remarkably rapid and literal fulfillment of the predictions made
by a professional seeress to an unknown lady, to whom she promised the
most exalted of mortal positions, not only astonished the crowd of
courtiers, wonder-stricken at realization of this indisputable and
well-authenticated augury of miraculous events; but elicited the
attention of men of intellect and of science, hundreds of whom visited
the remarkable prophetess, and in every instance testified to the
accuracy of her predictions, although at a loss to comprehend the
source from whence she attained apparently super-human knowledge. It
appeared wonderful to these men of science that the mere combination
of a series of cards, which they had been accustomed to look upon as a
mere species of diversion, could be employed as well to read the past
as to penetrate the mysteries of the future; still they were
compelled, in an elaborate report made to the Emperor, whose
comprehensive mind yearned after explanation of all secrets, mental as
well as physical, to state that, while unable to account for the cause
for this prophetic knowledge, there could be no rational doubt of its
existence.


RESEARCHING GYPSY LORE.

This present treatise on the subject of divination by cards is a
gathering together in handy form of the best authenticated methods of
its ancient practice as handed down from the Romany gypsies and the
seeresses that antedate them. As different nations and different times
had their varying interpretations of the values of the cards and
separate and distinct methods of laying the cards for readings, as
well as fundamental differences in their interpretations of the many
possible combinations of the various cards, we have decided to lay
before you in this work a complete symposium of each, that the reader
and student of the art may see before him all the approved methods of
the past and choose intelligently that which best pleases or suits his
convenience.

All the old and many of the recent authors that have been consulted in
the preparation of this book have been found to insist that divination
through playing-cards is to be relied upon as a truthful exposition of
the past and future and a veritable portent of the future. They desire
to be taken seriously. The present editor has no desire to detract
from this position if it be a fact, nor does he know that it is not a
fact. His part in this work is that of editor, and there ends. Here he
presents you with the results of centuries of effort on the part of
those who profess to believe sincerely in what they practice and
teach, and leaves the reader to place as much or as little credence in
the truthfulness of their divinations as he chooses.

Certainly there is a wonderful fascination in the mastering of
Cartomancy, in the being able to tell fortunes by the chance falling
of the cards into this or that position, and in knowing what each card
and grouping is believed to signify in their relations to the person
consulting.


HOW TO ACQUIRE THE ART.

The would-be adept is advised to study in detail every word in this
book, as he would any other lesson he desired to master. Learn the
various methods of dealing and of reading the layout; consult the
several interpretations of the meanings and learn to apply them, first
in reading your own fortune and later that of friends,--this only
after you have memorized many of the meanings and acquired a degree of
fluency in elaborating the "talk" or "patter" that goes with a
successful "reading."

No prophet or seer ever professed that divination by cards is a
natural gift. It is universally recognized as being solely the result
of study and practice, and can be mastered by anyone who has this book
and gives the subject a little thought and sufficient experimental,
practical test to acquire proficiency.


CARDS TO BE USED IN TELLING FORTUNES.

While any ordinary pack of playing cards sold in the usual stores can
be used, it is best to secure, if possible, a pack whose face cards
have only a single head, inasmuch as when, in dealing, cards come out
reversed they bear a different signification in some cases, than when
upright. When, however, the usual double-headed cards are used it is
only necessary to make a distinctive mark on the top end of the faces
of certain ones to secure the same result as though the special
fortune-telling pack were employed. This mark may be a simple dot or
cross with pencil or pen, and should be made at one end of the card
only, which will then become the top of the card in all cases, and
cards coming out in the deal with this mark at their tops will be
considered as upright, and with the marked end down, as reversed. The
only cards that need to be thus distinguished are: The face cards of
each suit; the ace, eight, nine and ten of diamonds. (The spot cards
below the seven in any suit are, in most cases, not used. Where they
are employed, their reversal has no significance.) The top of the
seven of diamonds, and the other suits, is considered to be the end
that has the extra central pip. Spot cards of the three suits other
than diamonds usually require no mark to determine their top or
bottom. The "handles" of all spades and clubs, and the sharp points of
all hearts, point downward when those cards are upright; hence when
they point upward the cards are considered as reversed. If, however,
any other cards than those here mentioned are so printed as to make it
difficult to distinguish the top from the base, you should mark them
at the top.


THE ONE SPECIAL CARD--THE CONSULTANT.

In some of the methods of fortune-telling by cards it is essential to
have a special card as the representative of the party seeking the
response of the oracle. This is commonly called the "Consultant." If
there is a joker in your pack, or an extra blank card, as is the case
in many packs, use one of them as the Consultant, marking this card to
show which is its top, as its reversal has its own signification. If
there is neither joker nor blank card, use the discarded deuce of
either suit in the pack, with a mark at its top end.




THE ANCIENT ORACLE


Various meanings have been ascribed to the individual cards in
different countries and times, several lists of which, and they the
known standards of the art, are given throughout this book. The first
list of interpretations that we present is from a very ancient work,
first published in 1600 or a little later. This, it will be noticed,
defines the entire fifty-two cards of the pack and has no separate
signification for any card being upright or reversed; in either
position the cards' meanings are the same.

Suit values are as follows: Clubs lead and mostly portend happiness
and good business arrangements, and no matter how numerous or how
accompanied by cards of other suits are seldom considered as bearers
of other than the very best augury. Next comes hearts, which are
usually taken to signify love-making, invitations, and good friends;
diamonds, money; and spades, annoyances, sickness or worry, sometimes
loss of money.


_Clubs._

  Ace--Great wealth, much prosperity, and tranquillity of mind.

  King--A man who is humane, upright and affectionate; faithful in
    all his undertakings. He will be happy himself, and make every
    one around him so.

  Queen--A tender, mild and rather susceptible woman, who will be
    very attractive to the opposite sex.

  Jack--An open, sincere and good friend, who will exert himself
    warmly in your welfare.

  Ten--Speedy wealth.

  Nine--Obstinacy and disagreeables connected therewith.

  Eight--A covetous person, extremely fond of money; that he will
    obtain it but not make a proper use of it.

  Seven--The most brilliant fortune and the most exquisite bliss
    this world can afford, but beware of the opposite sex, from
    these alone can misfortune be experienced.

  Six--A lucrative partnership.

  Five--Marriage to a person who will improve your circumstances.

  Four--Inconstancy and change.

  Trey--Three wealthy marriages.

  Deuce--Opposition or disappointment.


_Diamonds._

  Ace--A letter.

  King--A man of fiery temper, continued anger, seeking revenge, and
    obstinate in his resolutions.

  Queen--A coquette, and fond of company.

  Jack--However nearly related, will look more to his own interest
    than yours, will be tenacious in his own opinions, and fly off if
    contradicted.

  Ten--A country husband (or wife), with wealth, and many children;
    also a purse of gold.

  Nine--A surprise about money.

  Eight--Unhappy marriage late in life.

  Seven--Waste of goods, and losses.

  Six--An early marriage and widowhood, but a second marriage would
    probably be worse.

  Five--Success in enterprises; if married, good children.

  Four--Vexation and annoyance.

  Trey--Quarrels, lawsuits, and domestic disagreements, your partner
    for life will be a vixen, bad tempered, and make you unhappy.

  Deuce--Your heart will be engaged in love at an early period, but
    you will meet with great opposition.


_Hearts._

  Ace--Feasting and pleasure, and is also the house. If attended
    with spades it is quarreling; if by hearts, friendship and
    affection; if by diamonds, you will hear of an absent friend;
    if by clubs, merry-making and rejoicing.

  King--A man of good natured disposition, hot and hasty, rash in
    his undertakings, and very amorous.

  Queen--A woman of fair complexion, faithful and affectionate.

  Jack--A person of no particular sex, but always the dearest friend
    or nearest relation of the consulting party. It is said that you
    must pay great attention to the cards that stand next to the jack,
    as from them alone you are supposed to judge whether the person
    it represents will be favorable to your inclinations or not.

  Ten--A good heart, it is supposed to correct the bad tidings of the
    cards that stand next it; if its neighboring cards are of good
    report, it is supposed to confirm their value.

  Nine--Wealth, grandeur, and high esteem; if cards that are
    unfavorable stand near it, disappointments and the reverse.
    If favorable cards follow these last at a small distance,
    you will retrieve your losses, whether of peace or goods.

  Eight--Drinking and feasting.

  Seven--A fickle and unfaithful person.

  Six--A generous, open and credulous disposition, easily imposed
    on, but the friend of the distressed.

  Five--A wavering and unsettled disposition.

  Four--The person will not be married till quite late in life, which
    will proceed from too great a delicacy in making a choice.

  Trey--Your own imprudence will greatly contribute to your
    experiencing much ill will from others.

  Deuce--Extraordinary good future and success; though if
    unfavorable cards attend this will be a long time delayed.


_Spades._

  Ace--Has to do with love affairs generally. Death when the card is
    upside down.

  King--A man ambitious and successful at court, or with a great man
    who will befriend him, but let him beware of a reverse.

  Queen--A woman who will be corrupted by the rich of both sexes.
    Also a widow.

  Jack--A person, who, although he has your interest at heart, will
    be too indolent to pursue it.

  Ten--Is supposed to be a card of bad import, and in a great
    measure to counteract the good effects of the cards near it.

  Nine--Is professed to be the worst card of the pack; dangerous
    sickness, total loss of fortune and calamities; also endless
    discussion in your family.

  Eight--Opposition from your friends. If this card comes out close
    to you, leave your plan and follow another.

  Seven--Loss of a valuable friend, whose death will plunge you in
    very great distress.

  Six--Very little interpretation of your success.

  Five--Good luck in the choice of your companion for life, who will
    be fond of you. Bad temper and interference.

  Four--Sickness.

  Trey--Good fortune in marriage, an inconstant partner, and that
    you will be made unhappy thereby.

  Deuce--A death or disagreeable removal.


METHOD A.

  Using 52 Cards and the Foregoing Interpretations.

Take a pack of fifty-two cards and shuffle them three times well over,
and making the significator whichever queen you please (if a lady
performs the operation for herself; or king, if a gentleman), then
proceed to lay them on the table, nine in a row, and wherever the
operator finds himself placed, count nine cards every way, not
forgetting the said significator, then it will be seen what card the
significator comes in company with, and read from that.

When several diamonds come together, the interpretation is that some
money will soon be received; several hearts, love; several clubs,
drink and noisy troublesome company; several spades, trouble and
vexation.

If two red tens come next to the significator marriage or prosperity,
the ace of hearts is the house, the ace of clubs a letter, the ace of
spades death, spite, or quarreling (for this is supposed to be the
worst card in the pack), the ten of diamonds a journey, the three of
hearts a salute, the three of spades tears, the ten of spades
sickness, the nine of spades sad disappointment or trouble, to the
nine of clubs is ascribed a jovial entertainment or reveling, the nine
of hearts feasting, the ten of clubs traveling by water, the ten of
hearts some place of amusement, the five of hearts a present, the five
of clubs a bundle, the six of spades a child, the seven of spades a
removal, the three of clubs fighting, the eight of clubs confusion,
the eight of spades a roadway, the four of clubs a strange bed, the
nine of diamonds business, the five of spades a surprise, the two red
eights new clothes, the three of diamonds speaking with a friend, the
four of spades a sick bed, the seven of clubs a prison, the two of
spades a false friend, the four of hearts the marriage bed.

If a married lady doth lay the cards, she must then make her husband
the king of the same suit she is queen of; but if a single lady, she
must make her lover what king she may think proper. The jacks of the
same suits are supposed to be men's thoughts, so that they may know
what they are thinking of, counting nine cards from where they are
placed, and it is said if any lady should wish to know whether she
shall obtain her desires in any particular subject, matter, or thing
whatsoever, let her shuffle the cards well, most seriously and
earnestly wishing all the time for one thing; she must then cut them
once, particularly observing at the same time what card that is which
she cuts, then shuffle them and deal them out in three parcels, and if
that said particular card which she has cut doth come next herself, or
next the ace of hearts, it is taken that she will have her wish, but
if the nine of spades is next to her she judges the contrary, as that
is supposed to be a disappointment; however, she may try it three
times, taking the major number of testimonies as a ground whereon to
place her judgment. This method of using the cards is both innocent
and will afford amusement.




MODERN USE OF 52 CARDS


Here we present the more modern adaptation of the entire pack of 52
cards to the fortune-teller's use. As the meanings differ materially
from the ancient list just given, another complete list and several
combinations are presented.

In the modern usage, Diamonds take precedence and are considered to
mean money, riches and success.

Hearts next, love affairs, friendship, amusement and pleasure.

Clubs, business matters, whether investments, appointments or
settlements.

Spades, losses or grief, trouble and anxiety, sometimes sickness and
death.

The various combinations are supposed to either accelerate or mitigate
the several meanings.

For instance--the ace of diamonds coming with the ace of spades, a
railway journey--the nine of spades, usually taken to be a bad card,
but coming with diamonds, speedy good luck, etc.


_Diamonds._

  Ace--An offer or a ring.

  King--A fair man, a military man, or a diplomatist.

  Queen--A fair woman, fond of pleasure and amusement.

  Jack--The thoughts of either king or queen.

  Ten--A legacy or property.

  Nine--A good surprise about money.

  Eight--Meetings about money matters.

  Seven--A check or paper money; sometimes scandal.

  Six--An offer of some kind, generally to do with money matters.

  Five (supposed to be the best card in the pack)--Health, wealth
    and happiness.

  Four--A short journey.

  Three--Time, within three to four weeks.

  Two--A secret or something unexpected.


_Hearts._

  Ace--The house.

  King--A rather fair man in society; sometimes a sailor.

  Queen--A fair woman in society, but kind and good natured.

  Jack--Thoughts of either king or queen.

  Ten--An entertainment or festivity.

  Nine--Great happiness and the wish card.

  Eight--Love making or friendship.

  Seven--A puzzle or indecision, doubt.

  Six--Love affairs, sometimes an offer.

  Five--Marriage, sometimes a new admirer.

  Four--A small invitation, such as a dinner or evening party.

  Three--Time, within a week.

  Two--Kisses or trifling present.


_Clubs._

  Ace--A letter.

  King--A clever dark man, often a professional man, or in business.

  Queen--A clever, amusing woman, sometimes a little satirical.

  Jack--Thoughts of king or queen.

  Ten--A new appointment, investment or settlement.

  Nine--Relates to documents, papers, often a will.

  Eight--A journey by road or vehicle.

  Seven--A warning or unprofitable business.

  Six--A very poor business offer or else money borrowed.

  Five--News, either from the country or some one coming therefrom.

  Four--A journey by land on business.

  Three--Time, three to four months.

  Two--A good friend, in some cases a slight disappointment.


_Spades._

  Ace--Spite, death, or worry; sometimes a large town.

  King--A lawyer, widower or old man; a very dark man.

  Queen--A very dark woman, a widow; a spiteful, malicious woman.

  Jack--Thoughts of king or queen.

  Ten--At night-time, imprisonment.

  Nine (supposed to be a very bad card)--Grief, suffering, malice,
    and, with other black cards, death.

  Eight--Across water, sometimes treachery.

  Seven--Poverty, anxiety and annoyance.

  Six--Delay, or a bad character.

  Five--Temper, anger and quarrels.

  Four--Sickness, sometimes a journey caused through sickness.

  Three--By the water, or a very short journey across water.

  Two--Tears and vexation, sometimes a removal.


The following is a _résumé_ of most of the cards and some curious
combinations:

  Four Aces--Honors, dignities, rise in society, or money, friendship
    with the great; but if all four are reversed, the contrary--debt,
    bankruptcy, ruin and even disgrace, therefore it is to be noticed
    particularly how they lie before reading the cards.

  Four Kings--Great good luck, unexpected advancement, good and
    unlooked-for fortune.

  Four Queens--Society, pleasure, amusements.

  Four Jacks--Thoughts of either king or queen of each suit,
    friendly gathering.

  Four Tens--Great gain, legacies, happiness.

  Four Nines--Unexpected and sudden news; if two blacks together,
    not pleasant; if two reds, excellent.

  Four Eights--New appointments, sometimes new associations; two
    black eights together, mourning; two reds, wedding garments.

  Four Sevens--Intrigues, scandal, opposition and variance.

  Four Sixes--A great surprise or change; two black ones together,
    vexations; two red ones, good.

  Four Fives--A long and beneficial voyage, money, happiness and
    health; if two blacks are near, vexation first.

  Four Fours--A birth; two blacks together, a male; two reds, a
    female.

  Four Threes--Period of time from six to twelve months; sometimes
    gain or money returned.

  Four Twos--Visitors; two blacks together, disagreeable; two reds,
    pleasant, and sometimes love-making.

  Three Aces--Great good luck.

  Three Kings--A new friend or acquaintance who will advance you in
    life.

  Three Queens--Quarrels, disputes, backbiting.

  Three Jacks--A lawsuit or treachery.

  Three Tens--A rise in social life, but not necessarily happiness
    with it.

  Three Nines--A good removal, unless accompanied by very bad cards.

  Three Eights--Love dreams, and longing for the unattainable, but
    often wishes or desires postponed; in some cases fresh
    engagements, but a little worry in obtaining them.

  Three Sevens--Losses of friendship or property; reversed, you will
    never recover your goods.

  Three Sixes--A very large and brilliant entertainment; if the two
    black ones come together, disgrace or scandal.

  Three Fives--A delightful and happy meeting with absent friends.

  Three Fours--Strangers or visitors coming to the house from a
    journey.

  Three Threes--Slight annoyances or vexation caused by malicious
    tongues.

  Three Twos--A good and staunch friend, but one who will grieve you
    by a queer temper.

  Two Aces--Strange news quick and speedy, often good luck; two
    blacks, a telegram; two reds, a pleasant invitation.

  Two Kings--A partnership or friendship.

  Two Queens--A good female friend.

  Two Jacks--Unpleasantness, sometimes only thoughts of people.

  Two Tens--Change of residence or profession.

  Two Nines--A good removal, sometimes business projects or
    documents, in many cases relating to a will.

  Two Eights--An extraordinary occurrence.

  Two Sevens--Sometimes sudden and unexpected; two blacks, great
    treachery, especially if reversed.

  Two Sixes--A good friend; two blacks, a nasty, deceitful person,
    or a great danger, possibly an accident.

  Two Black Fives--Danger from falls, or possibly by water.

  Two Red Fives--Joyful and unexpected news.

  Two Black Fours--Separation or unfriendly meetings.

  Two Red Fours--Good appointments, or good luck.

  Two Red Threes--Pleasant and profitable visitors and friends.

  Two Black Threes--Disappointment and tears.

  Two Black Twos--A departure.

  Two Red Twos--An arrival.

  The Ace, Nine, Ten and Seven of Spades--Divorce.

  Seven and Nine of Spades--Separation.

  Eight of Spades and Seven of Clubs--Prison, or confinement.

  Six and Four of Spades--Sickness and danger.

  Eight and Five of Spades--Malignity, caused by jealousy.

  Six and Seven of Spades--Treachery, scandal, vexation.

  Seven and Two of Spades--Tears caused by unfounded reports--often
    a false friend.

  Nine and Six of Spades--A bitter and implacable enemy; if good
    cards follow, you will overcome, but if bad ones, he or she will
    triumph.

  Three and Two of Spades--A short and not agreeable journey.

  Seven of Hearts and Three of Spades--A journey and a strange
    adventure thereon.

  Seven, Six and Five of Spades--Thieves, or danger of robbery.

  Queen and Jack of Spades--Widowhood.

  Nine and Ten of Spades--Danger by fire.

  Six and Seven of Spades reversed--A fall or injury.

  Eight and Ten of Spades--News at night, but not very pleasant.

  Ten, Eight and Five of Spades--Broken engagement, or unfulfilled
    promise.

  Six and Eight of Spades--Delay, postponement.

  Nine, Seven, Six and Five of Spades--Bankruptcy.

  Ace of Diamonds and Ten of Hearts--A marriage engagement.

  Ace of Diamonds and Nine of Hearts--Hopes fulfilled.

  Ten of Hearts and Four of Hearts--Marriage.

  Three Tens and Five of Hearts--Happy love returned.

  Eight of Hearts and Seven of Hearts--Doubt and indecision about an
    offer.

  Seven of Hearts reversed--A nice and good present.

  Three of Diamonds and Three of Hearts--In nine days.

  Nine of Hearts and Nine of Diamonds--A delightful surprise about
    money.

  Nine of Hearts and Nine of Clubs--Something to do about a will, in
    which the consultor is generally successful.

  Eight of Hearts and Nine of Hearts--Great good luck through love.

  Ace, Nine, Seven and Four of Spades--Death.


METHOD B.

A pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled, and cut in three; the
first ten are taken out, then three are missed; another nine are taken
out, then two are missed; another seven out, five missed; seven out,
three missed; three out, one missed; and the last of the pack is
taken. They are now laid out in rows of eight each, eight having been
counted every way, beginning from the significator. When all are
finished, the two extremities are taken, paired and read; they are
then gathered together, shuffled, and cut in four parcels; the first
one of each parcel is taken off and put on one side. The packet that
comes first is the one that should be read.


METHOD C.

  What is Supposed to Happen Within a Month to Two Months.

A pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled and cut in three, each
meaning being read as it turns up. The cards are then turned up one
by one till a spade is found, which is not withdrawn, but the
following card, which lay face uppermost on the table. If three spades
are found in succession the first is missed, but the two next are
taken out, as well as the following card, whether diamonds, clubs or
hearts; this is continued to the end of the pack, then re-commenced
without shuffling or cutting. Should the final card have been a spade,
on beginning the pack afresh the first card should be taken out. The
same operation is gone through twice more, in all three times. This
having been done, they are laid in the form of a horseshoe in front of
the dealer in the order in which they came, being careful to note that
the significator is amongst them. Should it not appear naturally, it
must be taken out and placed at the end. Seven are now counted from
the one that represents the person consulting the oracle. When they
have been read, and the relative meanings ascribed to them explained,
one is taken from each end and paired, their various significations
being interpreted as they turn up. These prognostications are supposed
to come to pass within two months. A shorter way can be done by taking
out thirty-two selected cards, viz:--ace, king, queen, jack, ten,
nine, eight and seven of each suit; they are read in precisely the
same way. This is taken to allow a shorter period to elapse, from ten
days to a fortnight, but the former is supposed to be the better
method.


METHOD D.

A pack of fifty-two cards is taken, and after being well shuffled they
are turned up one by one, counting one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, jack, queen, king (here the ace counts as
one). If any card should fall on the number counted--thus, supposing a
five comes when five is counted, or a king when that card turns up, it
must be taken out and placed on the table, face uppermost, before the
dealer. After counting to a king the counting is re-commenced at one.
Should two cards follow, such as three and four, eight and nine, etc.,
these must be abstracted, also three of a kind, such as three tens,
three kings, etc., they must also be taken out; but if three of the
same suit they may be passed by. When the pack has been carefully gone
through, shuffled and cut, the process is gone through twice more, in
all three times. They are now all laid out in rows of four and read.
When this is done they are gathered together and laid two by two,
thus:--

         NORTH.
  WEST.          EAST.
         SOUTH.

One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven,
twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, and so on till the pack
is exhausted. Those at the top are the North, those at the bottom are
the South, those at the right hand the East, those at the left hand
the West. The North is to be read first, as that is supposed to happen
first; the South next, the East next, and the West last.


METHOD E.

The pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled, and cut in three, the
meanings of the cut being read first. Then the significator is taken
out. The cards are spread on the table, face downwards before the
dealer, and seven are drawn out at random. The topmost card of the
seven is taken off and put on one side. The cards are again shuffled
and cut in three, the cut again read as before; they are laid on the
table, seven cards being taken off, the topmost being withdrawn. This
is to be repeated the third time, still taking off the topmost card.
The cards are again shuffled and cut, this time nine each time being
drawn out and the topmost two removed. This maneuver has to be
repeated three times, each time taking two of the topmost cards. In
the first deal, where the first seven cards were removed, there will
be eighteen cards; the second time there will be twenty-one remaining
after having removed the two of each cut, thus:--The thirty-nine cards
are spread out in five rows of seven, and four remaining underneath.
The significator is now put in the center, and counting every way from
it, these cards are taken to signify the past and present. The nine
cards that have been taken from each sevens and nines are to be
shuffled and looked at. These are supposed to refer entirely to the
future. The three cards that are left out are useless.


METHOD F--THE STAR.

The pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled, and cut in three, the
cut being explained as it is shown. The card representing the
significator should be taken out and put in the middle. Three cards
are now placed above the head, three at the feet, three to the left,
and three to the right, three at the four corners, and three across
the significator. They are interpreted as follows:--First, above the
head, then at the feet, then to the right hand, and next to the left;
each corner to be taken top and bottom opposite. When these are all
explained (those across the significator last), they are then paired,
beginning with the topmost cards and the bottom cards, from end to
end.


METHOD G--A SHORTER STAR.

This is a much shorter way, and instead of placing the cards as they
come, they must be first well shuffled by the person consulting, then
laid face downwards on the table and nine cards withdrawn (the
significator must be in the center). In this method the cards are
placed round the card representing the consultor in the order in which
they come, the first card drawn being put at the head of the
significator, and the others in rotation. The nine cards are first
explained as they lie, eight round and one over the significator.
Then the consultor is desired to again draw nine, and these are put
over the first nine; this is to be repeated a third time, combining
all the cards as they lay one over the other, three deep, every way.


METHOD H.

The whole pack is taken, shuffled well, but not cut, every fifth card
is picked out and laid by, the pack is gone through and every seventh
card picked out, every third card must be taken, each fifth, seventh
and third cards to be laid aside in separate packets; then each packet
is carefully examined, whether the significator is amongst those
withdrawn. If not, he or she must be abstracted and placed at the
extreme end. Now the third pack is laid out in a row, the second next,
and the first last, and all that is hidden is said to be shown you,
counting three, seven and five from each row, beginning with the
significator. Now two are taken from end to end and read till twelve
are obtained; they are put on one side; then the rest are gone on with
from end to end until all are exhausted. Then they are all taken up,
including the twelve that were put aside, shuffled, the two first and
last are taken off. These three form "the surprise"; then parcels of
four are dealt, beginning with the first; they are all read in
rotation and the small "surprise" last.


METHOD I.

The pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled, cut in three, and the
meanings ascribed to the cut are explained. Then they are laid in rows
of five till the whole pack is exhausted, except the two last, which
are useless. The first row is to represent "the person for whom you
are acting"; the second, "the house"; the third, "your wish"; the
fourth, "the surprise," and the fifth, "what is supposed to come
true." The first ten are now read _lengthwise_, the others in the same
manner till the fifth row has been explained; then they are taken from
end to end, each pair being interpreted as arrived at. In this case
there is no significator, as the first row is supposed to stand for
what will happen immediately to the consultant. They are all gathered
together, shuffled and cut, and laid in packets of three. The
consultor is desired to choose one of the three parcels, and that is
laid out first and explained; then follow each of the other two, which
must be also read in the same manner.


METHOD J.

The pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled and cut by the person
consulting. They are cut in three and the meanings interpreted. Then
they are laid out in rows of sevens, leaving the three last, which are
not to be used. Then nine are counted every way, from the significator
backwards and forwards, from left to right, and from right to left, up
and down, always returning to the significator, then crossways from
end to end. Then they are paired from corner to corner, each card
being explained as it is arrived at, noticing if there should be any
pairs, triplets, etc., amongst them. Then they are gathered up and
shuffled well, then they are dealt in two packets, the consultant
being desired to choose one. The one taken is supposed to represent
the past and present, the other the future. They are laid out and read
pretty much as before.


METHOD K.

A pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled and cut, and divided
thus:--Every seven, nine and five are to be removed and put on one
side. The six of clubs, the eight and ten of diamonds are to be
withdrawn and put in a place by themselves. Then the rest are shuffled
and five cards laid out face upwards till the pack is exhausted. It
will now be found there are seven rows of five cards each, and two
remaining; these two are placed with the nines, sevens and fives, to
be used later. These cards are read, counting seven every way from the
significator, then gathered together, shuffled and cut, the first
group (seven in number) being first of all withdrawn, which must be
added to the nines, sevens and fives already withdrawn. There will now
be four groups of seven cards each. The first must be read, the second
put aside, the third explained, and the fourth laid by. The second and
fourth are left out entirely and not used. The nines, sevens and fives
and the first group you have withdrawn are shuffled, cut in two
packets, and laid out on the table before the dealer. If two red nines
appear close together, it is taken to show honor, dignity and joy; if
two red sevens and two red fives side by side, great and unexpected
good luck, a legacy or money that you don't anticipate; if two red
fives and the nine of hearts are near each other, a marriage of
affection; if with the seven of diamonds, a moneyed marriage, but of
love; if two red fives and two black sevens, a marriage for money
which will turn out unhappily; if two red sevens and two red fives,
and the nine of hearts appear, it is supposed to be the greatest and
happiest prognostic you can have, whether married or single--luck,
pleasure, money; if two black sevens and two black fives appear, it is
considered very evil, and if accompanied by the nine of spades,
unhappiness in marriage, divorce, scandal and sometimes violence
caused through drink; if the eight of spades should be amongst those
withdrawn and turn up with the aforesaid cards, violent death by
murder or accident. It is taken to be the worst combination in the
pack. These cards (viz: the nines, sevens and fives, and those which
have been withdrawn from the group of fives) are laid in rows of
sevens, counting seven every way from the significator; then the
extreme ends are taken and paired, being read as they turn up. Next
the whole is shuffled, including the six of clubs and the eight and
ten of diamonds. These three cards are the index. Wherever they appear
they are supposed to show good luck, happiness and prosperity; if
they should happen between exceptionally bad cards, the luck is over,
or marred through malignity; but as a rule they are taken to import
great joy. The evil combination is thus: If the six of clubs is
surrounded with spades, or the eight or ten of diamonds are _between_
two black fives and the two black sevens are near, then the best laid
scheme will come to nought; but if they are surrounded by the nine of
hearts and nine of diamonds, then it is a very good omen. The eight
and ten of diamonds are supposed to be extremely good if there are
three or four nines to follow them, for then the nine of spades loses
its evil significance, and should the seven of diamonds and seven of
hearts follow, a good marriage and happiness; or, if the person is
married, new prosperity or riches for the husband or sometimes the
birth of an heir.


METHOD L.

The pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled and cut, and divided
into two equal heaps. One of these is chosen by the consultant. Having
decided this, the other heap is left alone; it is not to be used. The
person consulting is now desired to shuffle the twenty-six cards
remaining, cutting in three, the meanings being read as they turn up.
They are now dealt in three packs, which are laid out in rows of
eight, the last card to be left out, as that forms "the surprise."
Four cards are now counted from the significator, which, should it not
be in the pack chosen, must be abstracted and put at the end. When
these have been fully explained, the same maneuver is repeated twice,
in all three times, one card being always taken out for "the
surprise." "The surprise" is turned up when those cards before the
dealer have been examined and explained. Then they are all gathered
together, and, after being shuffled and cut, they are turned up by
fours. If a sequence should come up, such as six and seven, or six,
seven and eight of any suit, they are taken out. If four of a suit,
the lowest is taken out. This is only to be done once. These are now
laid out in a row before the dealer and read from left to right,
always taking note that the significator is amongst them, and counting
four as above described. Then the two cards are taken from each
extremity and each couple explained till all are exhausted.


METHOD M.

A pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled well and cut. Then it is
divided into three equal parcels of seventeen cards each, and one over
for "the surprise," which is to be laid aside. The first three cards
of each packet is taken, and each three is put apart. That will leave
fourteen in each group. The first and third packets of fourteen are
taken up, the middle one being put aside. These are now laid out in
four rows of seven, being sure that the significator is amongst them;
or else the card which is supposed to represent the thoughts of the
person consulting you, viz: the jack, may be counted from. Six are
now counted, beginning from the next card to the significator; and
after every sixth card, that card is not counted as one, but the
following one. When these have been explained, which must be done till
the significator is returned to, they are paired from end to end, and
read as arrived at; then they are gathered together, shuffled and cut,
and divided again into two groups of fourteen. These are not laid out
again, but two being merely extracted from each of these, not
forgetting the middle one, and adding them to the three packets of
three placed on one side. The middle one is now taken up, shuffled
well, and four cards taken from it, two from the top and two from the
bottom, and added to the one put aside to form "the surprise." There
are now four packs of five cards each:--One for the "consultant" and
one for the "house," one for "what is sure to come true," and one for
"the surprise." These are laid out in front of the dealer and read
from left to right in rotation.




THE PREFERRED ORACLE--WITH 32 CARDS


We now come to the most important and approved method of telling
fortunes by cards, the method preferred and practiced in nearly all
countries. This widely accepted method requires but 32 cards of the 52
found in the pack, consisting of eight cards of each suit, as follows:
Ace, king, queen, jack, ten, nine, eight and seven only. To these may
be added, in some cases, the Consultant card, concerning which we have
spoken earlier in this work.

To enable this oracle to be read with an intelligent and proper
understanding it is important that one be fully informed as to all the
possible values or interpretations of the cards, singly and in
combination. Hence we shall devote a number of pages to these
definitions in very complete form before proceeding to elucidate for
you the various methods of dealing, laying and reading the cards. We
give first the simple and primary meanings, followed in detail by
their secondary or synonymical meanings, the whole constituting a
valuable work of reference for all who practice the art, enabling them
to give a full, fair and wise reading of every possible "fall" of the
cards. The primary meanings, while sufficient for the amateur, will
soon be seen by the student to be lacking in that completeness and
flexibility demanded by the adept. Their natural amplification into
their secondary and more extended definitions gives the interpreter
the fullest scope to exercise his powers of reading any possible
layout of the cards intelligently, and with satisfaction both to
himself and to the person consulting the oracle.




DICTIONARY OF PRIMARY DEFINITIONS

_Used in Interpreting the 32-Card Method of Telling Fortunes._


_Diamonds._

  KING

    _Upright_--Marriage. A military man. A man of fidelity. A dignitary
    of the state. A very fair person. A man of tact and cunning.

    _Reversed_--A country gentleman. A difficulty concerning marriage
    or business. Threatened danger, caused through the machination of a
    man in position or office.

  QUEEN

    _Upright_--A blonde female. A lady resident in the country. A woman
    given to gossiping and scandal.

    _Reversed_--A country gentlewoman. A malignant female, who seeks to
    foment disadvantage to the consultant, and who is to be greatly
    feared.

  JACK

    _Upright_--A country man. A young man of light complexion, of a
    lower grade in society. A messenger. Postman. A tale-bearing
    servant, or unfaithful friend.

    _Reversed_--A servant. An intermeddler, who will be the cause of
    mischief. A messenger bearing ill-news.

  ACE

    _Upright_--The ace of diamonds, whether upright or reversed,
    signifies a letter, a petition, a note, a paper, a document.

    _Reversed_--The ace of diamonds, reversed or upright, designates a
    letter to be shortly received, a petition, a note, a paper, or a
    document.

  TEN

    _Upright_--The ten of diamonds, either upright or reversed,
    represents coin, gold, water, the sea, a foreign city, and change
    of locality.

    _Reversed_--The ten of diamonds, whether reversed or upright,
    designates bullion, coin, gold, water, the ocean, a foreign city,
    a journey and change in locality.

  NINE

    _Upright_--Enterprise. Separation. Advantage.

    _Reversed_--Delay. Annoyance. Poverty. A family feud, or a quarrel
    among intimate friends.

  EIGHT

    _Upright_--The country. Riches. Love-making overtures.

    _Reversed_--Sorrow. Motion. Wealth. Satire. Mockery, and foolish
    scandal.

  SEVEN

    _Upright_--Present intentions. Good news.

    _Reversed_--Birth. Contrariness. Vexation. In a great measure.


_Hearts._

  KING

    _Upright_--A blonde man. A lawyer. A man of repute, and remarkable
    for superior qualities. A person of generosity.

    _Reversed_--A very fair man. A tutor. A man in anger. Great
    disappointment.

  QUEEN

    _Upright_--A blonde female. A faithful friend. A mild, amiable
    lady.

    _Reversed_--A very fair female. Impediment to marriage. Obstacle to
    success in business and general affairs. A woman crossed in love.

  JACK

    _Upright_--A blonde young man. A young soldier or sailor. A
    traveler. A gay young bachelor, dreaming chiefly of his pleasures.

    _Reversed_--A very fair young man. A dissipated bachelor. A
    discontented military man. A politician out of office.

  ACE

    _Upright_--The house. A repast. Festivity. A love letter. Agreeable
    intelligence.

    _Reversed_--A friend's visit. Forced or constrained enjoyment.

  TEN

    _Upright_--The city. Envious people.

    _Reversed_--An inheritance. A surprise.

  NINE

    _Upright_--Victory. Happiness. Triumph. Union. Harmony. Work.
    Trade. A present.

    _Reversed_--Weariness. Ennui. A passing trouble. Curiosity.
    Encumbrance.

  EIGHT

    _Upright_--The affection of a fair young lady. Success in your
    hopes. Nourishment. Food. Board.

    _Reversed_--A very fair maiden. Excessive joy. A young woman's
    indifference to love advances.

  SEVEN

    _Upright_--The thoughts. A weapon. A jewel.

    _Reversed_--Desire. A parcel.


_Spades._

  KING

    _Upright_--A dark complexioned man. A gentleman of some learned
    profession. A judge. Advocate. Surgeon. Physician. A literary man.

    _Reversed_--A widower. A man in wrath or with a malignant
    disposition. An envious man. Dishonest lawyer. A quack. An enemy. A
    general failure in all your anticipations.

  QUEEN

    _Upright_--A dark complexioned woman. A widow. A lady of some
    learned profession.

    _Reversed_--A widow seeking to marry again. A dangerous and
    malicious woman. A fast female. Difficulty. Derangement as to
    marriage.

  JACK

    _Upright_--A dark complexioned bachelor. An envoy. An ill-bred
    fellow. A messenger.

    _Reversed_--An inquisitive, impertinent interloper. A man plotting
    mischief. A spy. Pursuit. Treason in love affairs.

  ACE

    _Upright_--Abandonment. A document.

    _Reversed_--Pregnancy. Abandonment. Grief. Distressing
    intelligence.

  TEN

    _Upright_--Tears. Jealousy.

    _Reversed_--Loss. An evening party. Brief affliction. In the
    evening.

  NINE

    _Upright_--A great loss. Tidings of death. Mourning. Failure.

    _Reversed_--Disappointment. Delay. Desertion. Tidings of the death
    of a near relative.

  EIGHT

    _Upright_--Sickness. Want of prudence. Bad news.

    _Reversed_--Ambition. A religious woman. A marriage broken off, or
    an offer refused.

  SEVEN

    _Upright_--Expectation. Hope.

    _Reversed_--Wise advice. Friendship. Indecision. A foolish
    intrigue.


_Clubs._

  KING

    _Upright_--A man whose complexion is between light and dark. A
    frank, liberal man. A friend.

    _Reversed_--A nut-brown complexioned man. A person to meet with a
    disappointment.

  QUEEN

    _Upright_--A brunette female. One fond of conversation. An
    affectionate, quick tempered woman.

    _Reversed_--A nut-brown complexioned lady. A jealous and malicious
    female.

  JACK

    _Upright_--A slightly dark complexioned bachelor. A lover. A clever
    and enterprising young man.

    _Reversed_--A flirt and flatterer. A young man in anger or in
    sickness.

  ACE

    _Upright_--A purse of money. Wealth.

    _Reversed_--Nobility. Love. A present.

  TEN

    _Upright_--The house. The future. Fortune. Success. Gain. Money.

    _Reversed_--Money. A lover. Sometimes want of success in a trivial
    matter.

  NINE

    _Upright_--Chattels. Goods. Movable article. An indiscretion.

    _Reversed_--A trifling present. Gambling.

  EIGHT

    _Upright_--The affections of a brunette maiden. The art of
    pleasing.

    _Reversed_--A nut-brown maiden. Removal. Separation. A frivolous
    courtship.

  SEVEN

    _Upright_--A small sum of money. A debt unexpectedly paid. A child.

    _Reversed_--A child. Embarrassment.


THE CONSULTANT.

When coming out in an upright position, in the body of the deal
designates merely the person consulting the oracle, in a natural state
of mind.

When the card comes out in the deal reversed, it denotes the
consultant to be in a disturbed state of mind, or annoyed from some
cause beyond his or her control. Coming with the _eight of spades
reversed_, for example, by its side, it shows that the consultant's
mind has been disordered through prospects of ambition or religious
excitement. If accompanied by the _eight of hearts_, it demonstrates
that he or she is annoyed through being a victim to the tender
passion.




DICTIONARY OF SECONDARY DEFINITIONS

_And Synonyms, Supplementing the Preceding List. Consult Both._


KING OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ This card, when used as a representative,
denotes a very fair man, one with auburn hair, light blue eyes, and
florid complexion, who, notwithstanding his hasty temper, will
treasure his anger, long awaiting opportunities for revenge, or he is
obstinate in his resolutions.

It moreover designates a military officer, and frequently one of
fidelity to his country and its honor.

Still, it is most generally employed as the marriage card, for if it
does not come out in an oracle wherein matrimony is the wish, the
nuptials will be delayed or broken off.

Its synonymical signification would then be:

Alliance; reunion; attachment; vow; oath; intimacy; assemblage;
junction; union; chain; peace; accord; harmony; good understanding;
reconciliation.

KING OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ This card signifies a country
gentleman, in which capacity its synonyms are:

Country man; rustic; villager; peasant; farm laborer; cultivator;
rural; agriculture.

Again, this card reversed, bears a further signification of a good and
severe man, when its synonyms would be:

Indulgent severity; indulgence; compliance; condescension;
complacency; tolerance; low descension.

When used as the marriage card, and coming out reversed, the king of
diamonds signifies primarily difficulties and obstacles imposed in the
way of entering upon or consummating the nuptial contract, and through
inference vitiation of the married state, when its synonyms are:

Slavery; captivity; servitude; matrimonial ruptures; conjugal
infidelity.

QUEEN OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ When this card comes out in the oracle
upright it bears three primary significations: _a country lady_; _a
talkative_ or _communicative female_; and a _good, kind-hearted
woman_.

As a representative card it designates a very fair female with auburn
or blonde hair, brilliantly clear complexion and very blue eyes. A
woman of this character will be given to society, and is naturally a
coquette.

When the card is taken as a _country lady_ its synonyms will be
through induction or inference:

Economical housewife; chaste and honest woman; honesty; civility;
politeness; sweetness of temper; virtue; honor; chastity; a model
wife; excellent mother.

When used to designate a _talkative female_, they will be:

Conversation; discourse; deliberation; dissertation; discussion;
conference; intellectual entertainment; prattler; blab; idle talk;
flippant conversation; table talk; gossip.

QUEEN OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ When the card comes out reversed in the
oracle its ordinary signification is that of a meddlesome woman, who
has interfered in the affairs of the consultant for the purpose of
doing him or her injury, and the extent of the injury, contemplated or
done, can be estimated from the proximity of this card to that of the
consultant, or from the import of those cards intervening between the
two. This card has two secondary significations as follows:

_Want of foresight_, whose synonyms are:

Unawares; unexpectedly; on a sudden; napping; astonished; suddenly;
fortuitously; unhoped for; surprisingly.

_A knavish trick_, whose synonyms would be:

Roguishness; knavery; cheat; imposture; deceit; sharpness in
rascality; trickery; false pretense; artifice; wile; craftiness.

JACK OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ The primary signification of this card is
a _soldier_, a _postillion_, or a light haired _young man, in or from
the country_. In addition to these characteristics this card, whether
upright or reversed, assumes another, which is technically called _the
good stranger_.

As a _soldier_, its secondary value is expressed in the following
synonyms:

Man at arms; swordsman; fencing master; combatant; enemy; duel; war;
battle; attack; defense; opposition; resistance; ruin; overthrow;
hostility; hatred; wrath; resentment; courage; valor; bravery;
satellite; stipendiary.

In the quality of _the good stranger_, its synonyms are:

Strange; unaccustomed; unknown; unheard of; unusual; unwonted;
surprising; admirable; marvelous; prodigious; miracle; episode;
digression; anonymous.

When employed as a representative of a person, it denotes a light
haired, unmarried man, who, although one of your nearest relations,
will sacrifice your interests to his own; a person of stubbornness;
hot headed and hasty, tenacious of his own opinions and unable to
brook contradiction.

JACK OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ This card's signification is a public or
private servant; and in the latter case, without reference to gender,
either a male or female domestic. Its synonyms therefore are in
accordance with its acceptation:

Servant; waiter; valet; chambermaid; lady's maid; a subordinate; an
inferior; a hireling; condition of one employed; servitude; postman;
errand boy; messenger; agent; expressman; newsman; message;
announcement; commission; directions; a household; relative to post
office and the transmission of messages.

ACE OF DIAMONDS--It is a matter of perfect indifference whether this
card assumes its place in the oracle in an upright or reversed
position, as its primary signification is in no wise varied, although
of a most comprehensive nature, being, expressing generally, a
_letter_, a _note_, a _paper_, a _petition_, etc.

It requires, however, a great deal of attention to discriminate
between the manifold significations of this all-important card, which
is governed in a great measure by the cards coming next to it,
otherwise the interpreter may be entirely baffled in comprehending the
intent of the oracle.

The general synonyms of the _ace of diamonds_ are:

Epistle; writings; the art of writing; grammar; Holy Writ; text;
literature; doctrine; erudition; literary labor; book; correspondence;
composition; alphabet; elements of all learning; principles; bonds;
bills of exchange; notes of hand; evidence of indebtedness.

With the _seven of spades, reversed_, coming next to it, this card
denotes the existence of a law suit, in which case we have synonyms,
founded on the following basis:

Deed; covenant; agreement; law paper; writs; warrants; litigation;
differences; contestations; disputes; discussions; bickering; contest;
strife; discord; contradiction; stratagem; trick; broil; pettifogging;
wrangling.

TEN OF DIAMONDS--Like its companion, the _ace_, which with this card
form the only two in the pack possessing this peculiar quality, the
_ten of diamonds_ preserves its value and signification, whether it
emerges either upright or reversed. The primary significations of this
card are _gold_, _water_, the _sea_, a _foreign city_, _change of
locality_.

As the representative of _gold_ its synonyms are:

Riches; opulence; magnificence; splendor; éclat; sumptuousness;
luxury; abundance; means.

When its signification is assumed relative to _water_ and the _sea_,
the synonyms assume both a specific and general nature:

Fluid; humid; ablution; dew; rain; deluge; inundation; the ocean;
river; torrent; stream; fountain; source; lake; pond; cascade; falls.

When the surrounding cards designate this one to be accepted as
representing a foreign city, its synonyms are:

Traveler; traveling; foreign parts; beyond the sea; homeless;
wanderer; wandering abroad; trading; commerce; a sailor; ships;
refuge; exile.

When accepted to signify a _change in locality_, the synonyms, in
addition to preservation of its original meaning of a mere change in
domicile, or habitation, are inferentially extended to embrace a
wider scope, such as:

Departure; displacement; journey; pilgrimage; peregrination; steps;
motion; visits; excursions; incursions; emigration; immigration;
transmigration; flight; tour; rotation; circulation; deportation;
rout; defeat; overthrow; bewilderment; disconcert; to break one's
allegiance; desertion; disinheritance; alienation; alien; a foreigner;
houseless.

It will be seen that with the varied significations which can be given
to this card, it is one of the most important in the pack.

NINE OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ When coming forth in its natural
position, this card is one of particular good omen, as it foretells
great success in business operations and consequent gain. Its primary
meaning comprehends the grand mainspring to human exertion,
_enterprise_, while at the same time it assures you of the desired
result, _advantage_ or _gain_. Viewed as such its synonyms are, as to
_enterprise_ in the first instance:

To undertake; to commence; to usurp; to take possession of; audacity;
boldness; hardihood; impudence; rashness; speculative; speculation;
fearless in trade; in love.

When taken to represent _advantage_, the synonyms are:

Gain; profit; lucre; success; thanks; favor; benefit; ascendency;
power; empire; authority; government; rule; glory; reputation; happy
results; profitable end; victory; cure; fulfillment; termination;
satisfaction.

NINE OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ We have the other side of the picture,
for this card, coming up reversed portends the occurrence of dire
mishaps and abject despoliation with its concomitant poverty. In view
of this immense difference in the value and signification of this one
and the same card in its two positions, too much care cannot be taken
to mark the way in which it emerges.

In its modified signification of _delay_, its synonyms are:

Disarranged; sent back; suspension; variation; wavering; slowness;
relenting; obstacle; impediment; misfortune; adversity; accidental
injuries; miscarriage.

But viewed in its more bitter light as _spoliation_ and _poverty_, its
synonyms are:

Destitution; violence; ruin; victim of robbery; a fall; ruined honor;
bankruptcy; privation; violated chastity; defrauded; swindled;
victimized; separation; sold out by the sheriff; cast upon the town;
hopeless.

EIGHT OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ In its natural position this card is
accepted to represent either _the country_ or _riches_, as its
signification is relatively determined from its surroundings.

In its signification as the _country_, thereby meaning not only a
rural district but the characteristics of a country existence, the
interpretation of this card boasts a large number of synonyms:

Agriculture; cultivation; field labor; farming; garden; prairie;
woods; shades; pleasure; enjoyment; diversion; pastime; amusement;
rejuvenation; rural sports; rustic dances; peace; calmness; natural
tranquillity; rural life; forests; vales; mountains; flocks and herds;
shepherd; shepherdess; moral quietude.

As the synonyms of _riches_, as they are signified by this card in
contradistinction to others, we have:

Augmentation of wealth; increase of estate; advancement; prosperity;
general success; happiness; goodness; felicity; beauty; embellishment.

EIGHT OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ In this condition the primary
signification of the card is _sorrow_ and _movement_. The synonyms for
_sorrow_ are:

Sadness; affliction; displeasure; grief; desolation; mortification;
bad humor; melancholy; the blues; hypochondria; vexation; trouble.

But with the word _movement_, we have more trouble to apply its actual
signification, as shown in the cards, and therefore the interpreter is
left in a great degree to her own judgment, to decipher the connection
which should bind the oracle to a specific and intelligent reading.

The most applicable synonyms would therefore be:

To walk; step forward; move about; to contemplate; to propose; to make
advances; to undertake; to offer proposals; to promenade; to tender
offers; to inaugurate a scheme; to further any claims.

SEVEN OF DIAMONDS--_Upright._ This is what is most commonly styled the
_conversation_ card, as its initial and primary signification is
_discourse for the present_, while it likewise designates the
approaching receipt of _good news_; as the oracle demands, to be
secure, proper interpretation.

When used as the _conversation_ card, its synonyms are:

Talk; words; matter; tattle; desultory remarks; seasonable language;
pleasant gossip; table talk; anecdote.

Secondary to this signification, and in intimate connection, it has
oftentimes been employed to denote _designs for the moment_, whether
mental or expressed by word of mouth, embracing intent and resolution.

When signifying _news_, the synonyms will be:

Announcement; intelligence; newspaper; advice; advertisement;
admonition; warning; teaching; tale telling; history; fables;
anecdotal remarks.

SEVEN OF DIAMONDS--_Reversed._ This card is capable, when emerging
reversed, of receiving several interpretations, the general and
primary one of which is _birth_, or the origin of a human being, or
of matter which has, as its synonyms:

Nativity; origin; creation; source; commencement; principle;
primitive; extraction; first coming in of fruits and flowers; prime;
early; race; family; house; lineage; posterity; the reason for; cause;
premises for argument.

This card frequently designates a _great deal_, or a large quantity,
qualifying the value of those cards next to it. For example, should it
come before the _ten of spades reversed_, or the _ten of clubs_, it
will read a great deal of jealousy, or of money.

Commingled with cards, relating to a public or military official, this
one is taken to signify _declaration_, whose synonyms would
consequently be:

Publication; orders; authenticity; approbation; placard; designation;
discovery; disclosure; revelation; confession.

KING OF HEARTS--_Upright._ The primary significations of this card are
_a blonde man_, _an advocate_ and a _man of note_, but its secondary
significations are those attached to the state and _legislation_.

As the representative of an individual, this card shows a good,
kind-hearted man, of an amorous disposition, rash in his enterprises,
and generally hasty and passionate in all his actions.

Coming out as a _blonde man_, it has these synonyms:

Honest man; honesty; probity; equity; arts and sciences.

Considered as a _man of note_ or statesman, the synonyms are:

Legislation; legislator; laws; decrees; code; statutes; precepts;
commandments; combination; institution; constitution; temperament;
complexion; natural and moral law; religious law; civil law; politics;
politician; natural right; right of nations; public rights.

KING OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ This card coming out reversed, designates
a man of natural light complexion, neither fair nor brown, with dark
brown hair and hazel eyes, of an excellent temper, easily imposed
upon, credulous, moderately given to love matters, yet addicted to
vice and incontinence. Its other primary significations are a _tutor_,
or a _man in anger_, possessing vices, the reverse of those good
qualities attributed to the card when upright. In this case the
synonyms are:

Indignation; agitation; irritation; wrath; rage; fury; frenzy;
violence; hatred; aversion; animosity; peril; animadversion;
antipathy; resentment; vengeance; affront; outrage; blasphemy; storm;
tempest; cruelty; inhumanity; atrocity.

The chief secondary signification of this is a _man in office_, or
professional politician, to which are given the following synonyms:

Man of rank; dishonest man; exaction; pillage; injustice; simony; a
dishonorable person; a burglar.

QUEEN OF HEARTS--_Upright._ This card represents a blonde female,
faithful and affectionate, always the dearest friend or nearest
relative to the consultant. As such, the synonyms, attached to the
primary signification, are of an excellent nature:

Honest woman; virtue; wisdom; honesty.

This card is likewise taken as symbolical of _friendship_ in its
various phases, the synonyms of the term being:

Attachment; affection; tenderness; benevolence; kindly relations;
fraternity; intimacy; identity in inclinations; agreement; affinity;
harmonious correspondence; conformity; sympathy; attraction; cohesion.

Another signification is attached to this card in a secondary capacity
as _justice_, with the following synonyms:

Equity; probity; right; rectitude; reason; the law.

A further secondary signification has been bestowed upon this card,
under certain influences, when it is gifted with the attributes of
_temperance_ with these synonyms:

Moderation; discretion; continence; abstinence; patience; calmness;
sobriety; frugality; chastity; alleviation; reconciliation; respect;
conciliation; mitigation; molification; consolation.

QUEEN OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ This card reversed, designates a fair,
but not light, woman, with nut-brown hair and grayish eyes, who
intervenes to prevent marriage, and intermeddles in all the
consultant's affairs generally. It likewise represents either the wife
of a man in office, a woman of doubtful character, or a courtesan, a
betrayer of honor and of affection. Under this aspect it receives a
secondary signification of _dissension_, to which are given synonyms
as follows:

Agitations; sedition; conspiracy; rebellion; pride; vanity; seduction;
outrage; presumption; disputes; moral wrong; dishonorable proposals.

JACK OF HEARTS--_Upright._ This card, as a representative one,
designates a blonde, unmarried man, learned, good tempered and well
favored by fortune. Consequently, when it is drawn by a young woman,
and the marriage card comes near it, it portends that she will be
united to a person of such a description, and that the union will
prove both happy and of long duration.

It likewise designates, primarily, a soldier or a traveler, so that
should it come up in your oracle it is interpreted, in a secondary
connection, in this sense, and assures that you are on the point of
undertaking a journey. If bright cards surround it, the journey will
be a prosperous one, but should the _eight of spades_ be near it, it
will result in illness, and if the _ten of spades_ be adjacent, it
will be accompanied with tears.

In this secondary capacity it has synonyms as follows:

Road; highway; lane; pathway; a walk; a course; career; promenade;
messenger; ways and means; expedient; enterprise; method.

JACK OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ Should this card come out in the oracle of
an unmarried lady, reversed, it instructs her that her lover or
intended husband is a person wooing her for selfish purposes, who,
although handsome and accomplished, will make a bad match.

To a married woman, or widow, it is a warning that some unscrupulous
individual, under garb of friendship, contemplates her injury, which
will be followed by almost immediate desertion, if near the _ace of
spades_.

Consequently, in a secondary capacity, it is taken to mean _evil
desires_ or _longing_, when it has synonyms of this character:

Attraction; passion; flattery; cajolery; adulation; lechery; or
declivity; precipice; fall.

ACE OF HEARTS--_Upright._ The first and primary signification of this
card is _the house_, and as such obtains a secondary capacity of a
most extensive nature, expressed in the following synonyms:

Household; home; house-keeping; economy; saving; dwelling; domicile;
habitation; manor; lodge; lodging; hotel; palace; shop; store;
barracks; building; vessel; vase; archives; castle; cabin; cottage;
tent; pavilion; inn; hostelry; tavern; religious house; monastery;
convent; burial; long home; grave; stable; extraction; family; race;
lineage; posterity; ancestry; retreat; asylum.

This card likewise designates a _repast_ or _feasting_, when,
secondarily, it assumes synonyms of the following nature:

Table; festivity; merry making; nutrition; guests; invitation; host;
hilarity; good cheer; abundance; joy; gayety; natural pleasure;
domestics; sports and pastimes.

ACE OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ It primarily designates _forced_ or
_constrained enjoyment_, but more generally it should be taken for
_new acquaintances_, whence is derived a secondary significance of
_fresh news_, with these synonyms:

Indication; presentiment; new instructions; fresh knowledge;
enlightenment; index; augury; forewarning; fore-knowledge; conjecture;
oracle; prognostication; prediction; prophecy; divination; second
sight; novelty.

Again this card, reversed, means a _disordered household_, and from
this comes the secondary idea of _intestine quarrels_, with the
following more prominent synonyms:

Misunderstanding; regret; remorse; repentance; internal agitation;
irresolution; uncertainty; family feuds; marriage trouble; domestic
strife; dissensions.

At times this card represents _family vices_, or extravagance in
household expenditures, or any description of crime or folly which
renders home unhappy and unendurable.

TEN OF HEARTS--_Upright._ This card ordinarily signifies the _city_,
when its secondary capacities are expressed in some one from among the
following synonyms:

Metropolis; native land; burgh; village; town; locality; site;
town-house; dwelling; habitation; residence; municipality; city
government; citizens.

It moreover is accepted to signify _envious people_, as by that term
the ancient inhabitants of the rural districts were wont to designate,
ironically, dwellers in cities.

TEN OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ This card most generally signifies _an
inheritance_, when its synonyms are:

Succession; legacy; donation; testamentary gifts; dowry; dower;
dowager; legitimacy; will; patrimony; heir; transmission; to bequeath;
to endow.

It is likewise used to signify _relatives_ when its secondary capacity
is extended to the widest scope, embracing:

Consanguinity; blood; family; ancestors; father; mother; brother;
sister; aunt; uncle; cousin, male or female; Adam and Eve; race;
lineage; alliance; relationship; affinity; blood connection; love
intrigues.

Another primary signification of this card is _surprise_, generally
of a bad origin, with these appropriate synonyms:

Cheat; imposture; knavery; deceit; trickery; mistake; oversight;
misunderstanding; trouble; vexation; annoyance; emotion; fright; fear;
terror; consternation; astonishment; admiration; alarm; rapture;
exhaustion; swooning; fainting; a marvel; phenomenon; miracle;
anything wonderful or strange.

Among the ancient cartomancists, this card, with the _nine of hearts_,
was regarded as the most difficult of interpretation of any in the
pack, but through careful study of the synonyms above given, a true
meaning is readily attained.

NINE OF HEARTS--_Upright._ This card is generally regarded as an
augury of good fortune, wealth, happiness and worldly advantage.

Its principal signification is _victory_, whence we derive:

Success; good results; advantage; gain; pomp; triumph; trophies;
majesty; show; apparel; baggage; luggage; equipage; attire; furniture;
rich goods and wares.

Its next principal one is _union_ and _concord_, with the several
secondary significations, cognate to them:

Moderation; discretion; continence; temperance; patience; calmness;
sobriety; frugality; chastity; harmony; music; musical tastes; perfect
happiness.

It moreover designates _labor_ and _commerce_, in which capacity its
signification is expressed in the synonyms:

Studious; application; work; toil; reflection; observation;
meditation; occupation; trade; employment; merchant; clerk; trader;
laborer; mercantile pursuits.

Still another signification is _a present_, whence we have:

Gift; generosity; benefit; gratification; service.

NINE OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ This card means _ennui_, or weariness,
with secondary attributes expressed in these synonyms:

Displeasure; discontent; disgust; aversion; inquietude; lack of
spirit; listlessness; trivial sorrow; affliction; uneasiness;
complaining; want of energy.

It moreover is employed to signify _curiosity_, whence we have the
secondary signification of inquisitiveness; a busybody; a marplot and
intruder.

Then again an ordinary signification of this card is _obstacle_ or
_hindrance_ with the following synonyms:

Bar; embarrassment; opposition; barrier; contrariety; inconvenience;
trouble; difficulty; work; abjection; indisposition; ailment;
infirmity; distress; hesitation; vacillation; perplexity; impediment;
stumbling-block.

EIGHT OF HEARTS--_Upright._ The primary signification of this card is
first, a blonde young lady of great natural abilities, gentle
manners, lively disposition and personal beauty, for whom we have
synonyms:

Honest girl; virtuous girl; modesty; maidenly grace; bashfulness;
timidity; retiring disposition; fear of scandal; apprehension;
mildness; suavity of temper.

It moreover signifies _success in expectations_, in those enterprises
whereupon the consultant has set his heart, with the secondary
significations of:

Success; happy issue; fortunate termination; victory; cure; recovery;
accomplishment; end of trouble; discontinuance, termination of pains,
torment or labor.

EIGHT OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ When this card comes into the oracle in a
reversed position, and is used as the representative of an individual,
it designates an unmarried lady, of a light complexion, with
chestnut-brown hair, of a natural good disposition, but spoiled by an
assumption of superiority over her companions. From this
signification, we have that of _arrogance_, and thence:

Noise; quarreling; dispute; disturbance; difference; contestations;
litigation; bickerings; arguments.

But the most general signification of this card reversed is _great
joy_, otherwise expressed in these synonyms:

Perfect content; felicity; happiness; rapture; enchantment; ecstasy;
entire satisfaction; complete joy; inexpressible pleasure; heavenly
inspiration; exhilaration; enthusiasm; the music of the spheres;
celestial harmony.

Under other influences this card becomes modified to the signification
of the _means of satisfaction_, such as:

Gayety; dancing; the opera; the theater; festival; public rejoicings;
family reunions; poetry; romance; joyous visits; pleasant parties;
excursions.

SEVEN OF HEARTS--_Upright._ When this card emerges in its natural
position, its primary signification is that of _thought_, an _arm_, or
a _jewel_.

As thought, it has many secondary significations prominent among them
those expressed by the synonyms:

The soul; spirit; intelligence; an idea; memory; imagination;
conception; comprehension; extension of ideas; designs; intentions;
desires; will; resolution; determination; premeditation; meditation;
reflection; opinion; sentiment; philosopher; philosophy; wisdom.

This card is sometimes employed to signify _solitude_, when it obtains
a secondary signification:

A desert; seclusion; retreat from society; hermitage; exile;
banishment; isolation; abandonment.

SEVEN OF HEARTS--_Reversed._ When this card comes out reversed, one of
its primary significations is a _package_, or bundle, present, new
clothes, etc., in accordance with the signification of the cards
immediately preceding or following it, which can be easily learned by
study.

Nevertheless, its most ordinary signification is _desire_, or a strong
longing for, or hankering after, some person or thing; but then again
the interpretation is qualified by the cards coming near this one,
either before or after; reading from the consultant to the right, by a
simple change in position of the cards, _desire_ may be changed into
_aversion_, and an _attraction_ into _repulsion_.

When its signification is _desire_, its synonyms will be:

Wish; now; will; coveting; cupidity; lusting after; concupiscence;
unlawful desire; extreme hankering after; jealous; passion for good or
bad; illusion; craving; appetite; a fancy for a thing; decided
inclination.

It will be seen that the term _desire_ is employed as antagonistic to
love, or a holy and righteous phase of passion.

KING OF SPADES--_Upright._ Employed as a representative card, this one
designates a man of very dark complexion, with black eyes and hair,
passionate and proud, ambitious, and successful in most of his
aspirations, but a person whom the reverse of fortune would utterly
crush into obscurity.

Divested of this personal and destructive character, this card, when
coming upright in an oracle, designates a professional man of
eminence, a lawyer, judge, advocate, counselor, senator, practitioner,
attorney, confidential agent, jurist, orator, statesman, pleader,
diplomat, doctor of laws or in medicine, or a learned physician.

When the consultant be an unmarried lady, this card assures her that
her admirer is a man of excessive probity and of honorable intentions,
that is, if the _king of diamonds_ likewise comes out upright. To a
married woman it denotes that her property or honor will be in the
keeping of a lawyer or agent of rectitude, who will rescue her from
the machinations of enemies or spoliators. To a widow it shows that
her second marriage will be to a man of eminence, who will render her
after life most happy.

KING OF SPADES--_Reversed._ This card signifies a widower, a man in
anger or difficulty, also one given to inebriety. But taken in a
general acceptation, this card represents a _wicked man_, and, through
induction, _wickedness_. In that case, its secondary significance can
be gleaned from the synonyms, used to give expression to it, as
follows:

Bad intentioned; innate wickedness; perversity; perfidy; crime;
cruelty; inhumanity, and atrocity.

This card is likewise regarded as an unfortunate one, as it forewarns
you of the utter wreck of your expectations, wrought by some one of
the following causes:

Reverses; prejudice; theft; violence; corruption; elopement;
libertinage; debauchery; slander; malice; exposure of secrets;
disorder in morals, or calumny.

QUEEN OF SPADES--_Upright._ As the representative of an individual
this card designates a dark lady, with dark eyes and black hair,
naturally of an open and generous disposition, but who will change her
nature through flattery and her position in society. Should she be
possessed of beauty, her innocence will be in perpetual danger, and
only saved through the exercise of a strong will, or through motives
of self-respect.

This card likewise, when emerging upright, designates a _widow_,
without respect to color or social position, and is also taken to
signify the condition of widowhood, to be interpreted, as the oracle
demands, by these synonyms:

Privation; abstinence; absence; scarcity; sterility; poverty;
indigence; famine; deprivation.

Frequently this card is employed to denote a _well-founded distrust_,
when its secondary significations will be:

Just suspicion; legitimate fear; merited doubts; conjectures; surmises
based on fact; conscientious scruples; timidity; bashfulness;
reluctance; retirement.

QUEEN OF SPADES--_Reversed._ As a representative of an individual,
this card, coming out in the oracle reversed in position, denotes a
widow, desirous of contracting another marriage. It moreover
designates a dark woman of amorous propensities, who does not hesitate
to disregard the conventionalities of society.

But as a general thing, this card is assumed to signify a _crafty
evil-minded woman_, and can be interpreted as:

Malignity; malice; finesse; artifice; cunning; craft; dissimulation;
frolic; pranks; wildness; hypocrisy; bigotry; prudishness; wantonness;
shamelessness.

When coming reversed in a consultation upon marriage, this card
denotes that difficulties and impediments, generally originating with
a female, will be interposed to prevent the desired nuptials.

JACK OF SPADES--_Upright._ As the representative of an individual,
this card, coming out upright, designates a dark complexioned
unmarried man, an obliging fellow, who does not hesitate to
accommodate his friends at serious disadvantage to himself, if
occasion require.

The primary signification of the card is, however, _messenger_, an
envoy, or person, charged with bearing of intelligence, most generally
employed as a go-between in intrigues, or in a capacity of trust.

Sometimes this card is used to designate a _critic_, or a critical
position; a moment of impending danger; an awkward predicament; a
decisive instant; an unfortunate situation; a delicate circumstance; a
threatened calamity; a crisis; or a perplexing misstep.

JACK OF SPADES--_Reversed._ This card is one of evil omen to lovers,
as it forewarns a betrayal of their secrets, or the exposure of their
plans by a corrupt messenger, or through the intervention of some
intermeddler.

Its primary signification, when the card is reversed, is that of a
_Paul Pry_, or spy, whence we have the secondary ones of inquirer,
spectator, watcher, overseer, as well as the result of such a man's
investigations. Hence applied more generally, the card signifies
scrutiny; examination; reports; remarks; notations, and commentaries.

Another secondary signification of this card is _traitor_, from which
we readily obtain the following synonyms:

Deception; duplicity; stratagem; disguise; prevarication; disloyalty;
breach of trust; conspiracy; tale bearing; imposture; black
heartedness; perfidy; falsehood; dissimulation and breach of
confidence.

The card is, moreover, used to forewarn lovers that there is danger of
their being pursued in event of elopement.

ACE OF SPADES--_Upright._ This card, coming out in natural position,
and intervening between the representative cards of a male and female,
relates wholly to love affairs. When accompanied by the _ten of
spades_ it shows that an intrigue will be accompanied with a deal of
sorrow and affliction, and will ultimately end in abandonment under
most disastrous circumstances.

One of the primary significations of this card is a _paper_ or
document, chiefly appertaining to law matters, such as warrants for
arrest, writs, subpoenas and legal pleadings.

Another is that of a _ship_, or other means of conveyance by water,
particularly when accompanied by the _eight of clubs_, reversed, which
betokens the consultant to be on the eve of a sea voyage, or other
journey over water of some description.

ACE OF SPADES--_Reversed._ When in the oracle of a married consultant,
this card appears reversed, and near to her representative, its
primary signification is _pregnancy_, which in her case can be
expressed by the following synonyms:

Conception; maternity; accouchement; childbirth.

From this we derive a secondary signification, applicable to other
things, for which we employ correspondent synonyms:

Enlargement; engenderment; fecundity; fertilization; production;
composition; increase; augmentation; multiplication; deliverance;
parturition; growth; addition.

When reversed and accompanied by the _knave of clubs_, likewise
reversed, this card is a premonitor of _death_.

The general secondary signification of this card, when reversed and in
the body of the oracle, is a _fall_, whence we have:

Decadence; decline; discouragement; dissipation; ravage; ruin;
demolition; destruction; bankruptcy; error; fault; overwhelming
sorrows; perdition; an abyss; precipice; gulf; waterfall; disgrace;
shame.

TEN OF SPADES--_Upright._ The general signification of this card is
_jealousy_, particularly when accompanied by the _knave of clubs_,
which denotes that the consultant, either male or female, is jealous
of his or her sweetheart to such a degree that their friendly
relations are in danger of being broken off, which will assuredly be
the case, if the _nine of spades_ should likewise appear in the
oracle.

The other primary signification of this card is _tears_, whence we
derive a series of secondary significations, as:

Sighs; groans; weeping; complaints; lamentations; griefs; sadness;
heart-sickness; affliction; mental agony.

TEN OF SPADES--_Reversed._ This card, emerging reversed, has, for a
general signification, a _loss_, either moral or physical, as the
surrounding cards designate. Thus, with the _nine of hearts_
intervening between the consultant and this card, it announces that he
or she will lose a situation or employment. When it comes preceded by
the _ten of clubs_, it betokens the loss of money or valuables. Should
the consultant be an unmarried female, and this card comes out
reversed near to a knave, likewise reversed, it foretells the ruin of
her reputation through calumny. But if in place of one of the knaves
the _seven of clubs_ should appear, the loss of her character will be
brought about through some indiscretion.

Another primary signification of this is _the evening_, as a
designation of points of time; still this general term of night has
given rise to the application of important secondary significations,
of which the sense can be taken from the synonyms:

Shades; obscurely; nocturnal; mysterious; secret; masked; concealed;
undiscovered; clandestine; occult; veiled; allegorical; hidden
meaning; in secrecy; obscure hints; double meaning; on the sly; to
conceal from sight; nocturnal meetings.

NINE OF SPADES--_Upright._ This is justly regarded to be the most
unfortunate card in the pack, as it portends maladies, malignant
diseases, family dissensions, defeat in enterprises, constant
disappointment, and even death. The primary significations of this
card, when in its natural position, are a _priest_, _mourning_ and
_disappointment_.

The secondary significations, derived from these sources, are:

From the _priest_: Pastor; church; church services; ritual; sanctity;
piety; devotion; religious ceremonies; celibacy.

From _mourning_: Regret; desolation; affliction; sadness; sorrow;
calamity; grief; heart-pain; funeral; burial; tomb; grave;
church-yard; loss of relatives; wailing.

From _disappointment_: Obstacles; hindrance; delay; disadvantage;
contrarieties; misfortunes; suffering.

NINE OF SPADES--_Reversed._ When this card appears in the oracle
reversed its evil influence is augmented two-fold, although its
primary significations are modestly expressed as _failure_,
_abandonment_ and _delay_. The secondary significations are of the
most disastrous character.

The synonyms employed for these terms, in this instance, are:

Misery; indigence; famine; necessity; need; poverty; adversity;
misfortune; deep affliction; disagreements; correction; chastisement;
punishment; reverses; disgrace; imprisonment; detention; arrest;
captivity.

But when this card, reversed, comes before the consultant and the
_eight of spades_, in the same oracle, it signifies _mortality_, with
the following synonyms:

Death; decease; last sigh; end; finish; extinction; annihilation;
destruction; utter ruin; abjection; humiliation; prostration;
depression; alteration; poisoning; corruption; putrefaction;
paralysis; lethargy.

Still in all these sinister aspects the influence of this card can be
materially modified, but never counteracted, through intervention of
bright cards.

EIGHT OF SPADES--_Upright._ This card is ordinarily of bad import, as
its primary signification is _sickness_, although it is more generally
interpreted as _bad news_. This is its acceptation when preceded by
the _knave of spades_ or the _knave of diamonds_, or when accompanied
by the _ace of diamonds_, and sometimes by the _eight of hearts_,
reversed.

When this card signifies _sickness_, its synonyms are:

Illness of the body, soul or mind; bad condition of health or of
business; derangement; infirmity; epidemic; gangrene; agony;
displeasure; damage; mishap; accidental injury; disaster;
indisposition; head-ache; heart-ache; inquietude; melancholy;
medicine; remedy; charlatan; empiric; physician; quack; languor.

Sometimes, however, this card is employed to designate _prudence_,
whence we have as secondary significations:

Wisdom; reserve; circumspection; reticence; discernment; foresight;
presentiment; prediction; divination; prophecy; horoscope; second
sight; clairvoyance.

EIGHT OF SPADES--_Reversed._ Unlike other cards, the reversal of this
one brings with it a modification of its primary significations.
Hence, when coming out reversed, it most generally signifies
_ambition_, a passion for which we have synonyms as follows:

Desire; wish for; search after; cupidity; jealousy; aspiration;
onward; higher; illusion; pride.

Another primary signification bestowed upon this card when emerging
reversed, is that of a _nun_ or pious woman, whence we derive the
secondary signification usually applied to this card and expressed in
the synonyms:

Inaction; peace; tranquillity; repose; apathy; inertia; stagnation;
rest from labor; pastime, recreation; nonchalance; free from care;
idleness; supineness; lethargy; torpidity.

SEVEN OF SPADES--_Upright._ As a general exponent of current events,
this card is taken to forewarn the consultant of the loss of a
valuable friend, whose death will be a source of a great deal of
misery. On this account many interpret this card to signify a
_coffin_, which may be the case when coming out in close proximity to
the _ace of spades_ or the _nine of spades_.

Its most accepted primary signification, however, among practical
cartomancists, is that of _hope_, whence are derived the secondary
ones, expressed in the terms:

Trust; confidence; expectation; desire; inclination; longing after;
wish; taste for; whim; humor; fancy.

SEVEN OF SPADES--_Reversed._ This card takes a wider and an apparently
contradictory scope in its primary significations, when emerging in
this manner, being _good advice_, _friendship_, and _indecision_.

From _good advice_ we derive, as secondary attributes:

Wise counsels; salutary warnings; news; announcements;
advertisements; placards; consultations; admonitions; instruction;
advice.

For _friendship_ we have the following synonyms:

Attachment; affection; tenderness; benevolence; well wishing;
relation; harmony; correspondence; connection; identity; intimacy;
agreement with; concordance; concurrence; interest; conformity;
sympathy; affinity; attraction; admiration.

For _indecision_, the general synonyms are employed:

Want of resolution; uncertainty; perplexity; inconstancy; frivolity;
lightness; variation; diversity; vacillation; hesitation; versatile;
unsteady; changeable; whimsical; flexibility in character; unreliable;
undetermined.

KING OF CLUBS--_Upright._ As the representative of an individual, this
card designates a man of a complexion neither very dark nor
exceedingly light, but a person with medium colored brown hair,
grayish eyes, and of an easy, plodding disposition. He will be a man
humane, honest and affectionate, given to business, and faithful in
all his engagements; he will be personally happy in all his relations
in life, as father, husband and citizen, and make everyone happy about
him.

The primary significations of this card are, in the first instance, a
_friend_, and secondly, a _business man_.

As a _business man_ this card has these synonyms:

Merchant; trader; dealer; banker; broker; exchange agent; speculator;
calculator; physician; schoolmaster; collegian; geometry; freemason;
mathematics; engineer; science; professor.

KING OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ This card, as the representative of an
individual, designates a person of middling dark complexion, with
chestnut brown hair, who, without being positively wicked, is
viciously inclined, and for that reason should not be trusted. Being
of a morbid temperament, he will destroy the happiness of others, and
render his family miserable through his own viciousness.

A secondary signification is consequently a _vicious man_ or _vice_
itself, expressed in synonyms as follows:

Vice; defect; default; moral blemish; weakness; moral imperfection;
unformed nature; irregularity; flightiness of mind; depravation in
manners; libertinism; lewdness; licentious speech; ugliness;
deformity; corruption; stench; rottenness.

QUEEN OF CLUBS--_Upright._ As a representative of a particular
individual, this card designates a brunette lady, of a warm, tender,
and sympathetic nature, intellectual, witty and high spirited, of a
strongly loving disposition, given to society and social reunions,
where she distinguishes herself through her conversational ability.

The most prominent primary signification of this card is _opulence_,
which is represented in the following synonyms:

Riches; display; pomp; ostentation; vain show; pageantry; luxury;
sumptuousness; assurance; steadiness; confidence; certitude;
affirmation; security; hardihood; self-reliance; liberty; frankness;
candor; openness; plain-dealing; freedom.

Another signification of this card is a _parley_ or _conference_, and
is expressed by some of the subjoined synonyms:

Discourse; conversation; talk; communication; colloquy; dissertation;
deliberation; discussion; speech; pronunciation; grammar; dictionary;
tongue; idiom; jargon; slang; exchange; commerce; trade; traffic; to
speak; to confer; to converse; to tattle.

QUEEN OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ As a representative of an individual, this
card, reversed, denotes a lady whose complexion is brunette, with dark
hair and black eyes, but not dark enough to be represented by a
_spade_. She will be a woman of warm passions, of fine personal
appearance, given to coquetry and dependent more upon her natural
charms than education or intellectual training for conquests in her
flirtations.

The general signification of this card, reversed, however, is
_ignorance_ in contradistinction to its attributes when in natural
position, and therefore can be interpreted as:

Boorishness; unskillfulness; want of experience; untutored;
impertinent.

JACK OF CLUBS--_Upright._ As a representative of an individual, this
card denotes a young man of middling dark complexion, kind, gentle and
docile by nature, sedate and domestic in his habits, and studious
through inclination. He is a warm friend and faithful admirer.

Coming out in the oracle of a young lady, this card is the
representative of her lover, without respect to his color or other
qualifications, denoting simply the person indicated.

The primary signification of this card, divested of its representative
character, is a _scholar_ or lover of knowledge, while its secondary
attributes are expressed in the synonyms:

Study; instruction; application; meditation; reflection; labor; toil;
work; occupation; apprentice; student; disciple; pupil; master.

Another signification of this card, governed according to its
surroundings in the oracle, is _prodigality_, whence are derived
synonyms as follows:

Profusion; superfluity; luxury; largess; bounty; sumptuousness;
magnificence; liberality; benefits; generosity; charity; benevolence;
a crowd; a multitude; depredation; dilapidation; pillage; dissipation.

JACK OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ As a representative of an individual, this
card designates a bachelor, a shade darker, and of a more determined
character than the young man above described. It may likewise
represent that same young man in a state of anger or on a sick bed.

Its especial signification, however, is _delirium_, whence we have as
secondary attributes or synonyms:

Frenzy; aberration of mind; wandering of the brain; unseated reason;
fury; rage; fever; enthusiasm; imbecility; imprudence; distraction;
apathy; delirium tremens; intoxication; brain fever.

ACE OF CLUBS--_Upright._ This card is universally regarded as a most
fortunate one, inasmuch as it betokens vast wealth, personal
prosperity, physical health, mental tranquillity, marital happiness
and longevity.

The principal significations of this card are _a purse of money_ and
_riches_, whence we have as synonyms:

For _a purse of money_: Sum of money; a present; capital; principal;
treasure; bullion; gold and silver wares; opulence; rare; dear;
precious; inestimable; of excessive value.

For _riches_: Wealth; health; prosperity; worldly goods; happiness;
felicity; amelioration; improvement; benefit; advantage; profit;
blessing; favor; grace; plenty; destiny; chance; speculation; good
luck.

ACE OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ When this card emerges to form part of an
oracle, in a reversed position, its more popular and current
significations are _nobility_, _love_ and _a present_, but in a
consultation made for a young unmarried lady it signifies that she
will unexpectedly unite herself with a man, probably a widower, who
will better her fortunes; hence to a female operative this card is a
very good omen.

For _nobility_ we employ as appropriate synonyms:

A nobleman; a man of consequence; important; great; the eldest son;
extended; vast; sublime; renowned; illustrious; powerful; elevated; of
good quality; illustration; reputation; consideration; grandeur of
soul.

For _love_, a correct interpretation of the oracle may require
selection from among the following synonyms:

Passion; inclination; sympathy; affection; allurement; attraction;
charm; enticement; disposition; taste for; propensity; admiration;
gallantry; complacence for the sex; intrigue; affinity; an affair of
gallantry; attachment; devotion.

TEN OF CLUBS--_Upright._ When this card enters in your oracle it is to
apprise you that you will unexpectedly receive a handsome sum of
money, a gift or a legacy from some dear friend or near relative.
However, at the same time it warns you that your smiles will be
intermingled with tears; inasmuch as you will almost simultaneously
learn of the death of some person whose love you have cherished.

The chief primary signification of this card is _the future_, whence
are derived the following secondary ones:

Hereafter; to come; posthumous; after death; heaven.

Another primary signification is _gain_, which can be interpreted as
required, by any of these synonyms:

Advantage; profit; success; grace; favor; benefit; ascendency; power;
empire; authority; usurpation; profitable; useful; important;
interest; official position.

A more general signification in this card is _money_, from which we
have secondary ones of this description:

Wealth; coin; bullion; ingots; gold; silver ware; whiteness; purity;
candor; innocence; ingenuity; the moon; purification; twilight;
moonlight.

TEN OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ As a general thing this card, emerging
reversed, designates a _lover_, of either gender, unless the _knave of
clubs_ appears in the oracle of a lady, or the _eight of hearts_,
reversed, in that of a gentleman.

Employed in such a signification, we have as synonyms:

In love; gallantry; a gallant; husband; wife; married man; married
woman; friend; protector; courtesan; to love; to cherish; to adore; to
match; to mate; harmony; concord; suitable; corresponding; in
relations with; decency; decorum; regard; seemliness; convenience;
vicinity; fitness.

This card is sometimes used to designate _the house_.

NINE OF CLUBS--_Upright._ The general primary signification of this
card, when employed as a measure of time, is _the present_, whence we
have as synonyms:

At the instant; actually; now; presently; suddenly; unexpectedly; upon
the spot; momentarily; at hand.

The second primary signification of this card is an _effect_, whence
are derived the secondary ones of this nature:

For sure; with certainty; in consequence; result; evidence;
conviction; conclusion; will happen; event; to finish; to execute;
household goods; furniture; bonds; personal estate; jewelry; movable
goods.

This card has another primary signification, _indiscretion_, from
which are derived the secondary meanings, as follows:

Want of foresight; imprudent; rash; headlong; with precipitation;
thoughtlessly; impulsively; suddenly; disorder; confusion; misconduct;
want of reflection; chaos; disgrace; without restraint; dissipation;
libertinage; discordance; inharmonious; moral ruin.

NINE OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ This card, reversed, is most usually
employed to denote that the consultant, in whose oracle it appears,
will be the recipient of a _present_, but as to its value and its
nature the surrounding cards must determine. The card consequently may
represent:

Gift; presentation; memorial; offering; testimonial; a gratification;
service; offer of money; thanksgiving.

Another signification of this card when coming out reversed, is
_gambling_, but as this is a serious moral offense, great care should
be exercised to study its application.

From _gambling_ are derived these secondary meanings:

Games of chance; lottery; luck; card playing; any fortuitous
circumstance; by accident; destiny; human life; cards; dice; money
games; disreputable company.

EIGHT OF CLUBS--_Upright._ As a representative of an individual, this
card designates a brunette, unmarried lady, remarkable for her
personal attractions, of a mild and tractable nature, who, should she
not possess beauty, will win admiration from her accomplishments and
demeanor, as well as from her sincerity and virtue.

As a general thing this card signifies _the art of pleasing_, or, as
it is more appropriately styled, _a virtuous girl_, in which
connection, its meaning is expressed in the synonyms:

A virgin; chaste; modest; virtuous; genteel; becoming; decent;
decorous; suitable; befitting; civil; kind; courteous; polished;
polite; well bred; accomplished; condescending; meek; hospitable; good
manners.

EIGHT OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ As an individual's representative, this
card, when reversed, denotes a middling dark complexioned unmarried
woman, with dark chestnut hair, and eyes nearly approaching black in
color. She will be vain of her personal charms, and make little
account of the world's opinion should her own desires be gratified.

The primary signification of this card is _removal_ or _departure_,
and can be appropriately expressed in the following synonyms:

Moving; to move; change of residence; at a distance; remote; absence;
separation; dispersion; going aside; out of the way; ramble;
excursion; digression; flight; to discard; disdain; repugnance;
aversion; incompatibility; opposition; division; rupture, and
antipathy.

This card, reversed, has moreover the signification of _indecorum_,
which can be used in these different senses:

Inhospitable; ill bred; discourteous; bad manners; immodest; unchaste;
insincere; boorish; brazen faced; slovenly; a virago; a tartar; a
wanton.

SEVEN OF CLUBS--_Upright._ The principal primary signification of this
card is a _trifle in money_, but which, however, has been amplified to
designate _economy_, or the art of spending very little money to the
best advantage. Consequently from this source we have the following
synonyms:

Good behavior; wise administration of affairs; foresight; discretion;
order; regularity; household virtues; good management; wisdom;
happiness; prosperity.

This card likewise signifies _company_ or _sociability_, in which
connection it can be taken to denote:

Association; an assembly; a gathering; family party; friendly
intercourse; pleasant relations; harmless pastimes; domestic
recreations; balls; concerts; theater.

Still, its most important signification is a _child_. From this
physical object the secondary meanings of this card are extended to
designate the characteristics of childhood applied to after life.
Hence the synonyms of this signification are:

Infancy; childhood; puerility; frivolity; weakness; dependency;
abasement; humiliation; depression; humble; abject; minute; small;
diminutive; helpless.

SEVEN OF CLUBS--_Reversed._ As a general thing this card reversed has
the signification of _embarrassment_ or _impediment_, and, taken in
this light, its meanings, as applied to the exigencies of a correct
interpretation of the consultation, will be found in some one of these
synonyms:

Hindrance; entanglement; clog; fuss; intricacy; confusion; exigency;
disorder; distress; to make work; to come to a stand; to perplex; to
puzzle; to obstruct; to delay; to block up; to choke up; to stop up;
to stifle; hurry; bustle; in a fix; in perplexity; at a loss.

It must be borne in mind that this card, when signifying a child, may
come out either upright or reversed.




GROUPS OF CARDS


_All Four, Any Three and Any Two of a Kind, that Come Out in the Deal,
Either Upright or Reversed, to the RIGHT of the Consultant--Their
Meanings._

  Four Kings--Removal.

  Four Queens--Great assemblage of ladies.

  Four Jacks--An illness.

  Four Aces--A great surprise.

  Four Tens--An affair of justice.

  Four Nines--An agreeable surprise.

  Four Eights--A reverse.

  Four Sevens--Intrigue.

  Three Kings--Consultation.

  Three Queens--Female deceit.

  Three Jacks--A trifling dispute.

  Three Aces--Paltry success.

  Three Tens--Change in social position.

  Three Nines--Petty results.

  Three Eights--Unfortunate marriage.

  Three Sevens--Pain in the limbs. Contrariness.

  Two Kings--Petty counsel.

  Two Queens--Friends.

  Two Jacks--Inquietude.

  Two Aces--Deception.

  Two Tens--Change.

  Two Nines--A little money.

  Two Eights--A new acquaintance.

  Two Sevens--Trifling news.


_All Four, Any Three and Any Two of a Kind, that Come Out in the Deal,
Either Upright or Reversed, to the LEFT of the Consultant--Their
Meanings._

  Four Kings--Celerity in business matters.

  Four Queens--Bad company.

  Four Jacks--Privation.

  Four Aces--Disagreeable surprise.

  Four Tens--An occurrence, an event.

  Four Nines--Disagreeable surprise.

  Four Eights--Error.

  Four Sevens--An unjust man.

  Three Kings--Commerce.

  Three Queens--Friendly repast.

  Three Jacks--Idleness.

  Three Aces--Misconduct.

  Three Tens--Want.

  Three Nines--Imprudence.

  Three Eights--A play.

  Three Sevens--Great joy.

  Two Kings--You have projects.

  Two Queens--Occupation.

  Two Jacks--Company.

  Two Aces--Enemies.

  Two Tens--To be in expectation.

  Two Nines--Profit.

  Two Eights--You will be crossed.

  Two Sevens--A new acquaintance will criticize you.




COMBINATIONS OF TWO CARDS


_Coming Together in the Deal--Their Meanings--"Upright" Unless
Otherwise Stated--First Card Named is the Lefthand One of the Two._

  Seven of diamonds and seven of spades, both reversed--A quarrel.

  Seven and queen of diamonds, both reversed--A quarrel.

  Nine of diamonds and eight of hearts--A journey.

  Ace of spades reversed and nine of hearts--Despair.

  Nine of diamonds and seven of spades reversed--Delay.

  Eight of clubs and ace of clubs reversed--Declaration of love.

  Eight of diamonds and eight of spades--A difficulty between two
    persons.

  Ten of clubs reversed and eight of diamonds--You will go out of
    your way to reach your house.

  Seven of spades and seven of hearts, both reversed--Security,
    independence; deliverance from some trouble.

  Ace of hearts and ace of spades reversed--Distrust.

  King and ace of hearts, both reversed--Loan office or pawnbroker's.

  King of spades reversed and ace of hearts--Palace.

  Ten of diamonds and ten of spades reversed--Anger.

  Nine of spades reversed and nine of diamonds--Great delay.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Banquet hall; festivity.

  Seven of hearts and seven of spades reversed--You are undecided
    regarding a certain person.

  Ten and ace of diamonds--You will send a letter to a foreign city.

  Eight of clubs reversed and ten of diamonds--Departure for a distant
    foreign city.

  Jack and ace of spades--Second marriage.

  Ace of spades and seven of spades reversed--Lawsuit.

  Jack of hearts and jack of spades reversed--Uneasiness about politics.

  Ace of clubs and seven of diamonds reversed--A deal of money.

  Queen of spades and eight of hearts--A blonde widow.

  Ace of hearts reversed and jack of diamonds--Someone is waiting for
    you.

  Ace of hearts and ten of diamonds--A blow.

  Queen of diamonds reversed and king of diamonds--A handsome stranger.

  Jack of diamonds reversed and ace of spades--You await somebody.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Ballroom.

  Ace and ten of clubs--A sum of money.

  Ace of spades reversed and queen of clubs--Injustice.

  Ace of hearts reversed and ten of hearts--Surprise at the house.

  Ten of clubs and ten of spades, both reversed--Loss of money.

  Ten of spades and ten of clubs, both reversed--Money at night.

  Seven of clubs and seven of hearts--You think of silver.

  Seven of hearts and ten of diamonds--You will have gold.

  Ten of diamonds and ace of clubs reversed--Present of gold.

  Ten of clubs and ten of hearts--Surprise of money.

  Ace of hearts and seven of diamonds reversed--Words at the house.

  Seven of spades and ace of clubs, both reversed--Declaration of love.

  Eight of diamonds and seven of hearts reversed--You desire to take a
    walk.

  Ace of clubs reversed and ten of hearts--A love surprise.

  Ten of spades and seven of hearts reversed--You will receive a shock.

  Seven of hearts and ten of spades reversed--You will lose a small
    object.

  King and ace of hearts, both reversed--Gaming house. Stock exchange.

  King and queen of clubs--Married couple.

  Ten of diamonds and eight of hearts reversed--Unexpected voyage.

  Jack of diamonds reversed and queen of diamonds--A domestic and
    home-loving woman.

  Eight of diamonds and eight of spades--Sickness.

  Eight of diamonds and eight of clubs--Moving to the country.

  Ace of clubs and ten of spades, both reversed--Jealousy in love.

  Eight of diamonds and seven of spades reversed--Hesitation about going
    to the country.

  Queen of clubs and seven of diamonds reversed--Discussion.

  Seven of spades reversed and seven of hearts--You think of being
    someone's friend.

  Ace of spades reversed and nine of diamonds--You will experience a
    delay with some paper.

  Ace of hearts and jack of clubs--Flattery.

  Eight of clubs reversed and eight of hearts--Great affection.

  Seven of diamonds and seven of clubs, both reversed--A great deal of
    embarrassment.

  Seven of spades reversed and nine of diamonds--Certain delay or
    separation.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Convent.

  King and nine of spades, both reversed--Want.

  King and queen of hearts--A married couple in good society.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Court of justice.

  King of diamonds and eight of clubs--Robber.

  Eight of clubs and king of diamonds--Theft.

  King and nine of spades, both reversed--Unjust accusation.

  King of diamonds reversed and ace of clubs--A rich countryman.

  Jack of diamonds reversed and jack of spades--Strange young man.

  Ace of spades and jack of diamonds, both reversed--Someone expects
    you.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Large house, hotel.

  Queen and ace of spades, both reversed--Infidelity.

  Ace of spades reversed and king of hearts--Hospital.

  Ace of clubs and ace of spades, both reversed--Imprisonment.

  King and queen of clubs--Man and wife.

  King of hearts reversed and ace of hearts--Government house;
    campground.

  Ace of hearts and eight of hearts reversed--Money due.

  Ace of clubs reversed and ace of diamonds--Love-letter.

  Queen of hearts and nine of spades reversed--A lady in mourning.

  King and queen of diamonds, both reversed--A country lady and
    gentleman.

  Ace of hearts and queen of clubs reversed--Injustice.


A WORD OF ADVICE.

It will be found of material assistance to the complete understanding
of each of the following methods of telling fortunes to have in your
hands a 32-card pack as you read, and to carefully follow out the
details with the exact cards mentioned in the text. We strongly
recommend this plan to the student who desires to become an adept in
the art.


SPECIAL NOTE.

In all the following methods the 32-card pack is used, which consists
of the ace, king, queen, jack, ten, nine, eight and seven only of each
suit, and usually the extra Consultant card to represent the person
consulting the cards.

When about to consult the oracle, the cards should be arranged in the
following manner before shuffling: King, queen, jack, ace, ten, nine,
eight and seven of each suit. This precaution should be taken for
every consultation, whether for yourself or for another person, as
without this the permutation may chance not to be perfect.




DEALING THE CARDS BY THREES


The pack of thirty-two selected cards is taken, and a card is selected
to represent the dealer, supposing he is making the essay on his own
behalf; if not, it must represent the person for whom he is acting. In
doing this, if the Consultant card be not used, it is necessary to
remember that the card chosen should be according to the complexion of
the chooser. King or queen of diamonds for a very fair person; king or
queen of hearts for one rather dark; clubs for one darker still; and
spades only for one very dark indeed. The card chosen also loses its
signification, and simply becomes the representative of a dark or fair
man or woman as the case may be. This point having been settled, the
cards are shuffled, and either cut by the dealer or for him (according
to whether he is acting for himself or another person), the left hand
being used. That done, they are turned up by threes, and every time
two of the same suit are found in these triplets, such as two hearts,
two clubs, etc., the highest card is withdrawn and placed on the table
in front. If the triplet chance to be all the same suit, the highest
card is still to be the only one withdrawn, but should it consist of
three of the same value, such as three kings, etc., they are all to be
appropriated. If after having turned up the cards, three by three, six
have been able to be withdrawn, there will remain twenty-six, which
are shuffled and cut, and again turned up by threes, acting precisely
as before, until thirteen, fifteen or seventeen cards have been
obtained. The number must always be uneven, and the card representing
the person consulting must be amongst the number; if not, it must be
drawn out and put at the end.

Say that the person whose fortune is being read is a lady, represented
by the queen of hearts, and that fifteen cards are obtained and laid
out in the form of a semi-circle in the order they were drawn: The
seven of clubs, the ten of diamonds, the seven of hearts, the jack of
clubs, the king of diamonds, the nine of diamonds, the ten of hearts,
the queen of spades, the eight of hearts, the jack of diamonds, the
queen of hearts, the nine of clubs, the seven of spades, the ace of
clubs, the eight of spades. The cards having been considered, there
are found among them two queens, two jacks, two tens, three sevens,
two eights and two nines. It is therefore possible to announce:--"The
two queens are supposed to signify the re-union of friends; the two
jacks, that there is mischief being made between them. These two tens,
a change, which, from one of them being between two sevens, will not
be effected without some difficulty; the cause of which, according to
these three sevens, will be illness. However, these two nines can
promise some small gain; resulting, so say these two eights, from a
love affair."

Seven cards are now counted from right to left, beginning with the
queen of hearts, who represents the lady consulting the cards. The
seventh being the king of diamonds, the following may be said: "You
often think of a fair man in uniform."

The next seventh card (counting the king of diamonds as one) proves to
be the ace of clubs: "You will receive from him some very joyful
tidings; he, besides, intends making you a present."

Count the ace of clubs as one, and proceeding to the next seventh
card, the queen of spades: "A widow is endeavoring to injure you on
this very account; and (the seventh card counting the queen as one
being the ten of diamonds) the annoyance she gives you will oblige you
to either take a journey or change your residence; but (this ten of
diamonds being imprisoned between two sevens) your journey or removal
will meet with some obstacle."

On proceeding to count as before, calling the ten of diamonds one, the
seventh card will be found to be the queen of hearts herself, the
person consulting; therefore, the conclusion may be stated as: "But
this you will overcome of yourself, without needing anyone's aid or
assistance."

The two cards at either extremity of the half circle are now taken,
which are respectively the eight of spades and seven of clubs, and
may be read: "A sickness which will result in your receiving a small
sum of money."

Repeat the same maneuver, which brings together the ace of clubs and
the ten of diamonds:

"Good news, which will make you decide on taking a journey, destined
to prove a very happy one, and which will occasion you to receive a
sum of money."

The next cards united, being the seven of spades and the seven of
hearts, you say:

"Tranquillity and peace of mind, followed by slight anxiety, quickly
followed by love and happiness."

Then come the nine of clubs and the jack of clubs: "You will certainly
receive money through the exertions of a clever dark young man."

Queen of hearts and king of diamonds: "Which comes from a fair man in
uniform. This recontre announces great happiness in store for you, and
the complete fulfillment of your wishes."

Jack of diamonds and nine of diamonds: "Although this happy result
will be delayed some time through a fair young man, not famed for his
delicacy."

Eight of hearts and ten of hearts: "Love, joy and triumph."

"The queen of spades, who remains alone, is the widow endeavoring to
injure you, and finds herself deserted by all her friends."

The cards that have been in use are now gathered up and shuffled and
cut with the left hand. They are then made into three packs by dealing
one to the left, one to the middle, and one to the right; a fourth is
laid aside to form "a surprise." Then the cards are continued to be
dealt to each of the three packs in turn until their number is
exhausted, when it will be found that the left hand and middle packs
contain each five cards, while the one on the right hand consists of
only four.

The person consulting is now asked to select one of the three packs.
Supposing this to be the middle one, and that the cards comprising it
are the jack of diamonds, the king of diamonds, the seven of spades,
the queen of spades, the seven of clubs; recollecting the previous
instructions regarding the individual and the supposed relative
signification of the cards, they may be easily interpreted as follows:
"The jack of diamonds--a fair young man possessed of no delicacy of
feeling, seeks to injure--the king of diamonds--a fair man in
uniform--seven of spades--and will succeed in causing him some
annoyance--the queen of spades--at the instigation of a spiteful
woman--seven of clubs--but by means of a small sum of money matters
will be easily arranged."

The left hand pack is next taken up, which is "for the house" the
former one having been for the lady herself.

Supposing it to consist of the queen of hearts, the jack of clubs,
the eight of hearts, the nine of diamonds and the ace of clubs, they
would be read thus: "Queen of hearts--the lady whose fortune is being
told is or soon will be in a house--jack of clubs--where she will meet
with a dark young man, who--eight of hearts--will entreat her
assistance to forward his interests with a fair girl--nine of
diamonds--he having met with delay and disappointment--ace of
clubs--but a letter will arrive announcing the possession of money,
which will remove all difficulties."

The third pack is "for those who do not expect it," and will be
composed of four cards: the ten of hearts, the nine of clubs, eight of
spades, and ten of diamonds: "The ten of hearts--an unexpected piece
of good fortune and great happiness--nine of clubs--caused by an
unlooked for legacy--eight of spades--which joy may be followed by a
short sickness--ten of diamonds--the result of a fatiguing journey."

There now remains on the table only the card intended for "the
surprise." This, however, must be left untouched, the other cards
gathered up, shuffled, cut, and again laid out in three packs, not
forgetting at the first deal to add a card to "the surprise." After
the different packs have been duly examined and explained as before
described, they must again be gathered up, shuffled, etc., indeed the
whole operation repeated, after which, the three cards forming "the
surprise" are examined, and supposing them to be the seven of hearts,
the jack of clubs and the queen of spades, they are to be thus
interpreted: "Seven of hearts--pleasant thoughts and friendly
intentions--jack of clubs--of a dark young man--queen of
spades--relative to a malicious dark woman, who will cause him much
unhappiness."




DEALING THE CARDS BY FIVES


Shuffle the 32-card pack thoroughly and cut it twice with the left
hand, placing the first cut face downward at the right hand and the
second on the left.

Now take off the top card of the middle package and place it aside,
and repeat the shuffling and cutting of the balance in a precisely
similar manner, and again remove the top card of the middle package.
Repeat shuffling, cutting and discarding until you have in this way
taken out five cards. This done, examine if the Consultant be among
the number of cards taken from the pack. If it be, shuffle the five
cards well, and then deal them in a row, turning their faces up from
right to left in this manner:

  5, 4, 3, 2, 1

and proceed to read them from the same direction.

If the Consultant be not found among the five cards drawn as above,
take it from the pack and substitute it for one taken by chance from
the five cards after shuffling them thoroughly, faces down, so that
the card to be discarded shall not be recognized. After placing the
Consultant among the other four cards, shuffle well and deal as
directed, and you have your oracle of five cards for consultation and
explanation, and among which the Consultant will appear in its proper
position.

As an example, let us say that the five cards obtained are, from right
to left, as follows: Ten of hearts, ten of clubs, Consultant, eight of
clubs reversed and ten of diamonds.

The Consultant having behind him the eight of clubs near to the ten of
diamonds, these two cards announce to him his residence at a distance
in a foreign city, and the two tens which are found placed behind him
notifies that he is about to quit his house (ten of clubs) and the
city (ten of hearts) where he now lives.




DEALING THE CARDS BY SEVENS


After having shuffled the pack of thirty-two selected cards either cut
them yourself or, if acting for another person, let that person cut
them, taking care to use the left hand. Then count seven cards,
beginning with the one lying on the top of the pack. The first six are
useless, so put them aside, and retain only the seventh, which is to
be placed face uppermost on the table before you. Repeat this three
times more, then shuffle and cut the cards you have thrown on one
side, together with those remaining in your hand, and tell them out in
sevens as before, until you have thus obtained twelve cards. It is
however indispensable that the Consultant card or one representing the
person whose fortune is being told should be among the number;
therefore the whole operation must be recommenced in case of it not
having made its appearance. Your twelve cards being now spread out
before you in the order in which they have come to hand, you may begin
to explain them as described in the manner of dealing the cards in
threes--always bearing in mind both their individual and relative
signification. Thus, you first count the cards by sevens, beginning
with the one representing the person for whom you are acting, going
from right to left. Then take the two cards at either extremity of the
line or half-circle, and unite them, and afterwards form the three
heaps or packs and "the surprise" precisely as we have before
described. Indeed, the only difference between this and the three card
method is the manner in which the cards are obtained.




DEALING BY FIFTEENS


After the cards have been well shuffled and cut, they are dealt out in
two packs containing sixteen cards in each. The person consulting is
desired to choose one of them; the first card is laid aside to form
"the surprise," the other fifteen are turned up and ranged in a half
circle before the dealer, going from left to right, being placed in
the order in which they come to hand. If the card representing the
person consulting be not among them the cards must be all gathered up,
shuffled, cut, and dealt as before, and this must be repeated till the
missing card makes its appearance in the pack chosen by the person it
represents. They are explained, first, by interpreting the meaning of
any pairs, triplets, or quartettes among them; then by counting them
in sevens, going from right to left, and beginning with the card
representing the person consulting, and lastly, by taking the cards at
either extremity of the line, and pairing them. This being done, the
fifteen cards are gathered up, shuffled, cut, and dealt so as to form
three packs of five cards each. From each of these the topmost card is
withdrawn and placed on the one laid aside for "the surprise," thus
forming four packs of four cards each.

The person consulting is desired to choose one of these packs for
herself or for himself as the case may be. This is turned up, and the
four cards it contains are spread out from left to right, the
individual and relative signification ascribed to them being duly
explained. In like manner the pack on the left, which will be "for the
house," is used; then the third one, "for those who do not expect it;"
and lastly, "the surprise."

In order to make the meaning perfectly clear another example is given.
It is supposed that the pack for the person consulting consists of the
jack of hearts, the ace of diamonds, the queen of clubs and the eight
of spades reversed.

It will be easy to interpret them as follows: "The jack of hearts--a
gay young bachelor--the ace of diamonds--who has written, or who will
very soon write a letter--the queen of clubs--to a dark woman--eight
of spades reversed--to make proposals to her, which will not be
accepted." On looking back to the list of significations, it will be
found to run thus:

  Jack of Hearts--A gay young bachelor who thinks only of pleasure.

  Ace of Diamonds--A letter, soon to be received.

  Queen of Clubs--An affectionate woman, but quick tempered and
    touchy.

  Eight of Spades--If reversed, a marriage broken off, or offer
    refused.

It will thus be seen that each card forms, as it were, a phrase, from
an assemblage of which nothing but a little practice is required to
form complete sentences. Of this a further example will be given by
interpreting the signification of the three other packs.

"For the house" is supposed to consist of the queen of hearts, the
jack of spades reversed, the ace of clubs and the nine of diamonds,
which are supposed to read thus: "The queen of hearts--a fair woman,
mild and amiable in disposition--jack of spades reversed--will be
deceived by a dark, ill bred young man--the ace of clubs--but she will
receive some good news, which will console her--nine of
diamonds--although it is probable that this news may be delayed."

The pack "for those who do not expect it," consists of the queen of
diamonds, the king of spades, the ace of hearts reversed, and the
seven of spades: "The queen of diamonds--a mischief-making woman--the
king of spades--in league with a dishonest lawyer---ace of hearts
reversed--they will hold a consultation--seven of spades--but the harm
they will do will soon be repaired."

Last comes "the surprise," formed by, it is supposed, the jack of
clubs, the ten of diamonds, the queen of spades and the nine of
spades, of which the supposed interpretation is: "The jack of clubs--a
clever, enterprising young man--ten of diamonds--about to undertake a
journey--queen of spades--for the purpose of visiting a widow--nine
of spades--but one or both their lives will be endangered."




THE TWENTY-ONE CARD METHOD


After the thirty-two cards have been shuffled and cut with the left
hand, the first eleven are withdrawn from the pack and laid on one
side. The remainder--twenty-one in all--are to be again shuffled and
cut, that being done, the topmost card is laid on one side to form
"the surprise," and the remaining twenty are ranged before the dealer
in the order in which they come to hand. If the card representing the
person consulting be not among them, one must be withdrawn from the
eleven useless ones placed at the right extremity of the row, where it
represents the missing card, no matter what it may really be. Let us
suppose that the person wishing to make the essay is an officer in the
army, and consequently represented by the king of diamonds, and that
the twenty cards ranged in front of you are: Queen of diamonds, king
of clubs, ten of hearts, ace of spades, queen of hearts reversed,
seven of spades, jack of diamonds, ten of clubs, king of spades, eight
of diamonds, king of hearts, nine of clubs, jack of spades reversed,
seven of hearts, ten of spades, king of diamonds, ace of diamonds,
seven of clubs, nine of hearts, ace of clubs. You now proceed to
examine the cards as they lay, and perceiving that all the four kings
are there, you can predict that great rewards await the person
consulting you, and that he will gain great dignity and honor. The two
queens, one of them reversed, announce the reunion of two sorrowful
friends; the three aces, foretell good news; the two jacks, one of
them reversed, danger; the three tens, improper conduct.

You now begin to explain the cards, commencing with the first on the
left hand: "The queen of diamonds is a mischief-making, under-bred
woman--the king of clubs--endeavoring to win the affections of a
worthy and estimable man--ten of hearts--over whose scruples she will
triumph--ace of spades--the affair will make some noise--queen of
hearts reversed--and greatly distress a charming fair woman who loves
him--seven of spades--but her grief will not be of long duration. Jack
of diamonds--an unfaithful servant--ten of clubs--will make away with
a considerable sum of money--king of spades--and will be brought to
trial--eight of diamonds--but saved from punishment through a woman's
agency. King of hearts--a fair man of liberal disposition--nine of
clubs--will receive a large sum of money--jack of spades
reversed--which will expose him to the malice of a dark youth of
coarse manners. Seven of hearts--pleasant thoughts, followed by--ten
of spades--great chagrin--king of diamonds--await a man in uniform,
who is the person consulting me--ace of diamonds--but a letter he will
speedily receive--seven of clubs--containing a small sum of
money--nine of hearts--will restore his good spirits--ace of
clubs--which will be further augmented by some good news." Now turn up
"the surprise" which it is supposed will prove the ace of hearts, "a
card that is taken to predict great happiness, caused by a love
letter, but which, making up the four aces, is said to show that this
sudden joy will be followed by great misfortunes."

The cards are now gathered up, shuffled, cut, and formed into three
packs, at the first deal one being laid aside to form "the surprise."
By the time they are all dealt out it will be found that the two first
packets are each composed of seven cards, whilst the third contains
only six. The person consulting is desired to select one of these,
which is taken up and spread out from left to right, being explained
as before described. The cards are again gathered up, shuffled, cut,
formed into three packs, one card being dealt to "the surprise," and
then proceeding as before. The whole operation is once more repeated,
then the three cards forming "the surprise" are taken up and their
interpretation given.

No matter how the cards are dealt, whether by threes, fives, sevens,
fifteens or twenty-one, when those lower than the jack predominate it
is considered to foretell success. If clubs are the most numerous,
they are supposed to predict gain, considerable fortune, etc. If
picture cards, dignity and honor; hearts, gladness, good news; spades,
death or sickness.

[Illustration]




THE WAY TO TELL A FORTUNE


Illustrating the 21-card deal and the expert fortune-teller's method
of constructing a complete and connected reading of the same, which
you are advised to carefully consider, as a guide for your own use in
delivering an intelligent, interesting and coherent oracle in all
cases where you are rendering an interpretation for others.

A man asks the question:

_Shall I Marry the Woman I Love?_

The fortune-teller turns the cards by the 21-card method, with the
resultant layout as shown in the picture, and proceeds to read the
gentleman's answer in the following language:

You desire to learn, sir, whether you will marry the young lady to
whom you are now paying your addresses? You inform me that the lady is
a blonde; still it is necessary for me to inform you that in order to
be able to foresee whether or not the marriage be accomplished
according to your wishes, I am compelled to select as a representative
card of your future wife, a lady of your own color, for such a one is
necessary for the oracle, otherwise our labors go for nothing. You,
sir, are a middling dark man, and therefore would come up as a
_club_; as a representative card of your beloved we will take the
_queen of clubs_, as of your own complexion.

Now, sir, having performed our deal and arranged the oracle, permit
me, in the first place, to call your attention to the fact that you
stand represented by the _knave of clubs_, and in the next to observe
your position in the oracle.

The _eight of hearts_ coming as it does in company with the _eight of
clubs_, gives me satisfactory information that you entertain for the
young lady a most profound and honorable sentiment of affection, which
it appears to me she reciprocates with a no less degree of intensity.
I have chosen to designate your beloved by the _queen of clubs_, and
she is doubtlessly a personage well worthy of your love, as the _eight
of diamonds_, coming before her in conjunction with the _ace of
hearts_, demonstrates her to be a lady of wisdom, intelligence and
prudence. Observe, moreover, that the _nine of hearts_ intervenes
between you both, but is placed nearest the lady. This card predicts a
union, which is much desired by her, while on your part you regard
your intended with a spirit of admiration bordering almost upon
adoration. Such a union will assuredly be followed by domestic
happiness, by peace and concord in your domestic circle, by a reign of
harmony within your household.

I assure you, sir, that, scrutinizing this oracle from every aspect,
I fail to perceive any obstacle which can interpose to prevent your
contemplated marriage. On the other hand, the prognostications are
decidedly in its favor, for you will be pleased to notice that the
_eight of hearts_ and the _eight of clubs_, coming up side by side,
and between you and your intended, predict a success. Remark more,
that there are _three tens_ at your back, which denotes a change in
your estate or an alteration in your manner of life and social
position.

The presence of the _queen of hearts_ in immediate vicinity to the
_seven of diamonds_, indicates not only the receipt of pleasant
intelligence from a relative able to give you assistance, but
permanent prosperity should you continue in her good graces. I
perceive, likewise, from the _seven of hearts_, that you are at this
moment thinking of visiting your intended father-in-law, formally to
demand the hand of his daughter.

Do not hesitate, my dear sir, to do so, for you will risk nothing by
such an act of courtesy, as it will be crowned with the most happy
results. There can be no doubt on that head, as the presence of the
_king_, _queen_ and _knave of hearts_, coming almost together, and
blended with your new estate, assure you of the respect and esteem of
the family. True, the young lady entertains such affection (_seven of
spades_) for her parent that when she comes to be separated (_nine of
diamonds_) from him upon marriage (_king of diamonds_) the native
impulse of her heart will cause her to shed tears (_ten of spades_)
at the thought (_seven of hearts_) of leaving her paternal roof (_ace
of hearts_).

And now, sir, your surprise. It is a letter (_ace of diamonds_),
which, placed upon the last card to the left, which is the _king of
clubs_, announces to you that you will be surprised through receipt of
a most gratifying epistle from your intended father-in-law in relation
to your approaching marriage.




THE ITALIAN METHOD


Take the pack of thirty-two selected cards, shuffle them well, and
either cut or have them cut for you, according to whether you are
acting for yourself or another person. Turn up the cards by threes,
and when the triplet is composed of cards of the same suit, lay it
aside; when of three different suits, pass it by without withdrawing
any of the three; but when composed of two of one suit and one of
another, withdraw the higher card of the two. When you have come to
the end of the pack, gather up all the cards except those you have
withdrawn; shuffle, cut, and again turn up by threes. Repeat this
operation until you have obtained fifteen cards, which must then be
spread out before you, from left to right, in the order in which they
come to hand.

Care must, however, be taken that the card representing the person
making the essay is among them; if not, the whole operation must be
recommenced until the desired result is obtained. We will suppose it
to be some dark lady--represented by the queen of clubs--who is
anxious to make the attempt for herself, and that the cards are laid
out in the following order, from left to right: Ten of diamonds,
queen of clubs, eight of hearts, ace of diamonds, ten of hearts,
seven of clubs, king of spades, nine of hearts, jack of spades, ace of
clubs, seven of spades, ten of spades, seven of diamonds, ace of
spades, jack of hearts.

On examining them, you will find that there are three aces among them,
announcing good news; but, as they are at some distance from each
other, that the tidings may be some time before they arrive.

The three tens denote that the conduct of the person consulting the
cards has not been always strictly correct. The two jacks are enemies,
and the three sevens predict an illness, caused by them.

You now begin to count five cards, beginning with the queen of clubs,
who represents the person consulting you. The fifth card, being the
seven of clubs, announces that the lady will soon receive a small sum
of money. The next fifth card proving to be the ace of clubs,
signifies that this money will be accompanied by some very joyful
tidings. Next comes the ace of spades, promising complete success to
any projects undertaken by the person consulting the cards; then the
eight of hearts, followed at the proper interval by the king of
spades, showing that the good news will excite the malice of a
dishonest lawyer; but the seven of spades coming next, announces that
the annoyance he can cause will be of short duration, and that a gay,
fair young man--the jack of hearts--will soon console her for what she
has suffered. The ace of diamonds tells that she will soon receive a
letter from this fair young man--the nine of hearts--announcing a
great success--ten of spades--but this will be followed by some slight
chagrin--ten of diamonds--caused by a journey--ten of hearts--but it
will soon pass, although--jack of spades--a bad, dark young man will
endeavor--seven of diamonds--to turn her into ridicule. The queen of
clubs, being representative of herself, shows that it is towards her
that the dark young man's malice will be directed. Now take the cards
at either extremity of the line, and pair them together. The two first
being the jack of hearts and the ten of diamonds, you may say: "A gay
young bachelor is preparing to take a journey--ace of spades and queen
of clubs--which will bring him to the presence of the lady consulting
the cards, and cause her great joy. Seven of diamonds and eight of
hearts--scandal talked about a fair young girl. Ten of spades and ace
of diamonds--tears shed upon receipt of a letter. Seven of spades and
ten of hearts--great joy, mingled with slight sorrow. Seven of clubs
and ace of clubs--a letter promising money. Jack of spades and king of
spades--the winning of a lawsuit. The nine of hearts, being the one
card left, promises complete success."

Now gather up the cards, shuffle, cut, and deal them out in five
packs--one for the lady herself, one for the house, one for "those who
do not expect it," one for "those who do expect it," and one for "the
surprise," in the first deal, laying one card aside for "consolation."
The rest are then equally distributed among the other five packs,
which will four of them contain three cards, whilst the last only
consists of two.

We will suppose the first packet for the lady herself to be composed
of the ace of diamonds, the seven of clubs, and the ten of hearts. The
interpretation would run thus:

"Ace of diamonds--a letter will be shortly received--seven of
clubs--announcing the arrival of a small sum of money--ten of
hearts--and containing some very joyful tidings."

The second pack, "for the house," containing the king of spades, the
nine of hearts, and the jack of spades:

"The person consulting the cards will receive a visit--king of
spades--from a lawyer--nine of hearts--which will greatly
delight--jack of spades--a dark, ill-disposed young man."

The third pack, "for those who do not expect it," composed of the ace
of spades, the jack of hearts, and the ace of clubs, would read:

"Ace of spades--pleasure in store for--jack of hearts--a gay young
bachelor--ace of clubs--by means of money; but as the jack of hearts
is placed between two aces, it is evident that he runs a great risk of
being imprisoned; and from the two cards signifying respectively
'pleasure' and 'money,' that it will be for having run into debt."
The fourth pack, "for those who do expect it," containing the eight of
hearts, the queen of clubs, and the ten of diamonds:

"The eight of hearts--the love-affairs of a fair young girl will
oblige--the queen of clubs--the person consulting the cards--ten of
diamonds--to take a journey."

The fifth pack, "for the surprise," consists of the seven of spades
and the ten of spades, meaning:

"Seven of spades--slight trouble--ten of spades--caused by some
person's imprisonment--the card of consolation--seven of
diamonds--which will turn out to have been a mere report."




THE FLORENCE MODE


A pack is taken of thirty-two selected cards, shuffled well and cut in
three, then laid out in four rows of eight cards each. Significator is
made any king or queen that may be preferred; then seven are counted
from that significator from left to right, and from right to left,
also crossways, always starting from the king or queen that represents
the person consulting. The thoughts, which are supposed to be
indicated by the jacks, may then be counted from, or the house, or a
letter; in fact, anything about which information is desired; when
this is explained, the cards are paired from each extremity, each pair
being explained as arrived at till the pack is finished. They are now
gathered up, shuffled and cut in three; then turned up by threes, the
highest of each suit being taken out.

When three of equal value come together, such as three aces, three
kings, etc., they must all be taken out; the same is to be done should
three of a suit come together; this is to be repeated three times,
shuffling and cutting between each, and when the pack has been gone
through, any that are remaining over must be put on one side and not
used. Seven cards are counted again from significator, and paired as
before.

The meanings ascribed to some of the cards being different from those
already given, are here stated:

    Ten of Clubs--A journey or big building.

    Eight of Clubs--Drink or vexation.

    Ten of Spades--At night-time.

    Nine of Spades--Disappointment or sickness.

    Ten of Diamonds--Money.

    Seven of Diamonds--Check or paper money; sometimes an article of
    jewelry.

    Three Sevens--A loss.

    Four Tens--A great social rise through powerful friends.

    Two Jacks--Treachery.

    Ten of Hearts--An entertainment.

    Seven of Hearts--Delay or slight anxiety.

    Seven of Spades--Speedily.

    Seven of Diamonds and Ace of Spades--News read in the newspaper.

    Ace of Spades and any Court Card--Photograph.

    Two Red Tens with Ace of Diamonds--A wedding.

    Two Black Tens with Ace of Spades--A funeral.

    Eight and Nine of Clubs--Dinner or supper party.

    Seven of Clubs--A present.

    Three Eights--Good business transactions.

    Three Nines--A removal.

    Three Tens--A rise, either of money or social.




PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE


The person wishing to try her fortune in this manner (we will suppose
her to be a young, fair person, represented by the eight of hearts),
must well shuffle, and cut with the left hand, the pack of thirty-two
cards; after which she must lay aside the topmost and undermost cards,
to form the surprise. There will now remain thirty cards, which must
be dealt out in three parcels--one to the left, one in the middle, and
one to the right.

The left-hand pack represents the Past; the middle, the Present; and
the one on the right hand, the Future. She must commence with the
Past, which we will suppose to contain these ten cards: The king of
clubs, ace of spades, jack of diamonds, nine of diamonds, ace of
hearts, jack of hearts, queen of hearts, king of spades, jack of
clubs, and the king of hearts.

She would remark that picture-cards predominating was a favorable
sign, also that the presence of three kings proves that powerful
persons were interesting themselves in her affairs; the three jacks,
however, are supposed to warn her to beware of false friends; the nine
of diamonds, some great annoyance overcome by some good and amiable
person, represented by the queen of hearts; the two aces, notice of a
plot. Taking the cards in the order they lay: "The king of clubs--a
frank, open hearted man--ace of spades--fond of gayety and pleasure,
is disliked by--jack of diamonds--an unfaithful friend--nine of
diamonds--who seeks to injure him. The ace of hearts--a love
letter--jack of hearts--from a gay young bachelor to a fair amiable
woman--queen of hearts--causes--king of spades--a lawyer to endeavor
to injure the clever--jack of clubs--enterprising young man, who is
saved from him by--the king of hearts--a good and powerful man.
Nevertheless, as the jack of clubs is placed between two similar
cards, he has run great risk of being imprisoned through the
machinations of his enemy."

The second parcel, the Present, containing the ten of diamonds, nine
of spades, eight of spades, queen of diamonds, queen of clubs, eight
of hearts, seven of spades, ten of spades, queen of spades, eight of
diamonds, signifies:

"The ten of diamonds--a voyage or journey, at that moment taking
place--nine of spades--caused by the death or dangerous illness of
someone--eight of spades--whose state will occasion great grief--queen
of diamonds--to a fair woman. The queen of clubs--an affectionate
woman seeks to console--eight of hearts--a fair young girl, who is the
person making the essay--seven of spades--who has secret griefs--ten
of spades--causing her many tears--queen of spades--these are
occasioned by the conduct of either a dark woman or a widow,
who--eight of diamonds--is her rival."

The third packet of cards, the Future, we will suppose to contain the
eight of clubs, ten of clubs, seven of diamonds, ten of hearts, seven
of clubs, nine of hearts, ace of diamonds, jack of spades, seven of
hearts, and the nine of clubs, which would read thus:

"In the first place, the large number of small cards foretells success
in enterprises, although the presence of three sevens predicts an
illness. The eight of clubs--a dark young girl--ten of clubs--is about
to inherit a large fortune--seven of diamonds--but her satirical
disposition will destroy--ten of hearts--all her happiness. Seven of
clubs--a little money and--nine of hearts--much joy--ace of
hearts--will be announced to the person making the essay by a letter,
and--jack of spades--a wild young man--seven of hearts--will be over
joyed at receiving--nine of clubs--some unexpected tidings. The cards
of surprise--viz., the king of diamonds and the ace of clubs--predict
that a letter will be received from some military man and that it will
contain money."




THE MATRIMONIAL ORACLE


In the case of consultation upon the subject of marriages in general,
the Consultant should be withdrawn from the pack, inasmuch as it is
necessary that the couple should be of the same color, in order that a
marriage be formed.

Should the young lady be a blonde who consults the oracle upon
questions of marriage, she should pick out the jack of hearts and the
queen of hearts, and taking these two cards from out of the pack,
place them aside; then, let her shuffle the cards well and again pick
out eleven, which are in like manner set aside. Then take up the jack
and queen of hearts and replace them among the remaining cards in the
pack, shuffle them again, place them in succession in a line from
right to left. It is necessary so that the marriage be an accomplished
fact, that a quint, or five cards in hearts, appear in the lay-out,
and, if it be found at the end of the deal at your left, the marriage
will be a certainty; but, should the nine of diamonds or the seven of
spades be placed in front, the marriage will be most certainly
delayed; should the nine of diamonds alone appear, the delay will be
not over serious; but should, in place of these cards, there be found
the king of spades inverted, or three tens, the marriage will never
come off.

If the lady be a brunette she will take the jack of clubs, and, if
very dark, the jack of spades as her representative husband, and
represent herself by a queen of corresponding color, always taking
care that the card ordinarily used as the Consultant be retired from
the pack.

Should a widow desire to contract a second marriage, she represents
herself as the queen of clubs and her future husband as the king of
clubs, which cards should be retired and placed aside. Then the pack
is shuffled well and dealt upon the table, face downward, in five
rows; take these up again in a reversed manner, shuffle them well and
cause the consultant to cut, and to select eleven from the pack, which
are to be put aside. Then retake the king and queen of clubs, and
place them among the remainder of the pack, whence the eleven have
been withdrawn; shuffle well and again let them be cut, and then deal,
placing the first one dealt upon the table directly in front of you in
an isolated position--this is the surprise. Deal the others and place
them in a single line below the surprise card on the table, ranging
from right to left, one by one. Turn over all the cards except the
surprise, which is only to be consulted after the rest. Read the cards
thus placed likewise from right to left, and study their
significations well. It is necessary, in order that the widow's desire
for a second marriage be successful, that the queen of spades come
out inverted, that the king of the same color likewise appear, and
that the jack of spades be at the side of the ace of spades or of
hearts, and under this combination her second marriage is an assured
fact. Should the ace of spades emerge near the jack, it will also be
necessary that the ace of hearts come out to effect an alliance; but,
if the consultant have three tens before her, the marriage will not
occur; and, should the nine of spades come out, it denotes absolute
failure. Again, if instead of these cards the eight of clubs and the
eight of hearts appear, the marriage will be a great success. Great
care should be observed in noticing whether three eights appear behind
the Consultant, for in that instance the marriage will not be a happy
one.

[Illustration: _The Star Method._]




THE STAR METHOD


We will suppose the person making the essay to be a widow, and
consequently represented by the queen of spades. This card is,
therefore, to be withdrawn from the pack, and laid face uppermost upon
the table. The remaining thirty-one cards are then to be well
shuffled, cut, the topmost card withdrawn and placed lengthwise, and
face uppermost, above the head of the queen of spades. The cards are
to be shuffled, cut, and the topmost card withdrawn, twelve more
times, the manner of their arrangement being this: The queen of spades
in the center, the first card lengthwise above her head, the second
ditto at her feet, the third on her right side, the fourth on her
left, the fifth placed upright above the first, the sixth ditto below
the second, the seventh at the right of the third, the eighth at the
left of the fourth, the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, at the
four corners, and the thirteenth across the center card--the queen of
spades--thus forming a star. (See engraving.) We will suppose the
fourteenth card to be the queen of spades, which represents the person
making the essay; then--1. Ace of hearts; 2. King of clubs; 3. Ten of
clubs; 4. Nine of diamonds; 5. Queen of clubs; 6. Eight of hearts; 7.
Ten of spades; 8. Jack of clubs; 9. Seven of clubs; 10. Ten of hearts;
11. Jack of diamonds; 12. Eight of diamonds; 13. Nine of clubs. These
being placed at right angles, the person consulting them takes them up
two by two, beginning with those last laid down.

The first card, 12, the eight of diamonds, and the one in the opposite
corner, viz., 11, the jack of diamonds, read--"Overtures will be
made--jack of diamonds--by a fair young man--next two cards, 10 and 9,
ten of hearts--which will prove unsuccessful--seven of clubs--on
account of something connected with money. Next two cards, 8 and 7,
the jack of clubs--a clever dark young man--ten of spades--will be
greatly grieved by, 6--eight of hearts, a fair girl to whom he is
attached. Next two cards, 5 and 4, the queen of clubs--a dark
woman--nine of diamonds--will be annoyed at not receiving, 3--ten of
clubs--a sum of money--next two cards, 2 and 1, the king of
clubs--which was to have been sent her by a generous dark man, who is
fond of obliging his friends--ace of hearts--it will at last arrive,
accompanied by a love-letter--13th card, placed across the queen of
spades, nine of clubs--and be the cause of unexpected gain to the
person consulting the cards."




SHORTER STAR METHOD


The shorter and simpler star method surrounds the card representing
the person trying his or her fortune with a less number of cards. The
cards are shuffled and cut as before described, and the topmost one
withdrawn. We will suppose the center card to be the jack of clubs,
representing a dark young man. The first topmost one proves to be the
ace of clubs and is placed above the head of the jack. The second, the
eight of hearts, is placed at his feet; the third, the jack of
diamonds, at his right; the fourth, the queen of spades, at his left.
These are now read: Ace of clubs--"you will soon receive a letter
which will give you great pleasure"--eight of hearts--"from a fair
girl"--jack of diamonds--"a man in uniform"--queen of spades--"and a
malicious widow will seek to injure you on that very account."




WISHES


Having finished all the different methods of laying the cards, various
indications will now be given which are supposed to show whether the
one who is consulting will obtain his or her wish. These are done in
various methods, and each is given in order.


WISH NO. I.

The pack of thirty-two selected cards having been well shuffled and
cut, proceed by turning them up by threes; if an ace appears amongst
the three, those three cards must be taken out; and if the nine of
hearts and the significator appear, they must also be taken out with
the cards that accompany them. This operation has to be repeated three
times, and if in the three times the four aces, the significator and
the nine of hearts come out in eleven or nine cards, then the wish is
taken to be certain; if they do not appear under twelve or fifteen, it
is said the wish will not come to pass. To make the meaning perfectly
clear, we will suppose that a dark man, represented by the king of
clubs, is making the essay. Having well shuffled and cut the cards,
they must be turned up in threes.

In the first come the king of diamonds, ace of spades, and king of
clubs--the person who is making the essay; the next three are king and
queen of spades and ten of diamonds--these are useless; the next
three, the ten of hearts, six of diamonds and king of hearts--these
are laid on one side; then the seven and eight of spades and ace of
diamonds--these are withdrawn and are put over the other three, with
the ace and significator; the next three--nine of diamonds, eight of
clubs and ace of clubs, these come out; likewise the jack of clubs,
ten of spades, and ace of hearts, and the two left are the jack of
spades and nine of hearts--the other cards are useless. Fourteen cards
are now left, they are shuffled and cut, and again dealt in threes.

The ace of spades, nine of hearts, king of spades remain; the next
three, ten of spades, ace of hearts and nine of diamonds also remain.
The following triplet: king of diamonds, king of clubs and jack of
clubs all come out. The seven of spades, ace of diamonds and eight of
clubs remain, as also the two last--eight of spades and ace of clubs.
This makes eleven cards, so that the wish is considered to be gained;
but if it is tried the third time, and more cards come out, then it is
supposed that it will be very speedily accomplished.


WISH NO. II.

Shuffle and cut the pack of thirty-two selected cards. Put them
together, and turn up in threes. Supposing there should be two of one
suit, and one of another, the highest is taken out. Should there be
three of one suit, all are to be withdrawn and laid on the table in
front of the dealer, in the shape of a semi-circle or horse shoe. If
three of equal value, such as three kings, or three tens, they are
likewise to come out. The pack is gone through, then shuffled and cut
again. When the end of the pack is arrived at, this is repeated a
third time, acting in the same manner. Now count from the
significator, or if that should not appear naturally, use the jack
(which is taken to represent the thoughts of the person consulting);
seven are counted each way till it is come back to, then the cards are
paired from end to end, being read as arrived at; then all the cards
are shuffled together, cut in three, and dealt out in packets of four,
face downward. Each packet is taken up and looked through, the cards
being turned up one by one till an ace is come to. Should there be no
ace in the parcel it is put on one side--it is useless. The cards are
shuffled and cut again, being turned up as before, and dealt in three
packets, stopping each time at the ace, as before. The third time they
are shuffled but _not_ cut, and dealt in packets of two, and proceeded
with as before. Should the four aces (in the last deal) turn up
without another card, the wish is supposed to be sure, and to come at
once. If they come out with hearts, or diamonds, there will be some
delay, but if the nine or seven of spades makes its appearance with
the aces, then it is said to be a sign of disappointment.


WISH NO. III.

A pack is taken of thirty-two selected cards, and cut with the left
hand; thirteen cards are then dealt out. If amongst these is to be
found one or more aces, lay them aside. The remaining ones are
shuffled and cut and thirteen again dealt; the aces are withdrawn as
before, and again shuffled, cut and dealt. If in these three deals all
four aces make their appearance, it is supposed that the wish will be
granted. If all the aces come at the first deal, the answer is taken
to be in the highest degree favorable. If in the three times only one
or two appear, it is considered that the wish will not be granted.


WISH NO. IV.

A pack of thirty-two selected cards is shuffled and cut, the
consultant wishing all the time. They are laid out in two rows of four
each, face downwards. When two pairs come up, they must be covered by
the cards held in the dealer's hand. Should it be possible to cover
each pair--such as two kings, two queens, etc., it is supposed that
the wish will be granted. If the cards do not pair easily, it is said
the wish will not come to pass, or, at any rate, not for a long
period.

The following is taken to show whether the wish will be granted: The
cards are well shuffled, the consultant keeping his thoughts all the
time fixed upon whatever wish he may have formed; the cards are cut
once, and the card cut is noted; they are shuffled again and dealt out
into three parcels--each of these being examined in turn, and if it is
found that the card turned up next, either the one representing the
dealer or the person who is consulting him--the ace of hearts or the
nine of hearts, it is said that the wish will be granted. If it be in
the same parcel with any of these, without being next to them, it is
supposed there is a chance of the wish coming to pass at some more
distant period; but if the nine of spades makes its appearance, it is
taken that a disappointment is possible.


WISH NO. V.

The pack of thirty-two selected cards, as in the foregoing method, is
taken, shuffled and cut; then the four aces are taken out, the
significator, or the person for whom the dealer is acting, and
anything he wants to know about--such as money, then the ten of
diamonds would be selected; if about a man, any king; if about a
woman, any queen; if about business, the ten of clubs. These are
shuffled after having been withdrawn, without cutting, and the nine of
spades, which is the disappointment card, is also added to the aces,
etc., in all seven cards, laying them face downwards on the table.
Then the remainder are taken, shuffled well, and turned up in threes
twice, the one following being the seventh. The pack is gone through
like this, and when the nine of hearts appears whatever number that
falls on in the twenty-five cards remaining. When one, two, three,
four, five, six or seven, it must fall on the card drawn out by the
seven cards abstracted thus; if it should fall on No. 1 and that
happens on an ace, it is favorable, and if he should chance on an ace,
or his wish, or anything but the disappointment card (nine of spades),
the wish will be realized.

First of all, the four aces are taken out, and the nine of spades,
(the disappointment card); then, supposing the dealer is acting for a
fair man, or a soldier, who is anxious to know whether he will get his
wish. We will imagine he has invested a sum of money, and he wishes to
know whether it is a good one; or that he hopes for a legacy and is
anxious to know if he will get it. The king of diamonds (representing
the fair man), and the ten of diamonds, the money card, should
therefore be taken out. These are added to the four aces and the nine
of spades. These are well shuffled, but not cut, and laid face
downwards on the table, like the following:--

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |    _Ace_   |  |   _Ace_    |  | _Fair man_ |
  |   _Clubs_  |  |  _Hearts_  |  | _inquirer_ |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |    _Ace_   |  |   _Nine_   |  |    _Ace_   |
  |   _Diam._  |  |  _Spades_  |  |   _Spades_ |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

                +------------+
                |   _Ten_    |
                |  _Diam._   |
                +------------+

These represent the four aces, the disappointment card and the
inquirer and his wish. The remaining cards are now taken and turned up
three at a time. We will suppose the first three are the nine, seven
and eight of clubs; the next three the ten and jack of hearts, and
eight of diamonds; and the seventh card, the queen of clubs--these are
passed by. Begin again, counting one. We will suppose the next three
are the eight of spades, the seven of clubs and the nine of hearts.
Three are then counted from those laid face downwards on the table,
and that card is turned up--we will suppose that to be the king of
diamonds; the cards turned up by threes are gathered together and
shuffled, and turned up by sevens as before. Should the nine of hearts
fall on the fourth card the second time, that is to be turned up--we
will suppose that to be the ace of diamonds. Proceed again as before,
and this time we will imagine the nine of hearts to fall on the
seventh--this may be the ten of diamonds--so that it could be said to
the persons consulting that it is said he will get his wish; but
supposing the nine of hearts to fall on the fifth card, and that turns
out to be the nine of spades, he will be disappointed; and should it
happen that _in the first reading_ the nine of hearts should come on,
we will say, the first card, which might prove the nine of spades,
then it is no use continuing the three times, as it is supposed there
is no chance whatever of the wish being realized.


WISH NO. VI.

The whole pack of fifty-two cards is taken, shuffled and cut in two
packets. They are now laid out face uppermost, in three rows of four
cards each, in all twelve cards. If in the first twelve cards any
court cards appear, they are taken out, filling up the spaces with
fresh cards; should these again be court cards, they are abstracted as
before, filling in the spaces as described; if not, they are thus
counted: Eleven must be made up of any _two_ cards, such as an ace and
ten (ace counting as one), and covered, or two and nine, each card
being covered as counted, three and eight, four and seven, five and
six, etc. If a court card appears, it is a stop and counts as nothing.
If, as the cards are covered, eleven can be made out of any of the two
cards, and continued to the end, exhausting all the cards, it is taken
that the wish will be gained; in that case all the court cards ought
to be on the top, as those cast aside at first are used at the last,
to cover each two cards as they count eleven. If the court cards
cannot be got to come out at the end, the wish is supposed to be
delayed, and if eleven cannot be made from nearly the beginning, it is
said, the wish will not be realized at all. To explain the meaning
more clearly, the following diagram is given. We will suppose they are
as follows:--

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |   _Jack_   |  |   _Four_   |  |   _Seven_  |  |   _Four_   |
  |   _Clubs_  |  |  _Spades_  |  |  _Spades_  |  |   _Clubs_  |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |   _Three_  |  |   _Six_    |  |   _Four_   |  |   _Jack_   |
  |   _Diam._  |  |  _Spades_  |  |  _Hearts_  |  |   _Diam._  |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+
  |   _Five_   |  |   _Ace_    |  |   _Eight_  |  |   _King_   |
  |   _Diam._  |  |  _Clubs_   |  |   _Hearts_ |  |   _Diam._  |
  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+  +------------+

There are now removed the three court cards, viz.:--the jack of clubs
in the first row, the jack of diamonds in the second, and the king of
diamonds in the third. These are replaced by the nine of clubs in the
first row, five of spades in the second, and six of hearts in the
third. The cards are now to be covered. In the first row, four and
seven of spades, making respectively eleven covered by ten of clubs
and ten of spades. Eleven is now made, where possible, from all three
rows. In the second row will be found the six and five of spades;
these are covered by two and one of clubs. In the third row, one of
clubs and ten of hearts, covered by seven of diamonds and three of
spades. In the same row, five of diamonds and six of hearts, covered
by the two of diamonds and king of hearts. In the first and second
rows, nine of clubs and two of spades, covered by the four and eight
of diamonds. In the second row, three and eight of diamonds, covered
by the jack of hearts and queen of clubs. In the first and second row,
the one and ten of spades, covered by the three of hearts and three of
spades. In the first and third rows, four of clubs and seven of
diamonds, covered by the ten of diamonds and nine of hearts. In the
third row, nine of hearts and two of diamonds, covered by the five of
clubs and ace of diamonds. In the first and third rows, ten of clubs
and ace of diamonds, covered by the seven of hearts and queen of
diamonds. In the first row, four of diamonds and seven of hearts,
covered by the eight and five of hearts. In the first and third rows,
eight of hearts and three of clubs, covered by the seven of clubs and
jack of spades. In the first and second rows, seven of clubs and four
of hearts, covered by the two of clubs and eight of spades. In the
first and second rows, the three of hearts and eight of spades,
covered by the king and nine of spades. In the first row, two of clubs
and nine of spades, covered by the ace of hearts and six of diamonds.
In the first row, again, the ace of hearts and ten of diamonds,
covered by the two of hearts and six of clubs. In the first and third
rows, five and six of clubs, covered by the nine of diamonds and queen
of hearts. In the first row, five of hearts and six of diamonds,
covered by the king and eight of clubs. Then in the first and second
rows, the eight of clubs and three of spades, as there is only one
card remaining, viz.:--the queen of spades, the three other cards to
be covered, those put aside at first are taken up, the last two to be
covered being the nine of diamonds and two of hearts, covered by the
jack of diamonds and jack of clubs. In this case the wish is supposed
to be realized; but in some cases it will be found that it has not
made up the number eleven in the two cards, and then it is taken that
the wish may be either delayed or not fulfilled.




CURIOUS GAMES WITH CARDS

_By Which Fortunes Are Told in a Most Singular and Diverting Manner._


LOVERS' HEARTS.

Four young persons, but not more, may play at this game, or three by
making a dummy hand. This game is played exactly the same in every
game, making the queen, which is called Venus, above the ace; the ace
in this game only stands for one, and hearts must be led off by the
person next the dealer. He or she who gets most tricks this way (each
taking up their own and no partnership) is supposed to have most
lovers, and the king and queen of hearts in one hand is said to denote
matrimony at hand; but woe to the unlucky one who gets no tricks at
the deal, or does not hold a heart in his or her hand; to them are
ascribed misfortune in love and long tarry before they marry.


LOVE'S LOTTERY.

Let each one present deposit any sum agreed on, or a certain number of
counters; put a complete pack of cards well shuffled in a bag, let the
parties stand in a circle and the bag being handed round, each draw
three; pairs of any kind are supposed to be favorable omens of some
good fortune about to occur to the party and get back from the pool
the sum that each agreed to pay. The king of hearts is here made the
god of love, and claims double, and professes to give a faithful swain
to the fair one who has the good fortune to draw him; if Venus, the
queen of hearts, is with him, it is the conquering prize, and clears
the pool; fives and nines are reckoned crosses and misfortunes, and
pay a forfeit of the sum agreed on to the pool, besides the usual
stipend at each new game; three nines at one draw is supposed to
portend the lady will be an old maid, three fives, a bad husband.


MATRIMONY.

Let three, five, or seven young women stand in a circle, and draw a
card out of a bag. It is taken that she who gets the highest card will
be the first married of the company, whether she be at the present
time maid, wife, or widow, and she who has the lowest has the longest
time to stay ere the sun shines on her wedding day; she who draws the
ace of spades will never bear the name of wife; and she who has the
nine of hearts in this trial will have one lover too many to her
sorrow.


CUPID'S PASTIME.

Amusement may be caused by this game to all those playing, and at the
same time it is supposed that some curious particulars may be learned
concerning the future fates of the consultants.

Several may play at the game, it requiring no special number, only
leaving out nine cards on the table not exposed to view; each person
puts a trifling sum in the pool, and the dealer double. The ace of
diamonds is made principal, and takes all the other aces, etc.; twos
and threes in hand are said to show luck; fours, a continuance in the
present state; fives, trouble; sixes, profit; sevens, worries; eights,
disappointment; nines, surprises; tens, settlements; jacks,
sweethearts; kings and queens, friends and acquaintances; ace of
spades, death; ace of clubs, a letter; and the ace of diamonds with
ten of hearts, marriage.

The ace of diamonds being played first, or should it be amongst the
nine, the dealer calls for the queen of hearts, which takes next. If
the ace be not out and the queen conquers, it is supposed that the
person who played her will be married that year without a doubt,
though it may perhaps seem unlikely at that time; but if she loses her
queen, she must wait longer. The ace and queen being called, the rest
go in rotation as at whist; kings taking queens, queens jacks, and so
on, and the more tricks taken, the more money the winner gets off the
board on the division; those who hold the nine of spades are to pay a
penny to the board, and it is said they will have some trouble; but
the fortunate fair one who holds the queen and jack of hearts in the
same hand is supposed soon to be married, or if she is already within
the pale of matrimony, a great rise in life by means of her husband;
those who hold the ace of diamonds and queen of hearts clear the money
off the board and end that game; it also professes to betoken great
prosperity.


WEDDING BELLS.

You select the four kings from a pack, and lay them side by side in a
row upon the table.

The lady who wishes to know her fortune gives to each of these cards
the name of some gentleman of her acquaintance who might be likely to
woo her in marriage. It is usual to pronounce these names aloud before
the company. The name given to the king of hearts is, however, an
exception. This secret the lady keeps to herself. To these four kings,
you can also add a queen, which then denotes the old maid.

Now, take the rest of the pack, shuffle it thoroughly, let the person
in question cut three times and commence. Under each of the
above-named picture-cards you lay a card in turn, and as often as a
spade is placed under a spade, a heart under a heart, _et cetera_,
that is, as often as a card of the same suit is placed under one of
these picture-cards, the picture-card is turned from its position.

The first time it takes a direction from left to right, the second
time it lies upside down, the third time it is raised again to a
position from right to left, and the fourth and last time it regains
its former upright position.

That one of the four kings who, after these different changes, first
resumes his upright position, is to be the happy husband. If it should
happen to be the old maid, you can imagine what is in store for you.


MARRIAGE QUESTIONS.

After having learned from the cards who is to be the husband, the
questions next asked are, usually: How much will he love his wife, why
he marries her, and what is his profession. These questions are
answered in the following manner:

Gather up the cards, shuffle them thoroughly, and let the person cut
them three times. Then tell off the cards upon the table, as you
recite the following sentence:

  Heartily, painfully,
  Beyond all measure.
  By fits and starts.
  Not a bit in the world.

You repeat this sentence until the king of hearts makes his
appearance. If it happens that, as you lay this upon the table, you
pronounce the word "heartily" he will love his future wife heartily,
and so on.

Now as to why he marries her. Count off the cards upon the table,
while you repeat the following sentence:

  For love, for her beauty,
  For his parents' command,
  For the bright, golden dollars,
  For counsel of friends.

The sentence by which you discover what is his profession is the
following:

  Gentleman, alderman, clergyman, doctor,
  Merchant, broker, professor, major,
  Mechanic, lawyer, shipmaster, tailor.

This method of telling fortunes is very entertaining in society, when
you have not the book to find more particular answers.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE SHREWESBURY POPULAR ENTERTAINMENT BOOKS


GYPSY WITCH DREAM BOOK

BY THE QUEEN OF THE ROMANIES

  160 Pages      Paper Covers       Price 30 cents.

(Edited by Carleton B. Case.) The completeness of this work is
attested by its numerous exclusive interpretations of dreams based
upon modern subjects, as the aëroplane, automobile, baseball, cabaret,
chauffeur, football, golf, manicure, moving pictures, phonograph,
tango, turkey-trot, telephone, typewriter, wireless, and many others,
found in no other similar work. The best of the old and all the new
interpretations are given. Whether you take your dreams seriously or
find in their decipherment merely a pleasant pastime, you will
appreciate the perfection of this newest and most complete Dream
Dictionary.


SOME IRISH SMILES

BY CARLETON B. CASE

  160 Pages     Paper Covers     Price 30 cents.

A volume of genuine Irish humor with several hearty laughs to every
page; a book to be read and passed along to one's chums, that all may
enjoy its fun. The wit of our friends from the Emerald Isle is
proverbial, and none is so ready to see and appreciate the point of it
as the American. Its humor is so spontaneous that it creates laughter
in spite of one's self, and that is the kind of wit all of us prefer.
This little 160 page book is for laughing purposes only, and will be
carefully read from cover to cover by every purchaser.


SHREWESBURY PUBLISHING CO.

  Publishers       526 W. 26 St.       New York





