





THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS

PLYMOUTH
WILLIAM BRENDON AND SON
PRINTERS


  [Illustration: WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS. FACSIMILE FROM AN OLD WOODCUT
  DATE. 1657.

  _Frontispiece and Cover._]




THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS

A Book of Old World Lore


BY

_ROSA BAUGHAN_

AUTHOR OF "THE HANDBOOK OF PALMISTRY"; "CHARACTER IN HANDWRITING";
ETC., ETC.


_IN THREE PARTS_

PART   I. ASTROLOGY.
PART  II. CHIROMANCY
PART III. PHYSIOGNOMY

TO WHICH ARE ADDED

CHAPTERS ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MOLES OF THE BODY ASTROLOGICALLY
CONSIDERED,

THE MYSTICAL WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS AND THE METHODS OF WORKING IT


FOURTH EDITION,
REVISED AND ENLARGED BY THE AUTHOR

_ILLUSTRATED WITH TEN PLATES_

LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRÜBNER & CO., LTD.
DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, SOHO
1904




Transcriber's Note: Minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note. Dialect spellings, contractions and inconsistencies in
the text have been retained as printed. Words enclosed by square
brackets replace the symbol, as it is not possible to represent the
symbol itself in plain text.




    "Ye stars which are the poetry of Heaven!
      If, in your bright leaves we read the fate
    Of men and empires--'tis to be forgiven,
      That in our aspirations to be great,
    Our destinies o'erleap this mortal state
      And claim a kindred with you; for ye are
    A beauty and a mystery and create
      In us such love and reverence from afar,
    That Life, Fame, Power, and Fortune have named themselves a star."

    Byron.




CONTENTS


Part I.

ASTROLOGY

CHAPTER                                                          PAGE


     I. ASTROLOGY                                                   4

    II. THE ALPHABET OF ASTROLOGY                                  12

   III. CONCERNING THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC                         17

    IV. OF THE NATURES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS AND OF THEIR
ESSENTIAL AND ACCIDENTAL DIGNITIES                                 23

     V. OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS                     34

    VI. CONCERNING THE TWELVE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND THEIR POWERS    50

   VII. AN EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS TERMS USED IN ASTROLOGY          54

  VIII. OF THE FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS                               59

    IX. OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE FIXED STARS                       65

     X. OF THE EFFECT OF EACH PLANET IN EACH OF THE TWELVE
HOUSES                                                             70

    XI. ON FORMING A GENERAL JUDGMENT ON A NATIVITY                76

   XII. CONCERNING DIRECTIONS AND HORARY QUESTIONS                 92

  XIII. SOLAR HOROSCOPES                                          103

   XIV. APHORISMS CULLED FROM THE WORKS OF PTOLEMY AND OTHER
ANCIENT ASTROLOGERS                                               120


PART II.

CHIROMANCY

    XV. CHIROMANCY AND ITS ORIGIN                                 125

   XVI. CONCERNING THE PRINCIPAL LINES IN THE HAND AND THE
MOUNTS                                                            129

  XVII. THE LINE OF LIFE                                          137

 XVIII. THE LINE OF HEART AND LINE OF HEAD                        143

   XIX. THE SATURNIAN LINE                                        150

    XX. THE LINE OF THE SUN AND LINE OF HEALTH                    155

   XXI. ON THE RING OF VENUS, THE WRIST LINES AND THE LETTER
M TO BE SEEN IN MOST HANDS                                        160

   XXII. CONCERNING CHANCE LINES; THAT IS, LINES WHICH ARE
SOMETIMES--BUT ONLY RARELY--SEEN ON ANY HAND                      166

 XXIII. CONCERNING THE FINGERS AND THUMB AND NAILS                169

  XXIV. OF THE VARIOUS MARKS TO BE SEEN ON THE HAND               177

   XXV. THE TRIANGLE, THE QUADRANGLE AND THE HAPPY HAND           182


Part III.

PHYSIOGNOMY

  XXVI. PHYSIOGNOMY                                               185

 XXVII. THE FOREHEAD AND EYEBROWS                                 194

XXVIII. THE EYES AND EYELASHES                                    201

  XXIX. THE NOSE                                                  211

   XXX. THE MOUTH, TEETH, JAW AND CHIN                            221

  XXXI. THE HAIR AND EARS                                         231

 XXXII. THE SIGNATURES OF THE PLANETS                             237

XXXIII. THE MOLES ON THE FACE                                     246

 XXXIV. MOLES HAVING NO CORRESPONDING MOLES ON THE FACE           254

  XXXV. THE ZODIACAL MARKS                                        258

 XXXVI. CONCERNING ALFRIDARIES                                    263

XXXVII. CONCERNING THE WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS AND THE METHOD
OF WORKING IT                                                     267




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS                           _Frontispiece and Cover_

THE EARTH                                        _To face Chapter VI._

NATUS. 9TH JANUARY, 1889                             "   "     _VIII._

FACSIMILE OF A MAP OF A HORARY QUESTION FROM LILLY'S
"ASTROLOGY"                                          "   "      _XII._

PRINCIPAL LINES ON THE PALM OF THE HAND              "   "      _XVI._

THE LINE OF LIFE                                     "   "     _XVII._

CHANCE LINES ON THE HAND                             "   "     _XXII._

VARIOUS MARKS ON THE HAND                            "   "     _XXIV._

THE HAPPY HAND                                       "   "      _XXV._

THE PLANETS' PLACES ON THE FACE                      "   "    _XXVII._

ALFRIDARY TABLE                                      "   "    _XXXVI._




FOREWORD


Of all subjects that have at any time engaged the attention of the
world, there is none more ancient than astrology. In the East--where it
first arose at a period of very remote antiquity--it still holds sway
and in every part of the world (especially among the learned) it
reigned supreme until the middle of the seventeenth century. That it
not only ruled the daily actions of individuals but swayed the councils
of princes, is shown by the records of every nation that has a history
(and by none more fully than by that of England); yet the present
generation seems never, until quite lately, to have cared to inquire on
what basis this belief could have been for so many ages supported.
During the past ten years, however--possibly from a reaction growing
out of the realism by which we have been so long oppressed--a new
interest in these old-world beliefs has sprung up and it is to satisfy
that interest that this book (containing the results of many years'
study) was written.

Chiromancy and Physiognomy are both based on astrology and are,
therefore, quite in place as the second and third parts of a work
treating of the influence of the stars. Many of the modern writers on
Chiromancy seem disposed to deny its affinity to astrology, with which
it is, however, inseparably connected. Dr. Saunders, in the preface to
his exhaustive work on Chiromancy and Physiognomy, published in 1671,
and dedicated to his friend Lilly, the great astrologer, says: "For our
more orderly proceeding with the body of this work, it is in the first
place necessary to be observed that there are seven planets, named
_Stellæ Errantes_--wandering stars--which have each of them its
separate character as they are used in astrologie; the which stars have
great power over inferior bodies and do, each of them, govern some part
or other of man's body and they _especially have their material
existence in the hand_ and without astrology Chiromancy could not
subsist and be subservient to true wisdom."

Now, why, in the face of this and many other equally forcible words
among the old-world authorities, do the modern writers try to force
their own crude theories upon us? To drag the time-honoured study of
Chiromancy into the turmoil of nineteenth-century existence and--by
robbing it of its mysticism--to strain it into unison with the realism
of modern thought, strikes the earnest student with the same sense of
incongruity as would the hanging of a carnival mask over the mystically
calm features of an antique statue.

ROSA BAUGHAN.

_November, 1904._




THE INFLUENCE OF THE STARS




ASTROLOGY

    "To doubt the influence of the stars is to doubt the wisdom and
    providence of God."--TYCHO BRAHE.




CHAPTER I.

That a certain power, derived from æthereal nature, pervades the whole
earth, is clearly evident to all. Fire and air are altered by the
motions of the æther, and these elements, in their turn, encompassing
all inferior matter, vary it, as they themselves are varied, acting
equally on earth and water, on plants and animals. The Sun, not only by
the change of the seasons, brings to perfection the embryo of animals,
the buds of plants and the springs of water, but also, by his daily
movement, brings light, heat, moisture, dryness and cold.

The Moon, being of all the heavenly bodies the nearest to earth, has
also much influence, and things animate and inanimate sympathise and
vary with her. By her changes rivers swell or are reduced, the tides of
the sea are ruled by her risings and settings, and animals and plants
are influenced as she waxes or wanes. The stars also produce in the
ambient[1] many impressions, causing heats, winds and storms, to the
influence of which earthly things are subjected. The force of the Sun,
however, predominates, because it is more generally distributed; the
others either co-operate with his power or diminish its effects. The
Moon more frequently does this at her first and last quarter; the stars
act also in the same way, but at longer intervals and more obscurely
than the Moon. From this it follows that not only all bodies which may
be already in existence are subjected to the motion of the stars, but
also that the impregnation and growth of the seeds from which all
bodies proceed are moulded by the quality in the ambient at the time of
such impregnation and growth. When, therefore, a person has acquired a
thorough knowledge of the stars (not of what they are composed, but of
the _influences_ they possess), he will be able to predict the mental
and physical qualities and the future events in the existence of any
one whose actual moment of birth is accurately given to him. But the
science of astrology demands great study, a good memory, constant
attention to a multitude of different points and much power of
deductive judgment; and those persons who undertake to cast horoscopes
without possessing these qualities, must necessarily make frequent
mistakes in their judgments, which, perhaps, accounts for much of the
disbelief which exists as regards the power of astrology; but it is
unfair to blame the science for inaccuracies which are only the result
of the ignorance of its exponents. No one should attempt to pronounce
judgments on the influence of the stars without having first given
years of study to the subject; and even then, unless he should have
been born under certain influences,[2] he will never become a
proficient astrologer.

          [1] The ambient means the heavens when spoken of in a general
          manner.

          [2] Saturn, Mercury and the Moon.

The practice of observing the stars began in Egypt in the reign of
Ammon (about a thousand years before the Christian era), and was spread
by conquest in the reign of his successor into the other parts of
Africa, Asia, and Europe; but it appears to have been taught in the
earliest ages by oral tradition only, for there is no good evidence of
its having been reduced to written rules before some years after the
first century of the Christian era, when Claudius Ptolemy (who was born
and educated in Alexandria) produced a work called _Tetra-biblos_,
or _Quadripartite_, being four books of the influences of the stars. In
this treatise (translated into English by John Whalley--Professor of
Astrology--in the year of 1786) Ptolemy seems to have collected all
that which appeared to him of importance in the science. Another
translation of the _Tetra-biblos_, rendered into English from the Greek
paraphrase of that work by Proclus, was made in 1822 by J. M. Ashmand
and this is, by most people, preferred to the translation made by
Whalley. Somewhere between 1647 and 1657, Placidus di Titus, a Spanish
monk, published a system of astrology, founded, to a great extent, upon
Ptolemy's calculations. This work was printed in Latin and is called
the _Primum Mobile_, or _First Mover_, and was translated by John
Cooper in 1816; other translations have appeared, but his is the best
among them.

The planetary orbs, which the ancients recognised as having the most
powerful influence, were seven in number (now known under the Latin
names of the principal deities of the heathen mythology), viz.:
Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars and the Moon.

It may be objected that science has long since revealed to us many more
planets than the seven known to the ancients; but, in considering a
study so mystical as that of astrology, it is better to adhere to the
theories of the old-world writers. In the earliest ages almost all the
inhabitants of the earth led pastoral lives--were, in fact, merely
shepherds--but amongst these shepherds there naturally arose, from time
to time, men of superior intelligence, whose imaginations (purified and
strengthened by solitude and the constant communion with Nature which
grew out of that solitude) led them to the study of those distant
lights which they saw, night after night, appear and disappear in the
wide expanse of the heavens above them. Of purer lives and more
impressionable than we moderns, they were necessarily more open to the
influences of nature; and all their thoughts being given to the study
of the mysteries by which they felt themselves surrounded, their
intuitive perception is likely to be a safer guide on mystical subjects
than the scientific conjectures of our day. Besides, as the results
produced by their methods were astoundingly correct, why should we
imagine ourselves capable of bettering their theories? Jupiter, Saturn,
Mars and Mercury are _still_ the most important planets, whilst the
Moon (though so small) has a more subtle influence in consequence of
her nearness to us; whilst of the Sun's power over us and the whole
creation there can, of course, be no question. Each of these seven
planets is in the ascendant once during the space of the twenty-four
hours forming the day and night; and according to the junction of two
or more planets under which a person is born, his outward appearance,
character and fate, will be influenced. The sign of the zodiac, too,
under which a child comes into the world, possesses a power to produce
a particular form of body and mental inclination, always, however,
_subject to the influence_ of the seven planets.

It must also be borne in mind that the planets dominating the lives of
both parents would, to a certain extent, have an influence not only
during the pre-natal period of our existence, but also in arresting or
hurrying forward the moment of our advent into life. The father's
influence is strong at the moment of conception; the mother's during
the whole period of pre-natal existence. In this way we can account for
the resemblance between parents and children, and also for the physical
and mental qualities which we see constantly reproduced through a long
line of ancestry. It is rarely that one planet is the sole influence of
a life, for the child at birth may, and more generally does, receive
influences from several planets, and some not those of the father or
mother; and thus we can account for the innumerable differences of mind
and body to be found among members of the same family.

For the benefit of those who object that there is too great a leaning
to what they would call "the dangerous doctrine of fatalism" in these
old-world beliefs, it may be well to quote a few reassuring words from
a very able and voluminous writer on these subjects, Dr. Richard
Saunders, who modestly styles himself on the title-page of his learned
work (published in 1671) student in astrology and physic. "The stars,"
he says, "have such an influential power over us that we act by them
and, though _they are but second causes_, their influences do so
necessitate us that we cannot avoid their fatality, _unless_ we have
recourse to the First Cause which governs this all." In other words,
though the stars influence us, God rules the stars.




CHAPTER II.

THE ALPHABET OF ASTROLOGY


The Science of Astrology consists of four branches, namely, _Mundane
Astrology_, which is the art of foreseeing, by the aspect of the stars,
at certain periods, the events likely to happen to nations, such as
pestilences, wars, inundations and earthquakes; _Atmospherical
Astrology_, which is the art of foreseeing, by the positions of the
heavenly bodies, the quality of the weather at any particular time or
place; _the Casting of Nativities_, or the art of foretelling, from the
position of the stars at the moment of birth, the fate and character of
the native; and _Horary Astrology_, or the art of foreseeing, by the
positions of the heavens at the moment, the result of any business or
circumstance.

As the two former branches are treated in the astrological almanacks
issued every year by Zadkiel, Raphael, Orion, and others, it is
needless to go into them; but as the casting of nativities and the
answering of horary questions require individual treatment, the working
of these two branches of astrology (_after the ancient methods_) shall
be described as clearly as possible.

Before the student can do anything in astrology he must master its
alphabet--that is, he must make himself thoroughly acquainted with the
symbols used to represent the planets, the signs of the zodiac and the
aspects.

The planets recognised by the ancient astrologers are, as we have seen,
seven in number, and are as follows, with their symbols:--Saturn,
[symbol]; Jupiter, [symbol]; Mars, [symbol]; Sol, [symbol]; Venus,
[symbol]; Mercury, [symbol]; Luna, [symbol].

There are also the Dragon's Head, thus symbolised, [symbol]; and the
Dragon's Tail, [symbol]. These are neither planets nor signs of the
zodiac, nor constellations, but are only the nodes or points where the
ecliptic is crossed by the Moon. One of these points looks northward,
where the Moon begins her northern latitude, and the other points
southward, where she commences her south latitude. The head of the
Dragon is considered of a benevolent nature; the tail of the Dragon is
of evil tendency.

There are also the twelve signs of the zodiac, which are as follows,
with their symbols:--

       NORTHERN.                   SOUTHERN.

    [symbol] Aries              [symbol] Libra

    [symbol] Taurus             [symbol] Scorpio

    [symbol] Gemini             [symbol] Sagittarius

    [symbol] Cancer             [symbol] Capricorn

    [symbol] Leo                [symbol] Aquarius

    [symbol] Virgo              [symbol] Pisces

Through these twelve signs the planets continually move, and are ever
in one or other of them.

They are divided into _north_ and _south_. The first six, from Aries
to Virgo, are _northern_; the latter six, from Libra to Pisces, are
_southern_; this is because the Sun and planets when in the first six
are north of the equator, and when in the last six they are south of
that line.

Each point of the zodiac rises and sets once every twenty-four hours,
occasioned by the earth's revolution on its axis once every day;
therefore, when any given point is _rising_, the opposite point must be
_setting_.[3]

          [3] Aries is always opposite to Libra; Taurus to Scorpio; and
          so on of all the rest, as shown by the table given (p. 11).

As the zodiac consists of 360 degrees from the first point of Aries
until we come to that point again, and as these are divided into twelve
portions or signs, they must consist of 30 degrees each.

The aspects are five in number; they represent certain positions which
the planets bear to each other as they move through the signs of the
zodiac; they are as follows, with their symbols:--

    [Symbol] Conjunction], when two planets are in the same place, viz.,
    in same degree of the same sign.

    [Symbol] Sextile, when they are 60 degrees or two signs apart.

    [Symbol] Square, when they are 90 degrees or three signs apart.

    [Symbol] Trine, when they are 120 degrees or four signs apart.

    [Symbol] Opposition, when they are 180 degrees or six signs
    asunder.

The conjunction ([symbol]) is rather a position than an aspect, as
planets can hardly be said to aspect each other when they are in the
same place. When Saturn is in the first degree of Aries, and any planet
in the same degree of that sign, they are said to be in conjunction;
this is good or evil, according to the nature of the planets thus
posited.

The Trine ([symbol]) is the most powerful of all the good aspects.

The Sextile ([symbol]) is favourable.

The Square ([symbol]) is evil.

The Opposition ([symbol]) is also very evil.

There are several other aspects (sometimes called the "modern aspects")
invented by Kepler; but as they only appear to complicate what is at
best a very intricate study, it is best to ignore them and adhere in
this, as in the matter of the planets, to the old methods.




CHAPTER III.

CONCERNING THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC


The zodiac is a band or belt, measuring about 14 degrees in breadth,
but, as Venus sometimes appears to have more than her real latitude,
it is more correctly considered to be 18 degrees in breadth. The
_ecliptic_, or path of the Sun, passes exactly through the centre of
the zodiac, longitudinally.

The ancients divided the zodiac into _ten signs_--Libra being
omitted altogether, Virgo and Scorpio being merged into one, thus:
Virgo-Scorpio. This accounts for the similarity of their symbols,
[Virgo] [Scorpio].

Ptolemy divides the zodiac into twelve equal parts, of 30 degrees each.
He says: "The beginning of the whole zodiacal circle (which in its
nature as a circle can have no other beginning or end capable of being
determined) is, therefore, assumed to be the sign Aries, which
commences at the vernal equinox in March."

One of the many objections urged against Ptolemy's system of astrology
is that the signs are continually moving from their positions; but
Ptolemy seems to have been aware of this motion of the signs, and has
met this objection by what he says in the twenty-fifth chapter of the
first book of the _Tetra-biblos_, where he makes it clear that the
respective influences he ascribes to the twelve signs were considered
by him to belong rather to the _places_ they occupied in the ambient
than to the stars of which they are composed; and he especially speaks
of the _ambient_ as producing the effects attributed to the respective
signs of the zodiac when in the ascendant in a nativity; thus his
astrology is just as applicable to modern astronomy as it was to his
own.

The signs have been divided into four _triplicities_, thus: _fiery_
[Aries], [Leo ], [Sagittarius]; _earthy_, [Taurus], [Virgo],
[Capricorn]; _airy_, [Gemini], [Libra], [Aquarius]; and _watery_,
[Cancer], [Scorpio], [Pisces].

The _bicorporal_, or double-bodied, signs are [Gemini], [Pisces], and
the first half of [Sagittarius]. The _fruitful_ signs are [Cancer],
[Scorpio], [Pisces]; the barren signs are [Gemini], [Leo], and
[Capricorn].

These descriptions are useful in showing the modifications brought to
bear (by the sign ascending) on the planet's influence. But, when no
planets are in or near the ascendant at birth, the following
descriptions of the temperament and form of body produced by each sign
ascending at birth should be used.

Aries ([symbol]) is a hot and fiery sign and produces a lean body,
spare and strong, large bones, grey eyes, with a quick glance and sandy
or red-coloured hair. The temper is violent. It governs the head and
face; its colour is white.

Taurus ([symbol]) differs greatly, in its effects, from the preceding
sign; it is cold and dry, and gives a broad brow and thick lips. A
person born under it is melancholy and slow to anger but, when roused,
furious and difficult to be appeased. It governs the neck and throat;
its colour is red.

Gemini ([symbol]) is in nature hot and moist and produces a person of
straight, tall body, sanguine complexion, brilliant eyes and light
brown hair. The temperament of those born under Gemini is lively and
the understanding good. This sign governs the arms and shoulders; its
colours are red and white.

Cancer ([symbol]) is by nature cold and moist; it produces a native
fair and pale, short in stature, with a round face, sand-coloured brown
hair and grey eyes. Those born under it are phlegmatic, indolent and
gentle tempered. Women born under this sign generally have many
children. It governs the breast and stomach; its colours are green and
russet-brown.

Leo ([symbol]) is a fiery, hot and dry sign. When it rises at birth
without any planet being near the ascendant, the native will be of tall
stature, with yellow hair, ruddy complexion and oval face, and he will
have a quick glance and a strong voice. It governs the heart, the back
and the neck; its colours are red and green.

Virgo ([symbol]) is an earthy, cold, barren, feminine sign. When it
ascends, it shows a well-formed body, slender and tall, straight,
dark-brown hair and a round face. The mind of the native is ingenious,
but rather inconstant. It governs the belly; its colour is black
speckled with blue.

Libra ([symbol]) is an aërial, sanguine, masculine, hot and moist sign.
Rising at birth it produces a well-made body, with long limbs, an oval
and beautiful face, sanguine complexion, straight flaxen hair and grey
eyes. Those born under it are courteous, just and honourable. It
governs the loins; and the colours under its rule are black, crimson
and tawny.

Scorpio ([symbol]) is a moist, phlegmatic, feminine sign. It gives a
strong, corpulent body, low stature, thick legs, hair growing low on
the forehead and heavy eyebrows. Those born under this sign are
reserved, thoughtful, subtle and malicious. It governs the lower parts
of the body; the colour under its rule is brown.

Sagittarius ([symbol]) is a fiery, masculine sign. The person born
under its rule is handsome, with a rather long face and features,
chestnut hair, inclined to baldness and ruddy complexion; the body
strong and active. Those born under this sign are fond of field sports,
are good riders, and are lovers of animals. They are kindly, generous
and careless of danger. This sign governs the thighs and hips, and
rules yellow and green.

Capricorn ([symbol]) is an earthy, cold, dry, feminine sign. It
produces a person of slender stature, with a long neck, narrow chest
and dark hair. The mind is quick, witty and subtle. It governs the
knees and hams and, in colours, it rules black or dark brown.

Aquarius ([symbol]) is an airy, moist, masculine sign. In a nativity
where no planets are in or near the ascendant, it would produce a
person of a well-set, strong body, long face and delicate complexion,
with brown hair. It governs the legs and ankles and rules the
sky-colour or blue.

Pisces ([symbol]) is a watery, cold and feminine sign. It produces a
person of short stature and fleshy body, with a rather stooping gait.
Those born under its influence are indolent and phlegmatic. It governs
the feet and toes and presides over the pure white colour. It is
needful to remember the colours belonging to the signs, as they are
especially useful in horary questions.




CHAPTER IV.

OF THE NATURES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS AND OF THEIR ESSENTIAL AND
ACCIDENTAL DIGNITIES


Of the seven planets Jupiter and Venus, because of the heat and
moisture predominant in them, are considered by the ancients as
benefics or causers of good. The Moon is so considered for the same
reasons, though in a less degree.

Saturn and Mars are causers of evil or malefic; the first from his
excess of cold, and the other from his excess of heat. The Sun and
Mercury are deemed of common influence--that is, either of good or
evil, according to the planets with which they are connected.

The planets have particular familiarity with certain places in the
zodiac by means of parts designated as their houses, and also by their
_triplicities_, _exaltations_ and _terms_.

The nature of their familiarity by _houses_ is as follows:--

Cancer and Leo are the most northerly of all the twelve signs; they
approach nearer than the other signs to the zenith of this part of the
earth, and thereby cause warmth and heat; they are consequently
appropriated as houses for the two principal and greater luminaries;
Leo for the Sun, as being masculine; and Cancer for the Moon, as being
feminine.

Saturn, since he is cold and inimical to heat, moving also in a
superior orbit most remote from the luminaries, occupies the signs
opposite to Cancer and Leo; these are Aquarius and Capricorn, and they
are assigned to him in consideration of their cold and wintry nature.

Jupiter has a favourable temperament, and is situated beneath the
sphere of Saturn; he, therefore, occupies the next two signs,
Sagittarius and Pisces.

Mars is dry in nature and beneath the sphere of Jupiter; he takes the
next two signs, of a nature similar to his own, viz., Aries and
Scorpio, whose relative distances from the houses of the luminaries are
injurious and discordant.

Venus, possessing a favourable temperament, and, placed beneath the
sphere of Mars, takes the next two signs, Taurus and Libra. These are
of a fruitful nature and preserve harmony by the sextile distance; this
planet is never more than two signs distant from the Sun.

Mercury never has greater distance from the Sun than the space of one
sign, and is beneath all the other planets; hence he is nearest to both
luminaries, and the remaining two signs, Gemini and Virgo, are allotted
to him.

The "houses" of the planets are readily shown by the following table.
It is exactly the same as that found in the mummy-case of the Archon of
Thebes, in ancient Egypt, as may be seen at the British Museum:

    [Leo]          [Sun]              [Moon]    [Cancer]
    [Virgo]                [Taurus]             [Gemini]
    [Libra]                [Venus]              [Taurus]
    [Scorpio]              [Mars]               [Aries]
    [Sagittarius]          [Jupiter]            [Pisces]
    [Capricorn]            [Saturn]             [Aquarius]

It will be seen, at once, from this table that the Sun and Moon have
each only one house assigned them. All planets are most powerful in
that sign which constitutes one of their houses. Planets receive
detriment in the signs opposite to those of their houses. Thus, Saturn
would receive detriment in Cancer and Leo, which are the signs opposite
to his houses, Capricornus and Aquarius. There are some signs in which
the planets are found to be very powerful, though not to the same
extent as when in their own houses; these are called the "exaltations"
of the planets, and the signs opposite to these are those in which they
receive their "fall" when they are considered to be weak in power.
Saturn has his exaltation in Libra; his "fall" would therefore be in
Aries. He governs the airy triplicity, which is composed of the signs
Gemini, Libra and Aquarius by day, and in all the twelve signs he has
these degrees (zodiacal signs) allotted him by Ptolemy for his Terms:

    In Aries          27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Taurus         23, 24, 25, 26.
    In Gemini         22, 23, 24, 25.
    In Cancer         28, 29, 30.
    In Leo            1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Virgo          19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
    In Libra          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Scorpio        28, 29, 30.
    In Sagittarius    21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
    In Capricornus    26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Aquarius       1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Pisces         27, 28, 29, 30.

The meaning of which is that if Saturn should rise in any of these
degrees it is a sign that he is not void of essential dignities; or, if
he is posited in any of the following degrees (which he is allowed for
his Face or Decanate) he is still not devoid of dignities. This is to
be understood of all the planets.

Saturn is allotted for his Face these degrees:

    In Taurus         21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Leo            1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Libra          11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Sagittarius    21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Pisces         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Jupiter has his exaltation in Cancer and his fall in Capricornus. He
rules the fiery triplicity, Aries, Leo and Sagittarius, by night.

He has these degrees allotted for his Terms:

    In Aries          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Taurus         16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
    In Gemini         8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
    In Cancer         7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
    In Leo            20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
    In Virgo          14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
    In Libra          12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
    In Scorpio        7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
    In Sagittarius    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
    In Capricornus    13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
    In Aquarius       21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
    In Pisces         9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

He has for his Face, or Decanate:

    Of Gemini         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    Of Leo            11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    Of Libra          21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    Of Capricornus    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    Of Pisces         11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Mars has Aries for his day-house and Scorpio for his night-house. He is
exalted in Capricornus, and has his fall in Cancer.

He governs the watery Triplicity, viz., Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, and
he has these degrees in each sign for his Terms:

    In Aries       22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
    In Taurus      27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Gemini      26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Cancer      1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Leo         26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Virgo       25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Scorpio     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Aquarius    26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Pisces      21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

He has allotted to him for his Face these degrees:

    In Aries     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Gemini    11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Leo       21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Virgo     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Pisces    21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

The Sun rules the fiery Triplicity--Aries, Leo and Sagittarius--by day.
He is exalted in the sign of Aries, and receives his fall in Libra.

He has no degrees admitted him for his Terms, but in the twelve signs
he has the following degrees for his Face:

    In Aries          11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Gemini         21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Virgo          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Scorpio        11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Capricornus    21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

Venus governs the earthy Triplicity--Taurus, Virgo and Capricornus--by
day. She is exalted in Pisces, and has her fall in Virgo. She has the
following degrees for her Terms:

    In Aries          7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
    In Taurus         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
    In Gemini         15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 20.
    In Cancer         21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
    In Leo            14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
    In Virgo          8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
    In Libra          7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
    In Scorpio        15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
    In Sagittarius    9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
    In Capricornus    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
    In Aquarius       13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Pisces       1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The following degrees are allowed for her Face:

    In Aries      21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Cancer     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Virgo      11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Scorpio    21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Pisces     1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Mercury governs the airy Triplicity, viz., Gemini, Libra and Aquarius,
by night. He has his exaltation in Virgo, and his fall in Pisces. He
has the following degrees for his Terms:

    In Aries          15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
    In Taurus         9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
    In Gemini         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
    In Cancer         14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Leo            7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
    In Virgo          1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
    In Libra          20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
    In Scorpio        22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
    In Sagittarius    15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Capricornus    7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
    In Pisces         15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

These degrees are assigned him for his Face:

    In Taurus         1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Cancer         11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Virgo          21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Sagittarius    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Aquarius       11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

The Moon governs the earthy Triplicity, viz., Taurus, Virgo and
Capricornus, by night.

She is exalted in Taurus, and has her fall in Scorpio. The Sun and the
Moon have no terms assigned them.

In the twelve signs she has these degrees assigned her for her Face:

    In Taurus         11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Cancer         21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
    In Libra           1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
    In Sagittarius    11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
    In Aquarius       21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

A planet in his fall is very weak in his influence. The Houses count
first in dignity, then the Exaltation; afterwards the Triplicity, the
Terms, and the Faces.

The meaning of this is, if a planet is in any of the signs we call his
house or houses, he is essentially strong, and he is allowed five
dignities.

If he is in the sign in which he is said to be exalted, he is allowed
four dignities.

If he should be placed in any of the signs allowed him for his
Triplicity, he is allowed three dignities.

If in any of the degrees in the signs which are given as his Terms, he
has two dignities.

If in any of the degrees of the sign given to him as his Face, he is
allowed one essential dignity. Accidental dignities are when a planet
is swift in motion, angular or in sextile aspect with Jupiter or Venus.

There was a great difference between the Arabian, Indian, and Greek
methods in the disposing of the degrees of the sign to each planet
until the time of Ptolemy. Since then almost all astrologers followed
the method he left, which is that which has been given in this chapter.




CHAPTER V.

OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE SEVEN PLANETS


The planet Saturn is the most remote of the seven planetary orbs
recognised by the ancient writers on astrology. He is of a pale ash
colour, slow in motion, only finishing his course through the twelve
signs of the zodiac in 29 years and about 157 days. His greatest north
latitude from the ecliptic is 2 degrees 48 minutes; his south latitude
is 2 degrees 49 minutes.

Those born with this planet well-dignified[4] are studious, grave,
economical, prudent, patient and in all their actions sober and
somewhat austere. They are not much given to the love of women, but
they are persons of much depth of feeling, and, when they do love, they
are very constant. They are given to the study of occult matters,[5]
and are of a melancholic, suspicious and jealous temperament. In person
_when well-dignified_ Saturn gives a rather tall stature and long
limbs. The hair is dark, the eyebrows much marked and generally meeting
between the eyes, which are dark brown, deep set and close together.
The nose is long and generally somewhat bent over the lips and the
under jaw slightly protrudes. The complexion is sallow, the ears large
and the hands and feet are generally long, but not fleshy.

          [4] The foregoing chapter explains this term.

          [5] The Chaldees averred that when Saturn was powerful in a
          nativity the person then born was "mystical and confederate
          in secrecy."

Those born under the potent aspect of Saturn are generally slow of
speech and their voices are harsh; when Saturn rises in a horoscope
_devoid of dignities_, the native is envious, covetous, malicious,
subtle, untruthful and of a discontented disposition. In person
frequently deformed, with long and irregular features, the eyes and
hair dark and the skin yellow and harsh.

In man's body this planet rules the spleen, the right ear, the lips and
the teeth. In illness he gives ague, palsy, ruptures (especially should
he rule in the sign of Scorpio), jaundice, toothache and all affections
of the sight, of the ear, of the teeth and jaws and of the legs.

The herbs he governs are the hemlock, hellebore, burdock, sage,
henbane, rue, nightshade and mandrake.

The trees under his rule are the willow, the yew, the cypress, the
box-tree and the pine.

The beasts he governs are the elephant, the wolf, the bear, the dog,[6]
the basilisk, the crocodile, the scorpion, the serpent, the rat, the
mouse and all manner of creeping things; among birds, the crow, the
cuckoo, the raven, the owl and the bat.

          [6] This animal has been probably assigned to him by reason
          of its sagacity and extreme fidelity--constancy in feeling
          being one of the attributes given by the planet Saturn when
          well-dignified.

Of fish he rules the eel, the tortoise and all shell fish.

The minerals he governs are lead and the dross of all metals.

His stones are jet, onyx and all dark stones which are incapable of
polish. The colour he rules is black.

He rules Saturday--the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth hour of
the same day. His number is 55. In gathering the herbs under his rule
the ancients were particular to do so in his hours, as this rendered
the medicament more powerful. This is to be observed regarding the
herbs ruled by all the planets.

Saturn's orb is nine degrees before and after any aspect; that is, his
influence begins to operate when either he applies to any planet or it
applies to him within nine degrees of his perfect aspect, and his
influence continues in force until he is separated nine degrees from
the aspect. His angel is Cassiel. His friends are Jupiter, Venus,
Mercury and the Moon; his enemies are Mars and the Sun.

Jupiter is the next planet below Saturn and is of a bright, clear,
azure colour. He much exceeds Saturn in motion, as he finishes his
course through the twelve signs in twelve years. His greatest north
latitude is 1 degree 38 minutes, and his greatest south latitude 1
degree 40 minutes. When he rises at birth well-dignified he gives an
erect, tall stature, sanguine complexion, oval face, large grey eyes,
thick brown hair, full lips and good teeth. In temperament those born
under the good influence of this planet are honourable, generous and
hospitable, but loving material pleasures, kind and affectionate to
wife and family, charitable, desiring to be well thought of and hating
all mean and sordid actions. The voices of those born under Jupiter are
clear and sonorous. When this planet rises _devoid of dignities_ the
native will be gluttonous, profligate, vain, and boastful, of mean
abilities and shallow understanding, easily seduced to extravagance and
a tyrant to those of his family and household.

In man's body he rules the lungs and the blood, and of diseases he
gives apoplexy, gout, inflammation of the lungs, pleurisy and all
illnesses proceeding from corruption of the blood.

The herbs he governs are cloves, mace, nutmeg, gilliflower, marjoram,
mint, borage and saffron.

Of trees, he rules the mulberry, the olive, the vine, the fig, the
beech and the pear-tree.

Of beasts, the sheep, the hart, the ox and all those animals that are
useful to man.

Of birds, the stork, the snipe, the lark, the eagle, the pheasant, the
partridge and the peacock.

Of fishes, the whale, the dolphin and the sword-fish.

His metal is tin.

His stones are the sapphire, the amethyst and the emerald.

Of colours he rules red mixed with green.

His day is Thursday and he rules the first hour after sunrise and the
eighth hour. His number is 78.

His orb is 9 degrees before and after any aspect.

All the planets except Mars are his friends.

His angel is Zadkiel.

Mars in order succeeds Jupiter. He appears of a red colour, and
finishes his course through the zodiac in 1 year 321 days. His greatest
north latitude is 4 degrees 31 minutes. His south latitude is 6 degrees
47 minutes. When he is well-dignified in a horoscope, the native is
courageous, confident, loving war and all that belongs to it, jealous
of honour, hot-tempered and a great lover of field-sports. In person he
will be of middle stature, broad-shouldered and with big bones; the
complexion of a red fairness; the hair is crisp or curly and also red,
but this varies slightly according to the sign rising at birth; in
watery signs the hair is not so red, and in earthy signs it is more
chestnut; the eyes are grey and have a bold, fixed glance like that of
a hawk.

When he is ill-dignified at birth, the native is turbulent, cruel,
boastful, a promoter of sedition, ungracious in manners and
unscrupulous in his actions, with no fear of either God or man. He
rules the head and face, the gall, the throat and intestines; and the
diseases he gives are fevers, carbuncles, smallpox, all throat
affections, all hurts to the head and face (especially by iron), and
all diseases which arise from too much heat of blood; also accidents
from four-footed beasts.

The herbs over which he rules are the nettle, the thistle, onions,
scammony, garlic, horehound, cardamons, mustard and all herbs giving
heat.

Of trees, all those which are of a prickly nature, such as the holly,
the thorn and the chestnut.

Of beasts, all fierce animals--the tiger, the panther, the wolf, the
horse, the leopard, the wild ass and the bear.

The dog is sometimes assigned to Mars on account of its courage and
combativeness. This delightful animal is probably ruled by both Saturn
and Mars; the former giving it the quality of fidelity which it
possesses in a degree beyond all other creatures.

Of fish, the pike, the barbel and the sword-fish.

Of birds, the hawk, the vulture, the kite, the eagle, the magpie and
the cock, all of which are combative.

The metal he rules is iron. The colour he rules is red.

The stones, the carbuncle, the ruby and the blood-stone.

His orb is 7 degrees before and after any aspect.

He governs Tuesday--the first hour after sunrise, and the eighth. His
number is 39.

His friend among the planets is Venus, all the others are his enemies.

His angel is Samael.

The Sun passes through all the twelve signs of the zodiac in one year
and a few hours over the 365 days which constitute the year. He has no
latitude.

When the Sun rises at a birth well-dignified, the native is of an
honourable disposition, but always desiring to rule, loving pomp, yet
affable, speaking with gravity and without too many words and
possessing much self-reliance and dignity of manner. In person he will
be tall, well made, with golden hair, yellowish skin, large and
piercing eyes and long, straight and well-formed features.

When ill-aspected the native is arrogant, boastful, a spendthrift,
proud, yet in poverty hanging on other men's charity, very loquacious,
restless and without judgment.

He governs the heart, the brain, the right eye and the arms; and the
diseases he causes are all illnesses of the heart, such as swoons,
palpitations, cramps, also diseases of the mouth, the brain, and the
eyes.

Of colours he rules the yellow and orange colour.

The plants subject to the Sun are all those of pungent odours, such as
the marigold, heliotrope, rosemary, balsam, peony, spikenard, musk, St.
John's wort, and ginger.

Of trees he rules the palm, the laurel, the cedar, the orange-tree and
the citron-tree.

Of beasts, the lion, the ram, the goat.

Of birds, the eagle, the cock, the buzzard.

Of fish, the star-fish, the crab-fish and the sea-fox.

He governs Sunday. His number is 34.

Of metals, gold.

Of colours he rules the yellow.

Of stones, the topaz, amber, chrysolite and all yellow stones.

His orb is 15 degrees before any aspect, and as many after separation.

His friends are all the planets except Saturn and Mars.

His angel is Michael.

After the Sun the planet Venus succeeds in order; she is of a bright
shining colour. Her greatest north or south latitude is 2 degrees and 2
minutes. When she rises well-dignified in a nativity the person born
will be of middle stature, rather inclining to shortness, with a
beautiful complexion, light brown hair, the eyes large, of a blue or
grey colour and with a slow and rather languishing movement, red lips,
and dimples in the cheeks, chin and about the mouth. In disposition,
gracious, very tender, inclined to love-making; easy of belief and not
given to labour about anything; fond of music, plays, and all sorts of
merry-makings.

When ill-dignified at birth Venus causes the native to be over-fat,
with thick lips, and much flesh about the chin and cheeks. In
disposition, sensual, riotous and immoral.

Venus governs the lower parts of the body, and the illnesses she gives
are cancer and all affections of the womb.

All the herbs she governs have a sweet smell and, generally, have
smooth leaves and white flowers, such as the lily, both white and
yellow, and the lily of the valley, also the water lily, the myrtle,
maidenhair, violets and roses.

The trees she rules are the walnut, the almond, the apple-tree, the
box-tree, the sycamore, the ash and myrtle.

Of beasts, the hart, the rabbit, the calf and all small cattle.

Of birds, the dove, the sparrow, the nightingale, the swan, the pelican
and the swallow.

Her metal is copper.

Her stones, white and red coral, rubies, the beryl, turquoise and lapis
lazuli, because it expels melancholy.

Her colours are white and purple.

Her orb is 7 degrees before and after any aspect.

Her day of the week is Friday, of which she rules the first and eighth
hour after sunrise. Her number is 45.

Her friends are all the planets, but Saturn is the least sympathetic to
her.

Her angel is Anael.

Mercury is of a soft silver colour. His greatest north latitude is 3
degrees 33 minutes. His greatest south latitude is 3 degrees 33
minutes.

When he rises well-dignified at a birth the native is a person of
subtle intellect, an excellent logician, and possessing much eloquence
in his speech; sharp and witty, of admirable memory, curious in occult
knowledge, given to divination, and, if he should turn his attention to
trade, no man would exceed him in the invention of new ways to gain
wealth.

In person, when Mercury rises well-dignified, the native is of rather
small stature, but elegantly formed, very active and supple in his
limbs, and with long arms; he will have a long, narrow face, a high
forehead, rather swelling at the temples, grey eyes with brown spots in
them, delicate mouth, straight eyebrows, a skin of a pale yellow or
olive colour, the hair of a red-brown, commonly called auburn.

When ill-dignified at birth Mercury gives a person of very small
stature, with small, insignificant features and very small and
quickly-moving eyes; and in character he is shifty, a boaster,
foolishly loquacious and a great liar.

He rules the liver, the tongue and the nerves, and the illnesses he
gives are epilepsy, giddiness, dry cough, any affection of the tongue,
and all nervous affections.

The herbs attributed to him are generally those having a subtle smell,
and having effect on the tongue, brain, lungs, or memory; they are
vervain, adder's-tongue, aniseed, dragon-wort, and the reed.

The trees are the elder and the filbert-tree.

The animals are the squirrel, the weasel, the spider, the greyhound,
the fox, the ape and all cunning and quickly-moving creatures.

The birds, the parrot, the magpie, the crane, the linnet and the
swallow.

Of fish, the jack-fish and the mullet.

His metal is quicksilver.

His stones all those of divers colours, white and red carnelian and
marcasite, or fire-stone.

In colours he rules azure, and all light blue colours.

His orb is 7 degrees before and after any aspect.

He governs Wednesday--the first hour and the eighth after sunrise. His
number is 114. The Moon, Venus, Jupiter, the Sun and Saturn are his
friends; Mars is his enemy.

His angel is Raphael.

The Moon is the nearest to the earth of all the seven planets. She
finishes her course through the whole twelve signs in 27 days 7 hours
and 36 seconds. Her greatest north latitude is 5 degrees and about 17
minutes, her greatest south latitude 5 degrees and 12 minutes.

When she rises well-placed in a horoscope, she signifies a person of
soft and gentle manners, timid, imaginative, loving pleasure and ease,
yet fond of moving from place to place, rather capricious, but of a
poetic and romantic turn of mind. In person, those born under good
aspects of the Moon are of middle height, with a round head and face,
pale, soft skin, large light eyes, usually one a little larger than the
other. The whole body inclined to be fleshy, the lips full, and the
hair of a dull, light colour, but not at all inclined to gold.

When the Moon is ill-aspected at birth the native is indolent,
sometimes a drunkard and vagabond, generally a liar, and, as Lilly puts
it, "a muddling creature."

The Moon governs the left side and the bladder. She gives dropsy, all
cold and rheumatic diseases, colds or hurts in the eyes, convulsive
fits, hysteria, and feminine weaknesses.

The plants she governs are all those which have soft, juicy leaves,
such as the lettuce, the melon, the gourd, the poppy, mushroom, cabbage
and colewort. Of trees, all those which have round, spreading leaves,
such as the lime-tree and the sycamore.

The beasts she rules are those which love the water, as the otter and
the seal.

She rules all sea fowl and also the goose, the duck and the night owl.

Of fish, the oyster, the cockle and the lobster.

Her colours are light greenish-blue mixed with white.

Her metal is silver.

Her stones, pearls, diamonds, opals, crystals and selenite.

Her orb is 12 degrees before and after any aspect.

Her day is Monday; the first hour and the eighth after sunrise are
hers. Her number is 45.

Her friends are Venus, Jupiter, the Sun, Saturn and Mercury.

Her enemy among the planets is Mars.

Her angel is Gabriel.

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter VI._]




CHAPTER VI.

CONCERNING THE TWELVE HOUSES OF HEAVEN AND THEIR POWERS


The ancient astrologers divided the heavens into twelve houses.

_The First House._--This is called the _Ascendant_, and the planet
rising therein--whether well or ill-dignified--will materially affect
the mind, bodily appearance and fate of the native through his whole
existence. This house is masculine, and governs the head and face of
man and, if the planet Mars be in this house at the time of birth,
there will always be some blemish or mole in the face of the native; if
a few out of the degrees have ascended the scar or blemish is, without
fail, on the upper part of the head; if the middle part of the sign
ascends the mark is in the middle of the face; if the latter part of
the sign is ascending the mark is near the chin. This house represents
the head, the tongue and the memory, and it governs in colours white.

_The Second House._--This house has signification of the native's
wealth and worldly goods. The house is feminine, ruling the neck, and
the colour is green.

_The Third House._--This governs brothers and sisters, short journeys,
neighbours, letters and writings. It is masculine and governs the
hands, arms and shoulders; its colours are red and yellow mixed.

_The Fourth House._--This rules the father, inheritances or property of
the native, and shows his condition at the close of life. It is
feminine, and rules the stomach, breast and lungs; its colour is red.

_The Fifth House._--This signifies the children of the native, also his
success in speculation and hazardous games, the pleasures he enjoys and
the wealth of the father. It rules the heart, back and liver, is
masculine, and represents in colour black and white mixed.

_The Sixth House._--This concerns the native's servants, sheep, goats
and small cattle. It also signifies the father's kindred. This house is
feminine. It rules the belly and intestines and its colour is black.

_The Seventh House_ gives judgment of marriage and describes the man or
woman in all love questions. It is masculine, it rules the haunches,
and its colour is black.

_The Eighth House_ argues of death, of legacies and wills, also of the
kind of death a man shall die; it is a feminine house. It rules the
lower parts of the trunk of the body; its colours are green and black.

_The Ninth House_ gives judgment on voyages and long journeys, and also
on events happening to the wife's kindred. It rules the hips and
thighs. It is a masculine house; its colours are green and white.

_The Tenth House_ is called the _Mid-heaven_, and is feminine. This
concerns the native's mother, and also his calling. It rules the knees
and hams, and its colours are red and white.

_The Eleventh House_ represents friends and friendship. It is masculine
and rules the legs.

_The Twelfth House._--This house is often called the _Evil Dæmon_, for
it is the house of sorrow, self-undoing, enemies and imprisonment. It
governs great cattle. It is feminine, and rules the feet and toes, and
in colour it governs green.

The strongest houses are the first (the _Ascendant_) and the tenth (the
_Mid-heaven_). The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth are called Angular
Houses, and represent the four cardinal points of the compass; thus the
first is east, the seventh west, the fourth is north, and the tenth
south. The second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses are called
Succedent Houses; the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses are
termed Cadent Houses (see plate 1). Any planet posited in a Cadent
House is regarded as weak in its effects on the native. It is necessary
to have thoroughly mastered the influences of the twelve houses, as
well as those of the seven planets, and of the signs of the zodiac,
before attempting to cast a nativity or to work a horary question.




CHAPTER VII.

AN EXPLANATION OF VARIOUS TERMS USED IN ASTROLOGY


_Ascension, Right._--The distance any body or point in the heavens is
from the beginning of the ecliptic or first point of Aries. It is
measured in degrees and minutes of a degree. It is thus abbreviated, A.
R.

_Ascension, Oblique._--If a star be not on the equator, it will, when
it rises, form an angle with that part of the equator which is rising
at the same time, and this is called its

_Ascensional Difference._--This, added to its right ascension (A. R.)
if it have _south_ declination, but subtracted from it if it have
_north_ declination, gives its oblique ascension.

_Application_ signifies the approach of two planets and is of three
kinds: first, when a planet, swift of motion, applies to one of slower
progress: for example, we will suppose Mercury posited in 16 degrees of
the sign Gemini, and Mars in 21 degrees of the same sign (_both being
in direct motion_), Mercury being swifter would overtake and form a
conjunction with Mars, which is termed a _direct application_. The
second kind of application is formed by two retrograde planets: thus we
will suppose Mercury in 16 degrees of Gemini and Saturn in 15 degrees
of the same sign, both retrograde. Mercury being the swiftest planet,
applies to Saturn, a more ponderous planet, by retrogradation, and this
is called a _retrograde application_. The third kind of application is
when one planet, being direct in motion, meets another which is
retrograde: for instance, we will suppose Mercury retrograde in 16
degrees of Gemini, and Saturn _direct_ in motion in 12 degrees of the
same sign; here Mercury, being the higher planet, _applies to a
conjunction_ of Saturn by a retrograde motion. These two last are
considered _evil_ applications. It should also be remembered that the
superior planets, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, never apply to the inferior
planets, Venus, Mercury and the Moon, except by retrograde motion; but
the inferior planets apply in both ways.

_Besieging_ signifies a planet situated between the two malevolent
planets, Saturn and Mars: thus, if Saturn were in the 12th degree of
Aries, Jupiter in the 14th, and Mars in the 16th, Jupiter would then be
_besieged_ by the two malefic planets, Saturn and Mars. This is, of
course, an evil position.

_Cazimi._--A planet is said to be in _cazimi_ when it is in the heart
of the Sun: that is, only 17 minutes before or after the Sun. All
astrologers agree that a planet is fortified by this position, but a
planet when _combust_ is very evil in its influences.

_Direct motion_ signifies that a planet is moving on its natural
course, according to the succession of the signs of the zodiac: thus a
planet is _direct in motion_ when it moves from Aries to Taurus, or
from Taurus to Gemini.

_Frustration_ means the approach of a swift planet to an aspect with
one of slower motion; but before it can approach near enough to join
that aspect the more weighty planet is joined to some other, by which
the first aspect is frustrated.

_Hayz_ is when a masculine diurnal planet is situated above the horizon
in the daytime, or when a feminine nocturnal planet is placed below the
horizon in the night-time; this is fortunate in its influence.

_Node._--That part of the ecliptic where a planet passes out of north
into south latitude is its south node; that where it goes into north
latitude is its north node.

_Oriental and Occidental._--A planet, when oriental, rises before the
Sun; when occidental sets after him and is seen above the horizon when
the Sun is down; consequently, when a planet is oriental it is posited
in the east, and when occidental, in the west.

From the fourth house eastward to the tenth is oriental and from the
tenth westward to the fourth is occidental. But [Sun] or [Moon] are
_oriental_ between the first and tenth and its opposite quarter and are
_occidental_ between the tenth and seventh and its opposite quarter.

_Void of course_ is when a planet is separated from another planet, and
does not, during its continuance in the same sign, form any aspect with
any other planet. This most usually happens with the Moon. The effect
of this is

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter VIII._]




CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS


This was formerly termed a _horoscope_, but is now more generally
called a _figure of the heavens_. It is simply a scheme, or plan,
representing an accurate picture of the heavens--that is, of the
positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets, and, in some instances, of the
fixed stars also, for the moment at which a child is born. In horary
questions the figure is drawn for the required time, which may be the
moment of the propounding of a question to an astrologer, or of the
occurrence of any event of the result of which astrological information
is desired.

This map, which contains the twelve divisions already described as the
twelve houses of heaven, may be drawn in either a square or circular
form. Lilly and other mediæval writers use both forms indiscriminately;
but as the latter is more easily understood, the diagram (plate 2) is
drawn up in that manner. It will be seen that it is formed of three
circles. In the centre space the date, time and place of the event of a
horary question are entered, and in a nativity the name, sex and moment
of birth of the native. The next space (divided into twelve equal parts
for the houses) is reserved for the planets and in the outer space are
placed the signs of the zodiac, with the number of their degrees, on
the cusp of each house. The cusps of the Houses are represented by that
line between each house. Having obtained an Ephemeris, or astrological
almanack[7] for the year required, we must find the Sidereal Time for
the day and month of the birth, or question; then, if the time of the
event be _before_ noon we must _deduct_ the difference between the
given time and noon from the Sidereal Time of the day; for example, on
the day of the event (the 9th January, 1889), the Sidereal Time at noon
is shown by the Ephemeris to be 19 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, if the
birth had been at 9 a.m. The difference between 9 a.m. and noon is 3
hours. We should, therefore, have to _deduct_ 3 hours from 19 hours 16
minutes 51 seconds, which gives 16 hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, the
Sidereal Time required.

          [7] Zadkiel's and Raphael's are both good; the following
          figure is worked after the Ephemeris of the latter.

As the event is supposed to happen at 3 in the _afternoon_, we must
_add_ the difference between noon and the time given to the Sidereal
Time of the day. The difference between noon and 3 p.m. is 3 hours,
and, as the Sidereal Time on the 9th January, 1889, is 19 hours 16
minutes 51 seconds, we _add_ 3 hours to this amount, which gives 22
hours 16 minutes 51 seconds, the Sidereal Time required.

We must now proceed to place the signs for 3 p.m. on the 9th January,
1889, which is thus done: We turn to the "Table of Houses" (which will
be found at the end of the Ephemeris), and having found (under the
column headed "Sidereal Time") the nearest time to 22 hours 16 minutes
51 seconds, which in this case is 22 hours 16 minutes 48 seconds for
the latitude of London, we see in the next column (headed 10) the sign
(Pisces), and the number 3° opposite our Sidereal Time, showing that
the third degree of Pisces is on the cusp of the 10th house, In the
next column (headed 11) we see [Aries], and the number 7°; we therefore
place 7° [Aries] on the cusp of the 11th house, next 24° [Taurus] on
the 12th; then 7° 5' [Cancer] on the Ascendant (or first house), 23°
[Cancer] on the 2nd and 10° [Leo] on the 3rd; for the remaining houses
we place the signs _in order_ opposite to those already given, keeping
the same number of degrees to each corresponding house and sign. The
opposite house to the 10th is the 4th, and the opposite sign to
[Pisces] is [Virgo]; we therefore place 3° [Virgo] on the cusp of the
4th house, and so on of the rest. It will, however, now be seen that
the two signs [Gemini] and [Sagittarius] are missing; these signs are
"intercepted," which means that they lie between two houses without
occupying the cusp of either; they must, therefore, be placed in their
order _between_ the cusps of the houses. This is, of course, not always
the case, and some horoscopes will have no intercepted signs.


HOW TO PLACE THE PLANETS.

In the Ephemeris the longitudes of the planets are given daily for mean
noon; so, to find the _exact_ place of a planet for a given time, we
must note the difference of longitude between the previous noon and
noon of the day for drawing the map for a.m. and for p.m., the
difference between noon of the day and noon of the day after. This
_difference_ is the motion of the planet in 24 hours, which we must
work thus: As 24 hours are to--hours (_i.e._, the difference between
the given time and noon), so is the daily motion to the motion
required. For example, the [Sun] at noon on the 6th January is
(omitting seconds) in 19° 29' [Capricorn], and on the 10th January at
noon he is in 20° 30' [Capricorn], which gives a daily motion of 59
minutes. We must find his place for 3 p.m. on the 9th January. As 24
hours are to 3 hours, so are 59 minutes to the time required; this
equals about 7 minutes, which we add to the [Sun]'s longitude at noon
on the 9th. If the event had been for a.m. this amount would have been
_deducted_ from the [Sun]'s longitude at noon on the day of the event.
We must proceed in the same way for the other planets and place them in
the map according to their positions in respect to the degrees on the
cusps of the houses. The [Sun] will be in 19° 36' [Capricorn], or about
the middle of the 7th house. And note that the number of degrees of a
sign on the cusp of any house shows that that sign commenced _in_ the
previous house. Supposing the [Sun] had been 1° of [Capricorn], we
should then have placed it in the 6th house, a little below the cusp of
the 7th. When a planet is _Retrograde_ (shown in the Ephemeris thus,
_R._), we _add_ the amount to the longitude when the event is before
noon or a.m., and _deduct_ it from the longitude when the event is
after noon or p.m. The mode of giving the judgment on a horoscope will
be shown farther on.




CHAPTER IX.

OF THE INFLUENCES OF THE FIXED STARS


The fixed stars are so called because they appear to keep at the same
distance from one another in the heavens. All of these stars have their
respective influences analogous to those of the planets. The following
table of the principal fixed stars, with their several magnitudes and
natures, will be found useful. It is only those of the first and second
magnitude which much affect us; the influence of those stars marked as
of fourth magnitude is very slight. The time of the rising and setting
of the fixed stars varies according to the latitudes of the places of
observation. Their longitudes increase at the annual rate of 50
seconds, but their latitudes vary very little. The right ascension and
declinations of the numerous fixed stars are given every year in the
Nautical Almanack.


  TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL FIXED STARS, WITH THEIR MAGNITUDES AND
  NATURES.

             _Stars._                _Magnitudes._  _Natures._

  South End of the Tail of the Whale       2  Of the nature of Saturn.
  The Star in the Wing of Pegasus          2  Mars and Mercury.
  The Head of Andromeda                    2  Jupiter and Venus.
  The Whale's Belly                        4  Saturn.
  The Girdle of Andromeda                  2  Venus.
  The Bright Star in the Head of Aries     3  Saturn and Mars.
  The Left Foot of Andromeda               2  Venus.
  The Bright Star in the Jaw of the Whale  2  Saturn.
  Caput Algol                              2  Saturn and Jupiter.
  The Pleiades or Seven Stars              5  Mars and the Moon.
  The Middle Star in the Pleiades          3  Mars and the Moon.
  Oculus Taurus                            3  Venus.
  Aldebaran                                1  Mars.
  Rigel                                    1  Jupiter and Venus.
  The Foremost Shoulder of Orion           2  Mars and Mercury.
  The She-Goat                             1  Mercury and Mars.
  The Middle Star in Orion's Belt          2  Jupiter and Saturn.
  The Highest Star in the Head of Orion    4  Jupiter and Saturn.
  The Star in the Horn of the Bull         3  Mars.
  Propus                                   4  Mars.
  The Right Shoulder of Auriga             2  Mars and Mercury.
  The Foot of Gemini                       2  Mercury and Venus.
  Castor                                   2  Mars, Venus and Saturn.
  Pollux                                   2  Mars.
  The Smaller Dog Star                     2  Mercury and Mars.
  Præsepe[8]                               1  Mars and the Moon.
  North Asellus                            4  Mars and the Sun.
  South Asellus                            4  Mars and the Sun.
  Cor Leonis or Regulus                    1  Mars.
  Heart of Hydra                           1  Saturn and Venus.
  Vindemiatrix                             3  Saturn, Venus and Mercury.
  The Back of the Lion                     2  Saturn and Venus.
  The Tail of the Lion                     1  Saturn, Venus and Mercury.
  Crater                                   4  Venus and Mercury.
  Arcturus                                 1  Jupiter and Mars.
  The Virgin's Spike or Arista             1  Venus and Mars.
  The South Balance                        2  Saturn and Venus.
  The North Balance                        2  Jupiter and Mars.
  The Left Hand of Ophiucus                3  Mars and Saturn.
  The Highest Star in Head of Scorpio      2  Saturn and Venus.
  The Left Knee of Ophiucus                3  Saturn and Venus.
  Cor Scorpio                              2  Mars and Jupiter.
  Antares                                  1  Mars.
  The Right Knee of Ophiucus               3  Saturn and Venus.
  The Bright Star of the Vulture           2  Saturn and Mercury.
  The Mouth of Pegasus                     3  Venus and Mercury.
  The Tail of the Goat                     3  Saturn.
  Marchab                                  2  Mars and Mercury.
  Fomalhaut                                1  Venus and Mercury.
  Scheat-Pegasi                            2  Saturn.

          [8] The nebulous mass in the body of the Crab.

To know when any of these fixed stars will affect the horoscope we must
note the sign and degree on the cusps of the houses, and if (on
consulting the Ephemeris) any of these stars should be found to be
ascending or descending within five degrees of the signs upon the cusps
of the several houses, they must be entered in the same manner as the
planets, and their qualities weighed according to the nature of the
planet or planets with which they correspond, as shown by the table
given.

The influences of the fixed stars are not much considered by the modern
astrologers, yet in certain positions their power is undeniable. The
conjunction and opposition are the only aspects to be considered in
regard to them, as they do not operate on the planets by sextile,
square, or trine aspects. When a fixed star happens to be in
conjunction with the Sun at birth, certain effects are distinctly
traceable. For example, the Sun conjoined with Aldebaran, Hercules,
Antares, or any fixed star having the nature of Mars, threatens a
violent death, or, at best, constant illness to the native. The Sun,
with the Pleiades, Castor, Pollux, or Præsepe, shows a cruel and
headstrong disposition in the native and the _probability_ of violent
death. The star Arista, with the Sun, gives great and lasting good
fortune. All the stars of the nature of Saturn, conjoined with the Sun,
bring calamity and disgrace. When a fixed star, whose latitude does not
differ much from that of the Moon, is in conjunction with her, certain
effects are produced; for instance, when she is conjoined with
Aldebaran or Pollux violent death is indicated; when with the Pleiades
injury to the eyes or blindness. The Moon with Antares and in
opposition to Saturn with Aldebaran, shows death by strangulation. The
Moon, with Aldebaran or Antares either in the ascendant or in the
mid-heaven, gives brilliant honours, but not without many attendant
dangers and hair-breadth escapes. Fixed stars of the _first_ magnitude,
near the cusp of the seventh house, show a rich wife, but her
disposition will sympathise with the planetary qualities of the star.
Fomalhaut and Rigel, in either the ascendant or mid-heaven, give fame
after death. Sirius, the Dog Star, in conjunction with the Sun, either
in the ascendant or mid-heaven, gives preferment and honours from
royalty. Caput Algol, in conjunction with the Sun in the eighth house
and in square to Mars, shows decapitation.




CHAPTER X.

OF THE EFFECT OF EACH PLANET IN EACH OF THE TWELVE HOUSES


Saturn in the first house, or ascendant, shows melancholy and many
sorrows, and if near the ascendant probability of early death; in the
second house pecuniary troubles; in the third quarrels with brothers
and sisters, and dangers and losses in travelling; in the fourth house
death of father or mother, and loss of friends; in the fifth barrenness
or death of children; in the sixth illness, worries with servants and
losses from cattle; in the seventh an ungovernable wife and unhappy
marriage; in the eighth violent death and loss of legacies; in the
ninth losses by sea; in the tenth dishonour and imprisonment; in the
eleventh deep depression and false friends; in the twelfth sorrow,
trouble and persecution from secret enemies. If the planet is
strong--that is, well-dignified--these evils are much lessened.

Jupiter in the first house gives a good, happy and long life; in the
second riches; in the third family affection and fortunate short
journeys; in the fourth lands and inheritance with an honourable life
and end; in the fifth many children who are good and affectionate; in
the sixth faithful servants and fortunate dealings respecting cattle;
in the seventh honourable marriage; in the eighth long life and natural
death; in the ninth profitable sea voyages; in the tenth preferment and
honours; in the eleventh faithful friends; in the twelfth victory over
secret enemies. This, of course, means when the planet is strong in
dignities; if weak the good will be somewhat abated.

Mars in the first house shows shortness of life and scars on the head
or face; in the second poverty and troubles; in the third quarrels with
kindred and dangers in travelling; in the fourth short life to the
fathers; in the fifth disobedient children; in the sixth fevers, bad
servants, and loss of cattle; in the seventh sensuality and unhappiness
in marriage; in the eighth a violent death; in the ninth irreligion and
losses at sea; in the tenth military preferment, but troubles from
great dignitaries; in the eleventh false friends and loss of money; in
the twelfth imprisonment. This is when Mars is afflicted, but if
well-aspected these evils are somewhat abated.

The Sun in the first house gives honour, glory, and long life; in the
second much riches, but great extravagance; in the third good brethren
and fortunate journeys; in the fourth a noble inheritance and honours
in old age; in the fifth few children, yet such as will be a comfort;
in the sixth diseases of the mind; in the seventh a good wife,
honourable adversaries, and sickness; in the eighth good dowry with the
wife, but danger of a violent death; in the ninth gain by the sea, and
ecclesiastical dignities; in the tenth gain from princes and noble
women; in the eleventh distinguished friendships; in the twelfth
powerful adversaries. This is if the Sun is well-dignified; if weak the
good fortune is not so pronounced.

Venus in the first house gives good health, but sensuality as regards
the opposite sex; in the second riches by means of women; in the third,
in a woman's horoscope, by means of lovers above her in rank; in the
fourth inheritance; in the fifth many children; in the sixth illness
from excesses; in the seventh a good and beautiful wife and very few
enemies; in the eighth a good dowry with the wife and a natural death;
in the ninth good fortune by sea; in the tenth honour and preferment
through the means of some one of the opposite sex; in the eleventh
sympathetic friends; in the twelfth freedom from the power of private
enemies. This if Venus be strong; if weak the good fortune is less
pronounced.

Mercury in the first house gives noble thoughts, graceful elocution,
and love of art and science; in the second profit by intellectual work;
in the third mathematical skill, swift and prosperous journeys; in the
fourth the gain of an inheritance by craftiness; in the fifth clever
children; in the sixth thieving servants and diseases of the brain; in
the seventh a fomenter of quarrels, but a discreet wife; in the eighth
death by consumption; in the ninth wonderful ability, especially in
occult matters; in the tenth much preferment for ability; in the
eleventh inconstant friends; in the twelfth secret enemies, but they
will not much affect the destiny. This is when Mercury is
well-dignified. If weak the good fortune is much lessened.

The Moon in the ascendant, or first house, shows the native will travel
and will gain the favour of noble persons; in the second she sometimes
gives unstable fortune, riches, and poverty alternately; in the third
long journeys; in the fourth profit by travelling; in the fifth many
children; in the sixth diseases of the brain, but good servants; in the
seventh honourable marriage; in the eighth danger by drowning, but
otherwise a long and healthy life; in the ninth many long sea voyages,
inconstancy in religion, and love of art; in the tenth great honours;
in the eleventh the friendship of noble personages; in the twelfth the
common people will be the native's enemies and do him much wrong.

The Dragon's Head when posited in the first house shows poverty; in the
second a good estate; in the third honest kindred and fortunate
journeys; in the fourth gain by travels; in the fifth long life and
good children; in the sixth health and good servants; in the seventh a
virtuous wife; in the eighth many legacies and a natural death; in the
ninth prosperity at sea; in the tenth honour; in the eleventh faithful
friends; in the twelfth open enemies.

The Dragon's Tail in the same places signifies the contrary in all
things.




CHAPTER XI.

ON FORMING A GENERAL JUDGMENT ON A NATIVITY


Respecting the distribution of the doctrine of nativities, we are to
consider first the _parents_, then the duration of life; the shape and
figure of the body; after these the quality of the mind; then as to
fortune in regard to honours as well as wealth. In succession to these
the character of the employment; the questions relative to marriage,
children, and friendships; then that concerning travel; and lastly,
that concerning the _kind_ of death which awaits the native from the
configuration of the heavens at his birth.

_The Parents._--In conformity with nature, says Ptolemy, the Sun and
Saturn are allotted to the person of the father, and the Moon and Venus
to that of the mother; and the mode in which these luminaries and
planets may be found posited, with reference to each other as well as
to other planets and stars, will intimate the situation of affairs
affecting the parents.

If Mars should be in bad aspect to the Sun, the father will receive
some injury to the face or die suddenly; but a long life is presaged if
Jupiter or Venus be in any mode whatever configurated with either the
Sun or Saturn.

If Mars be succedent to the Moon or Venus, or in quartile or opposition
to them, or if Saturn be similarly aspected to the Moon only, and both
of them be void of course or retrograde, or cadent, adverse accidents
and disease will attend the mother; should they, on the other hand, be
swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend that her life will
be short or grievously afflicted.

Should the Sun be configurated, in any mode whatever, with the Moon or
Venus, or should Venus herself be harmoniously configurated with the
Moon, either by the sextile, the trine, or the conjunction, the mother
will live long.

Concerning the duration of the native's own life, the Hylegliacal[9]
places are, according to Ptolemy, the sign on the angle of the
ascendant from the fifth degree above the horizon to the twenty-fifth
degree below it; the thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto
constituting the eleventh house; also the thirty degrees in dexter
quartile forming the Mid-heaven above the earth; those in dexter trine
making the ninth house; and, lastly, those in opposition belonging to
the angle of the west.

          [9] Hyleg is the word used for that body or point which is
          the giver of life.

Among these places, the degrees which constitute the Mid-heaven are
entitled to preference, as being of a more potent influence; the
degrees in the Ascendant are next in virtue; then the degrees in the
eleventh house, succedent to the Mid-heaven; then those in the angle of
the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house, which precedes the
Mid-heaven.

He also holds that "the Sun, the Moon, and the Ascendant to be
considered as the four principally liable to be elected to the office
of prorogator"--or HYLEG.

These views are not adopted by the modern astrologers, but as this is a
book _setting forth the ancient methods_ it is needless to discuss
the various objections made by them to this, as to some other of the
theories laid down by Ptolemy.

Among the four prorogators already given, the Sun by day is to be
preferred, provided he is placed in one of the Hylegliacal places, and
if not, the Moon; but if the Moon also should not be so posited that
planet is to be elected as Hyleg which may have most claims to dominion
in reference to the Sun, the Moon and the Ascendant, which means that
the planet should have dominion, in any one of the places where these
are situated, by at least three dignities. If, however, no planet
should be so circumstanced the Ascendant is then to be taken as Hyleg.

By night the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, provided, in like
manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the
Sun; if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which
may have most right of dominion in reference to the Moon, and the
antecedent full Moon, and the Part of Fortune. But if there be no
planet claiming dominion in the mode prescribed the Ascendant must be
taken; in case a new Moon had last preceded the birth; but if a full
Moon, the Part of Fortune.

If the two luminaries and also some ruling planet of appropriate
condition should be each posited in a prorogatory place, then, provided
one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important and
influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen; but should
the ruling planet occupy the stronger place, and have prerogatives of
dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the planet must
then be preferred to either of them.

When the Hyleg has been determined by the foregoing rules, then note
whether it is supported by benevolent planets in good aspects towards
it and free from affliction--that is, from evil aspects from evil
planets--if so, the life is likely to continue and the constitution to
be strong; but if the Hyleg, whether it be the Sun, the Moon, or the
Ascendant, be afflicted with evil planets and there be no assistance
from good planets, the child will die in infancy: if there be some
assistance from good planets, but yet the evil aspects exceed the good,
the constitution will be weak and the first train of evil directions
will destroy the life.

Concerning the disposition and quality of the mind, we must look
principally to the planets in the Ascendant, the influences of which
over mind and body have already been given in the chapter on the seven
planets. We must, however, always bear in mind that Mercury has chief
dominion over the mental faculties, whilst the sentient passions are
governed by the Moon and the planet in the ascendant. The Moon
well-aspected, that is, in trine, sextile, or conjunction to Mercury at
birth, will give to the native excellent abilities, ingenuity,
versatility and wit. Even the evil aspects of the square and opposition
are better than no aspects at all, though these sometimes produce a
cynical and obstinate nature.

The abilities of those born when Mercury is in "cazimi" (that is,
within seventeen minutes of the Sun's centre) are of the highest order.

Mercury in conjunction with Saturn at birth gives clear judgment and a
love of occult subjects.

Venus in good aspect with Mercury gives love of music and an artistic
nature.

If Mercury and the Moon throw no aspect to each other and are afflicted
by Mars and Saturn, the native will be liable to become insane.[10]

          [10] This was the case at the birth of George the Third of
          England; at that of the Emperor Paul of Russia; Maria, Queen
          of Portugal; Charles the Second, King of Spain; and Murad the
          Fifth, Sultan of Turkey; and all these sovereigns, as is well
          known, became insane.

The fortune of wealth is determined by the Sun and the Moon; if they
are in good position, that is, angular and well-aspected by the two
luminaries, the native will be rich. If the Sun and the Moon are well
placed, and if there be benefic stars in the Mid-heaven, the native
will rank high in the world. If the contrary, the native never rises
above mediocrity; and if Saturn afflicts the Mid-heaven, he meets
disgrace. If Mars is strong and in good aspect to the Sun and Moon, he
will gain military glory. Jupiter on the Mid-heaven and the Sun and
Moon in trine to each other, the Moon, having the trine of Jupiter, is
one of the best positions for rising in the world. Jupiter in the tenth
house will cause the native to do fairly well in the world; but Saturn
in that house, if not extremely well-aspected, will bring him to shame
and beggary.

Concerning the nature of employment, the dominion of the employment is
claimed by the Sun and by the planet on the Mid-heaven. If Mercury
should rule alone he produces writers, teachers of science, merchants
and bankers; also, if well-aspected to Saturn and the Moon, astrologers
and students of all occult matters; if Jupiter is in conjunction, then
the native will be an orator, actor, or painter and his pursuits will
lead him into the society of persons of rank.

Venus ruling makes wine-merchants, dealers in colours, dyes, perfumes,
drugs, garments or apparel, &c.; if connected with Saturn, she makes
persons have to do with amusement, players, jugglers, &c.; if with
Jupiter, persons attending exhibitions and priests who have much
personal decoration such as Catholic priests, bishops, &c. and they
will gain by women. Mars ruling alone makes martial men and, if in
Scorpio, Cancer, or Pisces, naval men.[11] The Sun joined with him,
being near the Mid-heaven, or in aspect, makes persons dealing with
fire or metals, the latter especially if in Taurus or Leo. If Mars be
separated from the Sun, he makes shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists,
stonemasons and carpenters.

          [11] At Admiral Nelson's birth Mars was rising in the sign
          Scorpio.

If Saturn bear testimony in addition to Mars, persons become mariners,
workers in mines, wells, vaults, &c., underground, keepers of cattle,
cooks, butchers. If Jupiter join with Mars, they will be soldiers,
innkeepers, tax-gatherers, mechanics. If Mercury and Venus become joint
arbiters of employment, they produce musicians, dancers, poets, weavers
and painters, &c. Jupiter in connection with them makes magistrates and
senators and also teachers of youth. Mercury with Mars makes surgeons,
statuaries, boxers. If Mercury be more powerful, they will be
scientific; and if Mars be stronger, they will be more violent and
cruel in their practices.[12] If Saturn join these two, they will be
thieves (especially if the Moon be in ill aspect to Mercury); if [Moon]
be in ill aspect to [Mars], they will be robbers or assassins. If
Jupiter join [Mercury] and [Mars], they engage in honourable warfare
and are industrious. If Venus and Mars rule together, persons will be
dyers, workers in tin, lead, gold, silver and medical drugs.

          [12] Probably vivisectionists.

The Moon regulating the employment and, separating from the Sun and
forming an aspect with Mercury, inclines to the pursuit of astrology,
spiritualism and magic.

_Concerning Marriage_, Ptolemy has laid down some very clear
rules. He advises persons about to marry to have a care that the
luminaries--that is, the Sun and Moon in their respective
nativities--are in concord. It is of happy augury if the Moon in the
bridegroom's nativity is in good aspect--that is, in trine or sextile
to the Sun in the bride's nativity. The Square or Opposition aspects
formed between the luminaries in the two nativities indicate discord
and separation, and very evil effects follow if the malefic planets,
Saturn and Mars, have a bad aspect to the Sun and Moon in both
nativities. If Venus be with them the separation will be caused by
adultery. Good planets, such as Jupiter and Venus, placed between the
luminaries in both nativities, show much happiness.

In men's nativities the Moon must be chiefly considered in regard to
marriage. Should she be in her first or third quarter at birth, the man
will marry under thirty, or if older his wife will be a very young
woman.

If the Moon be configurated with Saturn, she entirely denies marriage.
If she should be in a sign of single form, such as Libra or Taurus, the
native will marry only once, but if she should be placed in a
double-bodied sign, such as Pisces or Sagittarius, the man will marry
more than once.

If the Moon make application to the benefics, the wives will be good
and true; but if she make application to evil planets, the wives will
prove either bad or of a quarrelsome disposition. For example: If
Saturn receives the Moon's application the wife will prove troublesome
and morose, yet constant and industrious; if Jupiter receive it, the
wife will be decorous, good and economical; if Mars, bold and
refractory; if Venus, cheerful, handsome and agreeable; if Mercury,
sensible, prudent and clever.

Women in whose nativities Venus is configurated with Jupiter or Mercury
are virtuous and well-conducted; but, when Venus is with Mars and no
other planet is there, women born under such aspects are liable to
become licentious. Mars in square to Venus shows adultery.

For women the Sun is to be chiefly regarded in estimating their chances
of marriage and happiness. If the Sun be oriental (_i.e._, between
the Ascendant and Mid-heaven, or between the Descendant and Nadir) the
native will marry in her youth; or when old, to a young man. If the Sun
be occidental, the native will marry late in life; or when young, to an
old man. If the Sun be in a sign of single form, she will marry but
once; if in a double-bodied sign, or configurated with several oriental
planets (in one sign) she will marry more than once. If Saturn be
configurated with the Sun, the husband will be steadfast, prosperous
and industrious.

Jupiter configurated with the Sun gives a good, benevolent and
honourable husband. "Mars," says Ptolemy, "gives a severe husband, void
of affection and intractable." Venus gives an amiable husband of
handsome appearance. Mercury gives one who is provident and expert in
business and of a lively and cheerful temperament.

If Mars be separated from Venus and Saturn, yet have the assistance of
Jupiter, men will lead virtuous lives. If Mars be configurated with
Venus _only_ men are of a licentious temperament.

Saturn, when in the 7th house of a nativity, brings either unhappiness
in marriage or early death of one or other of the married people. The
Sun badly aspected by Saturn in the nativity of a woman and the Moon
afflicted by the same planet in the nativity of a man, will bring
trouble in love and marriage.

_Description of the wife or husband._--The planet with the sign in
which it is placed, which is posited near the cusp of the 7th house,
must be taken to describe the person. If no planet should happen to be
so placed, then we must go by the sign alone. Benefic planets in the
8th house show that the wife or husband will be rich; unfortunate
planets show the reverse.

_Children._--As regards the probability of having children, the 10th
and 11th houses must be consulted and, should there be no planets in
them, then the opposite, the 4th and 5th houses, must be considered.
The Moon, Jupiter and Venus are said to be givers of children; the Sun,
Mars and Saturn deny children, or give very few and those either die
early, or are a source of trouble to their parents. Mercury either
gives or denies according to the planets with which he may happen to be
posited.

If the Sun and malefics be in barren signs or in masculine signs and in
the before-named houses, there will be no children; but if they be in
fruitful or feminine, or common signs, there may be children, but they
will be delicate and short-lived.

If Jupiter, the Moon and Venus, are well-dignified in the 10th and 11th
houses, the children born will attain rank and distinction in the
world.

_Friends and Enemies._--Persons born under the same sign of the
zodiac are likely to be sympathetic; so also if the planet in the
ascendant of one person's nativity is one which is friendly to that
which rises in the ascendant in the other's. Thus, a person whose
ruling planet is Venus would be attracted by one in whose ascendant
Mars is dominant and a person whose ruling planet is the Moon rarely
contracts a warm friendship with one who has Mars in the ascendant of
his nativity and _vice versâ_. The friendships and enmities of the
planets have already been given in the chapter on the influences of the
seven planets.

Mars in bad aspect to the Sun or Moon in the 7th house causes quarrels
in married life.

_Travelling._--The position of the Moon and Mars are here to be
considered. If they should be in a cadent position the native will
travel a great deal. The Moon in a watery sign causes much travelling
by water. Ptolemy tells us that Mars in square or opposition to the Sun
or Moon will cause much travelling in foreign countries. If the
benefics are conjoined with the Moon, the journeys will be safe and
pleasant; if with the malefics they will produce mischances and
ill-health in travelling. Mercury ascending at birth, in a
double-bodied or moveable sign, shows a great disposition to travel. If
a malefic affecting the Moon should be in the watery signs of Cancer,
Scorpio, or Pisces, shipwreck and even death by drowning may ensue
during travelling.

_Of the Manner of Death._--If the Hyleg and Ascendant should be
well-aspected and if either Jupiter, Venus, Mercury or the Moon
well-dignified should appear in the eighth house the native will die a
natural death. If either the Sun or Moon should be badly aspected by
Mars or Saturn in the eighth house it is significant of a violent or
remarkable death. Saturn causes lingering deaths and Mars those which
are sudden.

_Saturn_ indicates death by chronic diseases, rheumatism, ague and
paralysis.

_Jupiter_ (when not well-aspected at birth) may become a
promittor, or cause of death, by apoplexy, inflammation of the lungs,
spasms, or gout.

_Mars_ indicates death by acute or eruptive fevers, small-pox, all
kinds of hæmorrhage, burns, suicides and wounds from iron, over which
metal he presides.

_Venus_ produces death by cancer, scurvy, dysentery, or wasting
away and putrid diseases. If violence attends she causes death by
poisoning.

_Mercury_ kills by madness, epilepsy, coughs and obstructions. If
violence concur he brings death by accident in sport or by robbers.

_The Moon._--When the Ascendant or [Sun] be Hyleg, the
Moon will assist in causing death by cold phlegmatic diseases and if
she be placed in [Cancer], [Scorpio], or [Pisces], by drowning.

_The Sun_ will assist to cause death by his ill aspects to the
Ascendant or [Moon] if they be Hyleg and then he acts like Mars,
and if in _Leo_, will produce death by fire, if other testimonies
agree.

The benefics cannot cause death of _themselves_; and even their
[Opposition] aspects will frequently save life when they fall
amidst a train of evil directions. But if the malefic influence is too
powerful for them to avert, then they cause death in the various
manners above described.

  [Illustration: _A Dogge Missing--where?_

  _FACSIMILE OF A MAP OF A HORARY QUESTION FROM LILLY'S ASTROLOGY._

  _To face Chapter XII._]





CHAPTER XII.

CONCERNING DIRECTIONS AND HORARY QUESTIONS


We have seen in the chapter on the judgment of a nativity that by the
consideration of the position of the planets and of the Sun and Moon in
the twelve houses, what the _general_ fortune of the native will be in
the whole course of his life; but the art of Direction measures out the
time into years, months, weeks and days and thus informs us when we may
expect in _particular_ what is _generally_ promised us in the nativity.

Directions are of two kinds, _primary_ and _secondary_, and are based
upon arithmetical calculations of the time of the events caused by the
aspects of the significators (that is, of the Sun or the Moon), with
the places of the planets. They are founded upon the familiarities of
the stars amongst each other in the zodiac (_after the nativity_), and
show, by calculations, the distance of the place of a significator at
the moment of the nativity from the place it must reach before it can
join the aspect, which distance is called _the Arc of Direction_. Some
astrologers consider what are called "_Mundane Directions_," which are
distances in the world measured by the semi-arc, and are wholly
independent of the zodiac. These were invented by Placidus, but as
Ptolemy does not treat of them they will not be considered here.

It must always be remembered that--in directions--the place of a
planet, at the time of the nativity, is called the planet itself,
although it may not be there when the significator arrives; thus, if we
wish to direct the Sun to the conjunction of Jupiter, we must do so to
the position which that planet occupied _at the moment_ of the
nativity. When the Arc of Direction is found the Sun's right ascension
must be added to it, and the Sun will be the right ascension (without
latitude) of that place in the zodiac at which, when the Sun arrives,
the direction will be completed. For every day of the Sun's approach to
this point a year must be added, and thus the time when the event is
likely to happen is pointed out: these primary directions, however,
cannot be depended upon to produce an event of great importance unless
the secondary directions agree; but where the nativity is weak the
primary direction alone is powerful enough to kill (especially if it
should be opposed to the Hyleg), and misfortune will always happen if
the positions of the planets, at the moment of birth, are unfortunate,
_without_ the coincidence of any secondary direction.

_Secondary Directions_ are those daily aspects to the luminaries which
happen after birth, every day of which is reckoned for a year, two
hours for a month, thirty minutes for a week, and four minutes for a
day.[13] Thus, whatever aspects take place in the _first day_ of the
native's life will develop their effects in the first year and those of
the second day in the second year, so that, should the native live
fifty years, his secondary direction for his fiftieth year will arise
from the aspects which took place on the fiftieth day after his birth.
The ancient astrologers--particularly the Egyptians--used to predict
the events of a nativity _wholly_ from these secondary directions,[14]
in which the Moon should be chiefly considered; for in those days on
which she comes to an evil aspect with the malefics, Saturn or Mars,
the years corresponding to those days will be peculiarly unfortunate
and dangerous to the native; and where, on the contrary, the Moon is
well-aspected to the benefics, the years corresponding to those days
will be very fortunate: a good direction gives prosperity in that
matter which the significator indicates; thus we direct the Sun to
signify the native's preferment or disgrace, his good or bad health,
and the favour or disesteem of great personages.

          [13] These aspects can all be judged from the Ephemeris of
          the year of birth.

          [14] And these secondary directions being so much easier to
          calculate, students are advised to follow the ancient methods
          in this as in all else relating to this old-world study.

The direction of the Moon refers to the nature of the native's
journeys, whether prosperous or the reverse, his marriage, his wife,
his women friends and kinsfolk.

The direction of Saturn signifies the native's inheritance, buildings,
possessions, and also his fears, jealousies and mistrusts.

Jupiter is directed as regards glory, renown, riches, children and
religion.

Mars is directed for the native's law-suits, animosities and victories;
he also shows the estates of brethren.

Venus is directed for marriage, love and pleasure and all matters in
connection with women.

Mercury is directed for a knowledge of the amount of wit,
understanding, trade, industry, and journeys of the native; also for
distinction in scholarship and all intellectual pursuits.

The Horoscope or Ascendant is directed to signify the life, affections
and manners of the native.

The Mid-heaven's direction affects the position and career of the
native.

If the directions are to good aspects of benevolent planets, they
signify prosperity both of mind and body, cheerfulness and all manner
of earthly happiness; but if the horoscope should have directions to
the ill aspects of the malefics, Mars or Saturn, then evil is to be
expected of the nature given by the malevolent star. If directed to the
good aspects, such as the trine or sextile of these evil planets, the
misfortune is not so great, and even in some instances good may be
predicted. As, for example, the horoscope directed to the trine or
sextile of Mars gives preferment by arms; the same aspects towards
Saturn would indicate success in building or in mines, or some calling
connected with metals.

The occasional differences in the life, tastes, health, marriage and
pecuniary affairs of twins, born within ten or twenty minutes of each
other, are accounted for by the fact that at the birth of the first
child the last degree of a sign may ascend with planets therein, or a
planet in the 2nd house at 5 p.m. may be in the 1st at 5.15 p.m. and
the early degrees of another sign may be exactly on the ascendant at
the birth of the second child.

A planet may reach the M.C., or any other of the four cardinal points
at, say, 10 p.m. and ten minutes later have passed off, when its powers
would have greatly diminished. Though the signs rise and set at the
rate of 15° per hour, in our latitude from 50° to 60° North, it often
happens that 30° will ascend in fifty-two minutes.

Horary questions are questions asked at a certain time when a person
feels anxious concerning any undertaking or impending event. A figure
or map of the heavens, like that erected for a nativity, is drawn out
for the minute in which the question is asked; and, if the astrologer
be skilful, and the querist sincere--that is, not putting the question
from frivolous motives--the answer will, in general, be true, for the
whole is the effect of that sympathy which pervades all nature and
which is the keynote of all divination under whatsoever form it is
practised.

In horary questions the sign ascending and its lord represent the
querent, and to these the Moon is added and must be considered with the
lord of the ascendant.

The house to which the thing belongs--about which enquiry is made--is
the significator of that person and thing, and every other house and
its lord are to be considered according to their respective
significations, so as to indicate the means and persons by which the
event, about which the enquiries are made, will be accelerated or
retarded.

The dates of events are regulated by the signs and angles. For example,
should the significator of the event be in a movable sign and an angle
the event will come to pass in the same number of days as there are
degrees between the significator's aspect and the star to which it is
directed if the aspect be by _application_; if by _separation_, the
thing will _not_ take place at all. In one of the succedent houses
movable signs give months, common signs years and fixed signs bring
about the event, after much delay, and when all hopes of it are past.

Significators in any of the cadent houses seldom do anything and,
should they bring about an event at all, they do so after much waiting
and with much trouble and vexation.

The matter of horary questions is very well treated in Lilly's _Grammar
of Astrology_, published in 1647, and, by way of explaining the manner
in which this branch of astrology is worked, we give a _fac-simile_ of
a map of a horary question to be found in this book, with (verbatim)
Lilly's method of dealing with that particular question.

_Judgment of the Figure given in Plate._--"Living in London, where
we have few or no small cattle as in the country, I cannot give example
of such creatures, but I once set the figure preceding concerning a
Dogge (which is in the nature of small beasts), which dogge was
missing. The question to me was what part of the city they should
search and if he should ever be recovered.

"The querent was signified by the sign ascending and the lord thereof,
for, in his person, he was Saturnine and vitiated (according to the
Dragon's Tail in the ascendant) in his nature, mind and
understanding--that is, he was deformed in body and of a covetous
disposition. The sign of the sixth house and his lord signifies the
dogge, for that sign stands for sheep, hogs and small cattle.

"The sign of Gemini is west, and by south the quarter of the heaven is
west; Mercury (the significator of the dogge) is in Libra, a western
sign, but southern quarter of heaven, tending towards the west; the
Moon is in Virgo, a south-west sign, and verging towards the western
angle. The strength of the testimonies being thus examined I found the
plurality to signify the west, and therefore I judged that the dogge
ought to be westward from the place where the owner lived, which was at
Temple Bar, wherefore I judged that the dogge was about Long Acre, or
the upper part of Drury Lane. In regard that Mercury (the significator
of the beast) was in a sign of the same triplicity as Gemini the
ascendant, which signifies London, and applied to a trine aspect of the
cusp of the sixth house, I judged that the dogge was not out of the
lines of communication, but was in the same quarter, of which I was
more confirmed by the trine of the Sun and Saturn. The sign in which
Mercury appeared was Libra--an airy sign; therefore I judged that the
dogge was in some chamber or upper room, and kept privately, or in
great secrecy, because the Moon was under the beams of the Sun; and
Mercury, the Moon and the Sun were in the eighth house: and because the
Sun on the Monday following would apply by trine to Saturn, the lord of
the ascendant, and the Moon to trine of Mars having exaltation in the
ascendant, I intimated to the owner of the beast that, in my opinion,
he should have his dogge again, or news of his dogge or small beast,
upon the Monday following, or near that time, which was true; for a
gentleman of the querent's acquaintance sent home the dogge the very
same day, about ten in the morning, who, by accident, coming to see a
friend in Long Acre, found the dogge chained up under a table, and,
knowing the dogge to be the querent's, sent him home as above said, to
my very great credit," and no doubt also to the great satisfaction of
"the dogge" himself.




CHAPTER XIII.

SOLAR HOROSCOPES[15]


JANUARY.--AQUARIUS

          [15] Translated from a Hebrew manuscript found near Cairo in
          1836 at the time of the removal of the obelisk to France.

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of January
to the Twenty-first of February._

The man born under this influence will be of medium stature, good
genius and a great speaker. He will achieve what he desires and will
become famous in his own country.

He will be subject to melancholy, very religious and of a highly
conscientious nature. The stars, however, destine him to pass through
much poverty in his youth and he will have other troubles in the matter
of deaths of relations and friends before he is thirty. He will travel
much and, in his early youth, he will suffer from illness. He will be
much influenced by women to his own detriment. He will lose his first
wife and will marry twice, but the second marriage will not be very
fortunate. At thirty he will be very seriously ill, but will recover
and live on to about sixty-four years.

The woman who is born at the above-mentioned dates will have a charming
and expressive face; her eyes will be soft and beautiful in shape and
her hair of a medium brown colour, neither very dark nor very fair. In
character she will be slightly melancholy and of a romantic turn of
mind. She will be happy in her marriage. She will have a serious
illness at fifty, but will recover from it through the affectionate
care of her husband, and will live to a good old age, surrounded by her
children's children.


FEBRUARY.--PISCES

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of February
to the Twentieth of March._

The man who is born under the influence of this sign will be above
middle height, his chin will be fleshy, his eyes blue and his
complexion rather colourless. His forehead will be low and broad and
his eyes will express much kindness and goodness of disposition. He
will be very fond of aquatic pursuits and take great delight in
angling. He will not be studious, for he has not much perseverance, but
he will take delight in conversation of an instructive order. He will
not be much of a talker and will be slow to give his opinions on any
subject. He will be of a luxurious temperament and will be much
influenced by women. He will be economical in his household expenses,
but will spend money freely on his own pleasures out of his family
circle. He will be fond of travelling and will be more fortunate in
other places than in his own country. He will be ingenious and of good
counsel, yet wiser for others than for himself. He will lose his wife
early in life, but will not marry again, yet this more from indolence
than constancy of feeling.

The woman born at this time will be fairly good looking; her eyes will
be light blue and she will have a fair complexion and a dimple in the
right cheek. She will be of a good disposition and kind to the poor;
but yet she will be self-indulgent and much given to luxury of all
sorts. She will marry twice and have many children, but the stars do
not promise her much happiness. She will die at sixty-eight.


MARCH.--ARIES

_The qualities given by this sign of the Zodiac last from the
Twentieth of March to the Twentieth of April._

The man born under this sign will be of medium stature, of fierce
countenance, with an aquiline nose, quickly moving eyes and a strongly
marked dimple in the chin. His hair will be of a reddish tint, his
forehead broad and his complexion florid. He will be a loud talker and
have much inclination for women and also for the pleasures of the
table. He will be fond of field sports and very courageous. He will be
subject to accidents, both from fire and from four-footed beasts. He
will be capricious in his affections and will suffer much from his
affairs with women in his youth, but will grow wiser towards middle
age. He will not marry. At fifty he will lose much money and will fall
into poverty, and thus become alienated from the friends of his youth.
His life will not be prolonged much beyond fifty-five years.

The woman born at this time will have a florid complexion, large
round-shaped eyes and a square chin. She will be of middle height and
rather strongly made. She will be quick-tempered, strong-willed, very
courageous and rather selfish. She will marry at twenty-three, but will
not have many children. She will be a widow in middle life and will
marry again within a year of her first husband's death. She will die
suddenly by an accident in her fifty-sixth year.


APRIL.--TAURUS

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of April to the
Twenty-first of May._

The man born under this sign will have full lips, a short throat, and a
mole at the back of his neck. He will be subject to sudden fits of
anger and will be fierce and cruel. He will be fond of women, but will
not be much liked by them and will suffer much in consequence. He will
be ambitious, fortunate in business and energetic. He will not be very
prudent in speech and will often get himself in trouble by
over-communicativeness. He will marry a rich wife and will acquire much
money by legacies from her relations. He will be very ill at forty, but
he will survive it and come into much riches soon after it. His life
will go on to about sixty-two, when he will die of much the same
illness which he had at forty.

The woman born at this time will be graceful and well formed, with
luxuriant hair and a full and well-formed mouth. She will have a good
complexion and will have fascinating manners, so that she will much
attract men. She will run great risks both from fire and water, and she
will be subject to weakness of the eyes to such excess that towards the
end of her life she will have reason to fear blindness, but she will
escape this calamity. Although she will have many lovers she will only
marry once, for her husband will survive her. She will have many
children and they will all live. She herself will die before sixty.


MAY.--GEMINI

_The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of May
till the Twenty-first of June._

The man born under the influence of this sign will be subject to ulcers
and all skin diseases. He will be tall, well formed and of florid
complexion. He will be much liked for his amiable qualities and will
govern his family well. He will travel much in foreign countries and
will acquire many beautiful things in the course of his travels. He
will be attentive to women, very conscientious, gracious and valiant.
He will not be at all given up to luxury, but will be of a pious and
self-denying temperament. He will be bitten by some venomous reptile,
yet will not die of the wound, but will recover entirely from it in a
short time. He will be falsely accused of some sin and will be
imprisoned for it; but he will come out victorious and his innocence
will be acknowledged by all. His marriage is uncertain.

The woman who is born at this time will be fluent of speech, gracious
in manners, witty and intelligent, but rather sensitive in temper. She
will be small of stature, slight in figure and of a fair complexion.
She will have well marked yet delicate eyebrows, brilliant eyes and
small white teeth; her hands will be slender, with pointed fingers. By
reason of her grace and wit she will be much loved, but she will not
marry until she is twenty-five. She will be passionately loved by her
husband, but she will not return his affection. She will have very few
children who will not live beyond childhood. She herself will die at
sixty-seven.


JUNE.--CANCER

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of June to
the Twenty-first of July._

The man born under this sign will be of medium height and will have
light hair and eyebrows. He will be given to deceit in his manners with
women and will be very inconsistent, yet always with such gracious
manners towards them that he will be much beloved by them. He will
travel much, and will suffer many misfortunes in the way of accidents.
He will in middle age lose much money through the misconduct of his
brothers, who will, by their extravagance, spend all the father's money
and thus leave only a poor inheritance. He will occupy himself with
agriculture and be successful with it. At forty he will suffer from a
very serious illness and his life will probably end at forty-eight.

The woman born at this time will have large grey eyes, full lips and an
abundance of soft, rather colourless hair. She will be fond of luxury
and ease, and will be much given to the pleasures of the table, and
will eat much and drink more. She will marry early, but will not agree
with her husband by reason of her own inconstancy. She will be married
three times, and will get on better with her last husband than with the
two others. She will have several children, but they will all be of a
sickly constitution. She herself will have a very serious illness at
seventy which will cure her of all her troubles.


JULY.--LEO

_The influences of this sign extend from the Twenty-first of July to
the Twenty-first of August._

The man born under this sign will be of middle height, but more
inclined to be tall than short; his hair will be of a red colour, and
his eyebrows will be well marked and much arched in their form. He will
be valiant, hot tempered, very talkative, somewhat boastful, but
pleasant and jovial in his manners. He will be a great admirer of
women, but not constant in his affection. He will marry once, but not
the woman he so much loves.

The woman born at this time will be tall, with bright hair of a reddish
gold colour, grey eyes, with a bold fierce glance, and long features.
Her nose will be aquiline and the face a long oval. The lips will be
full but firmly closed and the teeth good and large. She will be quick
of temper and difficult to please, fond of pleasure and very ambitious
of shining in society. Her great desire for admiration will cause her
to be much talked about--not always in a manner pleasing to her
husband. She will marry early. She will lose her husband in early youth
and will marry again soon after her widowhood. She will be much subject
to illnesses through the blood, and at forty-eight she will have a very
serious illness; but she will recover and live another fifteen years,
but her life will always be full of anxieties and troubles.


AUGUST.--VIRGO

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-second of August to
the Twenty-third of September._

The man born under this influence will have an abundance of hair and
will have a large chin and a good complexion. He will be ambitious,
enterprising, and very valiant, but a little capricious. He will suffer
much illness and, when he is about thirty years of age, he will be
menaced by death or imprisonment, yet he shall escape both evils. He
will be of a sympathetic and benevolent disposition and will give good
counsel to his friends. He will have a beautiful wife whom he will
tenderly love, although she will not return his affections.

A woman born at this time will be graceful and charming, with a
well-formed face, an agreeable expression, small mouth and
well-proportioned figure. Her voice will be one of her charms, and will
be clear and soft and singularly harmonious. She will be much loved and
admired for her wit, and will show much taste for music and dancing.
She will have fairly good health, and her beauty and charm of manner
will make her much sought after in marriage, but she will not accept
any of her numerous lovers until after her twenty-second birthday. She
will be much loved by her husband, and being inclined to be devout, she
will educate her children in the fear of God. She will die at
sixty-nine.


SEPTEMBER.--LIBRA

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-third of September
to the Twenty-third of October._

The man born under this sign will be fluent of speech and his voice
will be sonorous and will sound angry even when he is not so. He will
be wise and prudent and will be much esteemed by good men. He will be
just and honourable in all his dealings and will acquire the respect of
all who know him for his conscientious dealings with his fellow-men. He
will marry twice. His second wife, whom he will marry when he is turned
forty, will be extravagant, and will so worry him by spending all his
substance, that she will bring on his death before he is fifty.

The woman born at this period will be, say the astrologers, cheerful
and of a kindly disposition. She will be of a lively temperament and
will easily learn both music and dancing and will excel in both. She
will be amiable, very caressing in manner and much loved by all who
know her. She will marry twice. Her first husband will be rich and of
mature age and very prudent. The second will be young and will soon
spend the greater part of the money left her by her first husband. She
will be gay, fond of pleasure and rather a coquette, which will much
displease the second husband. She will be rather given to gambling and
will lose money in this way, which will cause her much discomfort and
anxiety in her latter years.


OCTOBER.--SCORPIO

_The influences of this sign will last from the Twenty-second of
October to the Twenty-first of November._

A man born under this sign will be short and broad in figure and
ungraceful in his movements. He will be dark in complexion; but the
hair will be of a red-brown colour, the eyebrows thick and meeting over
the nose. He will be prompt in judgment, but very wily and inconstant,
promising one thing and doing another, so much so, that those who have
once had dealings with him will never again have confidence in him,
knowing how likely he is to deceive them. He will be of a perverse and
irritable temper, which will cause him to have many enemies; and
notwithstanding all his acuteness, he will always be poor. He will
travel much and will lead a somewhat vagabond life. He is very unlikely
to marry, and he will probably die a violent death.

The woman who is born under the influence of the Scorpion will be of a
reddish colouring and of middle height and strongly built. As regards
her character, she will be affable, much beloved by her relations, fond
of pleasure, yet very energetic in the discharge of her household
duties, sensitive in temper, a little revengeful and very ingenious and
of quick judgment. In her youth she will have much trouble from
lawsuits, but she need not fear the result, for as she is pious God
will always protect her. She will only marry once, at about her
twenty-sixth year, and will die at sixty-eight. She will have no
children.


NOVEMBER.--SAGITTARIUS

_The influences of this sign continue from the Twenty-second of
November till the Twenty-first of December._

The man born under this sign will be of pale complexion and he will
have long features and dark hair and eyes. He will be prudent, studious
and economical. He will see many foreign countries and will gain much
money in his youth, by reason of which he will excite the envy of his
friends. He will receive much injury from a relative, who will
endeavour to prejudice people against him, but he will always be well
received and much liked in society. He will be generous to his friends,
but he will be badly recompensed for his kindness. He will be
persevering in his profession and will attain a good position in it. He
will be subject to internal complaints, but will live long. He will be
untrue to his wife, but he will be careful that she does not know it.
He will have several children, but they will be no comfort to him, as
they will be always ungrateful to him.

The woman who is born at this time will be well formed, with luxuriant
hair and well-marked and rather arched eyebrows; her forehead will be
broad and her intellect good, but her temper easily irritated and over
sensitive, especially where her affections are concerned. She will be
timid, very constant both in love and friendship, generous in her
affections, yet very ill-requited in this respect. She will marry at
twenty-six and will have many children. She will suffer much from the
evil tongues of false friends, who will malign her to her husband, but
her innocence will be made known and in the end she will be fully
justified. She will live to sixty-eight.


DECEMBER.--CAPRICORNUS

_The influences of this sign last from the Twenty-first of December
to the Twenty-second of January._

The man born under this influence will be of good complexion, his voice
will be clear and bright and he will be fluent of speech. He will have
a mole on his chin or on his right arm. He will be very much influenced
by women and will be a great lover of luxury. He is likely to be bitten
by some mad animal and he is also menaced by many illnesses of the eyes
and eyesight. He will be much deceived by a woman who will cause him
much injury.

The woman born under this sign will be amiable, with an agreeable
countenance, a clear voice and a well-formed body. She will be twice
married. Her first husband will much love her. He will be a poor man,
but of a very conscientious nature and much respected for his
straightforwardness of character. Her second husband will be much
richer and of a gay and pleasure-loving nature, but he will not be so
affectionate as the first. She will suffer much from melancholia, and
when she is thirty she will have a very serious mental illness; but, by
the grace of God, she will recover from it and live until she is
forty-seven.




CHAPTER XIV.

APHORISMS CULLED FROM THE WORKS OF PTOLEMY AND OTHER ANCIENT
ASTROLOGERS


Whosoever may be adapted to any particular event or pursuit will
assuredly have the star indicative thereof very potent in his nativity.

If Virgo or Pisces be on the ascendant the native will create his own
dignity; but if Aries or Libra be there he will cause his own death.

Venus gives pleasure to the native in that part of the body which may
be ruled by the sign she occupies. It is the same with other stars.

Should a disease begin when the Moon may be in a sign occupied at the
birth by some malefic, or in quartile or opposition to any such sign,
such disease will be most severe; and if the malefic also behold the
said sign, it will be dangerous. On the other hand, there will be no
danger if the Moon be in a place held at the time of birth by some
benefic.

In all horary questions remember that there is no affliction to the
Moon so great as when she is in conjunction with the Sun; the ill
aspects for the malefics must affect her, but no evil aspect is so
powerful as her conjunction.

Mercury in trine or sextile to the Moon gives the capacity for
acquiring foreign languages. In bad aspect to the Moon makes the native
envious, sarcastic, ill-natured, given to lying and thieving.

Saturn in trine or sextile to Venus shows much power of attachment to
wife and family. In a woman's nativity this is very good, as it
indicates purity.

Those born near noon are generally successful in life, owing to the
Sun's influence being then most powerful. Those born near midnight are
by no means so fortunate as those born at midday, and it is a singular
peculiarity in such nativities that the most remarkable events of their
lives take place _after_ their thirtieth year, and they are also
certain of some kind of a name after death, meritorious or otherwise,
according to what their horoscope declares. Persons born near midnight
are very imaginative, and subject to see visions, dream dreams, and to
be believers in the unseen world.

In all travels the Moon is to be considered, for she is a general
signifier of journeys, whether by sea or land.

When the moon is besieged between Mars and the Sun in a nativity, it
argues a short life to the native.

Mercury, if posited in one of the houses of Saturn, in trine or sextile
to that planet, gives excellent understanding; and if the moon be also
well-dignified, the native is much given to the study of occult
science, and will have much renown in that particular.

Those born with the Moon powerful in their horoscopes would do well to
be guided by her aspects in their daily avocations. If she should be in
trine or sextile to Jupiter, it is a good day to seek favours of the
great, or to make arrangements with employers. When she is in trine or
sextile to Mercury, all intellectual matters taken in hand will be
likely to prosper. When she is so aspected to Venus, matters undertaken
with reference to love, marriage, or friendship will have a happy
issue. When she is in square or opposition she would have, of course,
the contrary effects.

The Sun and Moon in conjunction with Mercury give to the native great
intellectual abilities.

Those who have the benevolent planets, Jupiter and Venus, well posited
in either the ascendant or the mid-heaven at birth will always be much
beloved during the whole course of their lives.

He who is born with the sun in trine to Jupiter is fond of rule, and
very famous in his generation.

Venus in square to Saturn at a birth causes the native to be sensual
and given to unnatural vices.

All the planets, or most of them above the earth, make the native
eminent and famous, and if all should be well-dignified, he will--like
a comet--outshine all others in the world's esteem. If, on the
contrary, all the planets are under the earth at a birth, the native
will be of a falling fame and fortune, or if they promise by their
natures honour, dignity and fortune (that is, if they appear
essentially dignified in nocturnal genitures), these good things will
only come in the latter part of the native's life.

Jupiter in conjunction with the Moon in a watery sign gives
drunkenness.

Venus in conjunction, trine or sextile to the Moon, gives happy
marriage, but in square to the Moon, prodigality, indolence and
drunkenness.

Saturn in square to Mars means a malicious and murderous temperament,
and liability to imprisonment.

It is advantageous to make choice of days and hours at a time well
constituted by the nativity. Should the time be adverse, the choice
will in no respect avail, however favourable an issue it may chance to
promise.

A sagacious mind improves the operation of the heavens, as a skilful
farmer by cultivation improves nature.




Part II.

CHIROMANCY

    "God has placed signs in the hands of all men, that every man may
    know his work."--Job xxxvii. 7 (_St. Hierom's Translation_).




CHAPTER XV.

CHIROMANCY AND ITS ORIGIN


Chiromancy is a science which teaches us to read not only the character
but the whole destiny--for good or evil, the length of life and often
the manner of death of a man by the lines and marks to be seen in his
hand. This study is sometimes called Palmistry, in which case, however,
it properly refers _only_ to a judgment formed from what appears in the
palm of the hand, whilst Chiromancy (taken from the word _Cheir_, a
hand, and _Manteia_, divination) signifies the revelations made by the
hand, taken as a whole. Chiromancy is nearly as ancient as astrology,
with which it is _indissolubly_ connected, for the hand represents, as
has been before said, a natural horoscope, which is placed upon it at
the time both of the conception and the birth by the influence of the
stars. The seven planets are all represented in the hand and also the
twelve signs of the zodiac, so that the casting of a nativity is
needless, as by simply examining a hand by the light of Chiromancy we
can indicate what planets have been powerful at the time of birth, and
what, therefore, will be their effect for good or evil over the
existence; and we can also find the dates of the principal events of
the life. We find many allusions to this subject in the Bible, and
still more in the ancient Kabbala.

The Holy Kabbala, as it was called by the Magi, must not be confounded
with what is called "The Black Art"; it is, on the contrary, the
quintessence of reason and morality as they were understood by the
ancients and contains that traditional science of the secrets of nature
which, from age to age, is borne towards us as the wave is carried by
the tide to the shore; but it has been transmitted obscurely, because
the doctrines of the Kabbala were known only, in those early ages, to
the adept and the initiation, later on, of neophytes was only yielded
after a series of severe and terrible ordeals, whilst the revelation of
its mysteries to the uninitiated was punished by death.

The necessity of silence was, in fact, one of the principal tenets of
the Kabbala and is represented, in the figure of Adda-Nari,[16] by the
position of the fingers of the hand holding the flowering branch of
Abundance; the thumb and the first two fingers, which in Chiromancy
represent _will_, _power_ and _fatality_, are held open; whilst the
third and fourth fingers, representing light and science, are closed.
This was meant to indicate to the good--the initiated--that they would
have, when united, strength and will to direct Fate; but that they must
keep hidden from the wicked and ignorant both light and science. It
must, however, in justice to the ancient Kabbalists, be suggested that
their inculcation of silence probably arose, not so much from a desire
of domination, but rather from the fact that, feeling themselves
superior in knowledge, they thought they were obeying a divine law in
refusing to the wicked those lights which, when possessed by them, led,
as perhaps they had sometimes found, to error. We, seeing things in a
wider light, give, or try to give, equal knowledge to all, without
submitting the ignorant to the ordeal of initiation to prove their
worthiness as recipients; but, after all, it amounts to much the same
thing--give to all men truth and light in abundance, but all will not
profit by it. We see this every day in our college system; the lesson
is the same for all, but it is only the few who profit by it; and
although we appear to be obeying a divine law in opening the way of
light and life--the life of knowledge--to all, as God makes His sun to
shine on good and bad equally, still we can, in some sort, understand
the feeling of the ancient Magi, whose motto was: "Know, Dare, Will,
but _keep Silence_."

          [16] Adda-Nari, Nature--that is, the deity known under the
          name of Isis by the Egyptians.

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter XVI._]




CHAPTER XVI.

THE PRINCIPAL LINES IN THE HAND AND THE MOUNTS


In the plate belonging to this chapter we give a hand on which are
marked the principal lines seen on the palm; three of which, viz., the
Line of Life, the Line of Head and the Line of Heart, are found in a
clearer or fainter degree on all hands, but which vary, as regards
their relative position, in every hand. The first and largest, that
which encircles the thumb, is called the Line of Life; by the length,
colour and evenness, or the reverse, of this line the length of life is
indicated, and also the illnesses and accidents by which the life is
menaced in running its course. The line immediately above it, crossing
the palm of the hand, is the Line of Head; by it we are to judge of the
intellectual powers. Above it is the Line of Heart, from which we form
an opinion of the strength of affection, or the want of it, in the
native.

The lines which are not always to be found are the lines going from the
wrist to the finger of Saturn, which is called the Saturnian line, and
which shows the events of the life; the Line of the Sun, which goes
towards the finger of the Sun and which indicates success in art,
literature, or the pursuit of riches; and the Line of Health, which
goes from the wrist to the finger of Mercury: this line is often absent
in a hand.

All these lines will be more fully discussed further on; at present it
is only necessary to name them in order to explain the plate belonging
to this chapter.

At the base of each figure there is a mount, more or less developed, on
every hand. Now, each of these mounts corresponds with one of the
planets from which it has received more or less influence, according to
its development, and the signs or marks to be found upon it.

It will be seen also, from the plate, that the ancients gave to each
finger the name of one of the planets, thus:--

The first finger represented Jupiter, the mount at its base being
called the Mount of Jupiter.

The second, Saturn, the mount at its root being the Mount of Saturn.

The third, the Sun, the mount below being the Mount of the Sun.

The fourth, Mercury, the mount at its base being called the Mount of
Mercury.

The thumb is sacred to Venus, and the root of the thumb is called the
Mount of Venus.

It will also be seen that the planet Mars (although no finger is
dedicated to it) is twice represented in the hand, along the side of
the palm by the Mount of Mars, and in the palm, between the Line of
Life and the Line of the Head, which is called the Plain of Mars.

The Moon is only represented by the Mount of the Moon, at the lower
part of the palm on the opposite side of the hand to the thumb.

When these mounts are well in their places, and clearly but not too
strongly defined, they give the qualities of the planet they represent;
but when any mount is not well marked, or even, as frequently happens,
is quite deficient, there is a want of the qualities shown to exist
where the mount is clearly defined. If the mounts are not only
ill-defined, but represented by a cavity, that cavity would indicate
the existence of qualities which are the reverse of those indicated by
the mount; whereas an exceeding development would denote an excess of
the qualities given by the mount.

Thus the Mount of Jupiter, which is immediately under the index finger,
when fairly developed, indicates noble ambition, will-power, love of
nature, kindliness, generosity, religion and happy marriage. When in
excess--that is, when the mount is so large as to invade that next
it--the Mount of Saturn--it gives superstition, exaggerated pride and
domineering self-assertion. The total absence of this mount (which is
sometimes, but rarely, seen) indicates coldness, selfishness,
irreligion and that want of dignity which is produced by the utter
absence of self-respect.

The Mount of Saturn is found immediately beneath the second finger,
which the ancients assigned to Saturn, the planet of Fatality. Saturn
gives extreme misfortune, or extreme good fortune, according to the
development of the mount and the signs and lines to be seen upon it,
and the course of the Saturnian Line, or Line of Fate (of which we will
speak further on), in the palm of the hand. This mount also denotes a
tendency to occult science. Those born specially under the influence of
Saturn are timid, lovers of solitude, and very seldom marry, but are
very persistent in their affections when they do love.

Saturn, when well developed, gives prudence, wisdom and, to a certain
extent, success; when in excess it gives sadness, taciturnity,
asceticism, dread of the after-life and yet, sometimes, a
predisposition to suicide. The total absence of the mount indicates an
insignificant existence.

The Mount of the Sun is placed at the root of the third finger, which
was sacred to the Sun; when this mount is well developed it indicates
love of art and literature, which shows itself (according to
temperament) in poetry, painting, sculpture, or music; it gives also
religion of the æsthetic, tolerant sort, grace, riches and celebrity;
in excess it gives love of show, frivolity and vaingloriousness. The
total absence of the mount means a thoroughly material existence;
absence of all taste for art--a life without colour, a day without
sunlight.

The Mount of Mercury is found at the base of the fourth finger, and,
when well defined, indicates intelligence, success in science and in
occult studies, the love of work and activity, both of mind and body
and eloquence; in excess it gives impudence, theft and falsehood:
absence of the mount indicates no aptitude for science, no
intellectuality--a negative existence. Of course, should the Mount of
the Sun be well defined, the last quality would be overridden by the
success which that indicates.

The Mount of Mars is at the side of the hand opposite the thumb, just
below the Mount of Mercury, and, when well developed, indicates
courage, ardour and resolution; in excess it gives cruelty, anger,
revenge and tyranny: the absence of the mount gives cowardice and want
of self-command.

The Mount of the Moon is found immediately below that of Mars, and,
when well developed, gives imagination of the dreamy, sentimental
order, gentle melancholy and love of solitude; in excess it gives
morbid melancholy, caprice and fantastic imagination: the absence of
the mount indicates want of poetry in the nature, positivism.

The Mount of Venus, which is formed by the root of the thumb,
indicates, when fairly developed, love of the beautiful, melody in
music, the desire of pleasing and sensuous tenderness; in excess it
gives love of material pleasures, coquetry, inconstancy and (when other
signs, afterwards to be explained, are also seen in the hand) extreme
sensuality.

Each planet has a special influence over certain parts of the body.
Jupiter governs the head and lungs; Saturn, the spleen and ears; the
Sun, heart, eyes and arms; Mercury, the liver and legs; Mars, the head
and throat; the Moon and Venus, the lower parts of the body. Any excess
in the length or size of the fingers or mounts argues a tendency to
disease in the organs represented by that finger or mount. When a
mount is--instead of being high--broad and full, it gives the same
indications as if it were high; if much covered with lines it shows an
overabundance of the quality of the mount, and is equal to an excess of
height. _One_ deep perpendicular line upon a mount is a fortunate sign;
_two_ show danger of too great force of the quality; and _three_ give
misfortune arising from excess of the qualities of the mount. Crossway
lines on the mount always denote obstacles. Some old Italian writers
affirm that fine cross lines on a mount signify wounds to that part of
the body over which the mount on which they are seen has influence.

The mounts are often irregularly placed. If one should lean towards the
other, it absorbs some of the qualities of the mount which it invades.

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter XVII._]




CHAPTER XVII.

THE LINE OF LIFE


The ancient Chiromancists divided the Line of Life into ten
compartments (see plate), each representing ten years of life, and thus
they were enabled to prognosticate at what date in the life the
illnesses or dangers indicated by the form or colour of the line would
be likely to happen. This plate is copied from one in the Sieur de
Peruchio's interesting work, _La Chiromance_, published in Paris in
1657.

It will be noticed that the mounts are here indicated by the
astrological symbols of the various planets they represent, Mars being
placed on the Plain of Mars, and again on the Mount of Mars, which, as
we have already seen, lies immediately below the Mount of Mercury, It
will also be seen that the signs of the zodiac are also represented on
the hand: Aries (March), which begins the astrological year, is placed
at the base of the hand, close to the Mount of Venus; Taurus (April) is
on the Mount of Venus; Gemini (May) is at the base of the Mount of
Jupiter. These represent the spring-tide of the year, and also of life:
therefore they are placed on and near Venus, which planet represents
happiness and enjoyment. The signs Cancer (June), Leo (July) and Virgo
(August) represent the second age, which is given to the accumulation
of riches and honours: so these signs appear on the finger of Jupiter.
In the third age a person is supposed to enter upon the enjoyment of
dignities, therefore Libra (September), Scorpio (October) and
Sagittarius (November) are on the third finger, that of the Sun, which
is supposed to accord position and reputation. The last months of the
astrological year are thus placed: Capricornus (December) is beneath
the Mount of the Sun; Aquarius (January) is on the upper part of the
Mount of the Moon; and Pisces (February) will be seen at the base of
the Mount.

When the Line of Life is long, well-formed, slightly coloured and goes
all round the thumb, it indicates a long life and free from serious
illness; but when the line is wide and pale in colour, it indicates bad
health; when it is short, it means early death.

If the Line of Life is broken on one hand, but is marked in a
continuous line on the other, these signs indicate an illness of a very
serious nature; but if the broken line should appear in _both_ hands,
it means death at the epoch corresponding with the place on the line
where the break occurs. When the Line of Life is not clearly defined,
but is formed by a sort of chain of small lines, it indicates
continuous small illnesses.

When the Line of Life, instead of starting from the side of the hand,
takes its rise in the Mount of Jupiter, which is sometimes, but rarely,
the case, it indicates a life of successful ambition, honours and
celebrity--qualities given by the influence of Jupiter.

If the Line of Life joins the Line of the Heart and the Line of the
Head, it indicates grave misfortune or violent death, by which the
ancients probably meant to infer that when the heart and the head are
dominated by merely vital instincts, the life is menaced by misfortune,
but, when the Line of Life is _very far_ from the Line of Head, it
indicates a life that accomplishes its course without much
intelligence; so also if the Line of Life is very far from the Line of
Heart, it indicates a life without love.

When the Line of Life is bi-forked at its termination, near the wrist,
it means a total change in the way of life towards its close and,
should one of the branches tend towards the Mount of the Moon, it
indicates madness towards the end of existence. A double Line of Life
is sometimes, but rarely, seen: this indicates excess of health and
long life and also success in a military career. This line is sometimes
called the Line of Mars. To a woman it indicates success in love. Three
stars inside the line, but so close to it as to be almost on it, show
that the subject will be much loved of men or women as the sex will
determine, but that these signs will bring distress.

A circle on the Line of Life shows loss of an eye or disease of the eye
at the period at which it appears on the line. If two circles appear
the person will become blind. If the Line of Life terminates with many
small lines it means slight illnesses towards the close of life.

A woman having two crosses on the upper part of the Line of Life is
sensuous and immodest. A line going from the Line of Life and
terminating with an island on the Mount of Jupiter shows lung disease
or pleurisy at the time where such line starts. If at the end of the
Line of Life, towards the wrist, there is a small triangle, it denotes
loquacity and falsehood; but with a good Line of Head and Heart, tact
and eloquence.

When the Line of Life throws branches upwards towards the Plain of Mars
it means that, after long struggles, riches and honours will be
acquired in old age. A line upwards from the Line of Life to the Mount
of Jupiter shows success by the subject's own merits. This often makes
its appearance quite suddenly.

A black spot on the Line of Life indicates an illness or some
misfortune which affects the health. Lines going from the base of the
thumb across the Mount of Venus and cutting the Line of Life denote
illness from money worries if they stop at the Line of Head; and from
heart troubles if they go direct to the Line of Heart. A line going
from the Line of Life straight to the Mount of Saturn indicates
accident from a four-footed beast. A line going from the Mount of Venus
to the Line of Heart and terminating with a fork shows separation after
marriage.[17] When this is seen, in conjunction with an island on the
line of Fate, it has a worse indication--that of adultery and divorce.
_One_ deep line going from the joint of the thumb across the Mount
of Venus and just cutting the Line of Life indicates a deep heart
sorrow from the death or faithlessness of someone much loved.

          [17] The date of this event would be determined by the place
          where the separation line crosses the Line of Fate.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE LINE OF HEART AND LINE OF HEAD


The Line of Heart is placed immediately beneath the mounts at the root
of each finger. This line, when clear, straight and well coloured,
rising in the Mount of Jupiter and extending to the outer edge of the
hand, signifies that its possessor has a good heart capable of strong
affection. If, instead of commencing on the Mount of Jupiter, it does
not take its rise till the Mount of Saturn, then the love will, in that
nature, be rather of a sensual character. The Line of Heart sometimes
stretches across the whole of the hand; such a line announces a too
great amount of tenderness--a passionate and blind devotion in
affection.

When the Line of Heart is broken in several places, it means
inconstancy, both in love and friendship. Should the breaks be seen
immediately beneath the Mount of Saturn, it indicates a tragic end to
the love; if beneath the Mount of the Sun, by pride;[18] but if between
the Mount of Saturn and the Mount of the Sun, the heart-break will be
occasioned by folly; if between the Mounts of Apollo and Mercury, by
cupidity--the desire to make a better marriage in a worldly point of
view; if the break occurs immediately beneath the Mount of Mercury, the
evil issue of the love will be from caprice.

          [18] If the Sun is one of the dominant planets, the Line of
          Heart broken under the Mount of the Sun shows serious
          physical affection of the heart; if this sign is on both
          hands it is fatal.

When the Line of the Heart appears in the form of the links of a chain
instead of in one clear line, it indicates inconstancy and
indecision--a tendency towards a series of _amourettes_ rather
than to a high and serious affection. If it goes round to the
percussion of the hand it indicates jealousy.

The Line of Heart of a deep red colour indicates a power of love ardent
even to violence; but when, on the contrary, the Line of Heart is pale
and wide, it is an indication of coldness of temperament.

When, at its starting-point, the Line of Heart is seen to turn round
the base of the Mount of Jupiter somewhat in the form of a circle, it
is what the ancient Chiromancists called "Solomon's Ring," and
indicates an aptitude for the occult sciences. If the Line of Heart
joins the Line of Life between the thumb and forefinger, it is a sign
(if the mark is in _both_ hands) of a violent death; if only in one, of
a serious, but not fatal, illness connected with the heart.

Should the Line of Heart droop towards the Line of Head and touch it,
it is a sign of coldness in the affections: the instincts of the heart
are swayed by worldly considerations. Red punctures on the Line of
Heart mean as many wounds in the affections as there are spots. White
spots, on the contrary, show the persons of the opposite sex who, at
some time of the subject's life, have given him, or her, a strong love.
Should the spot be at the beginning of the line, above the Mount of
Venus, the person will have the appearance and qualities given by that
planet; if under the Mount of Jupiter he would be a Jupiterian; if
under Saturn he would have the appearance and character of a Saturnian;
under the Sun of a Sun person; if under Mercury the appearance and
character would be those of a Mercurian; if near the side of the hand,
of Mars; and if quite at the percussion of the hand, the qualities and
physical appearance given by the Moon would describe the person.

If, on starting, the Line of Heart is bi-forked and one branch of the
fork rises towards the Mount of Jupiter, it indicates great happiness
of a glorious nature; but if the other branch stops between the finger
of Jupiter and that of Saturn, it is merely negative happiness--a life
passed without great misfortunes. When a hand (but this is rare) is
entirely without the Line of Heart it indicates an iron will,
wickedness and cruelty, unless the Ring of Venus is deep and goes
towards the Mount of Mercury, in which case it would supply the place
of the Line of Heart.

The Line of the Head rises between the Line of Life and the Mount of
Jupiter and, when it is long and clear, it denotes a sound judgment,
good memory and masterly intellect; but it must not extend across the
hand in a _straight line_, as that signifies a disposition to avarice,
or at any rate of extreme economy, because unless corrected by a rich
Line of Heart, it would indicate an excess of calculation in the
character.

If the Line of Head is long, but droops towards the Mountain of the
Moon, it signifies ideality in excess. Life and its numerous duties and
cares will be considered from an artistic and unreal point of view, for
the Mount of the Moon, it will be remembered, represents imagination in
excess, romanticism and superstition; and if the Line of the Head
droops very low to the Mount of the Moon, it indicates more than
superstition--it is then mysticism.

If, instead of drooping towards the Mount of the Moon, the Line of Head
rises towards the mounts at its close, the intellect will partake of
the qualities of that mount towards which it rises: thus, if it rises
beneath the Mount of Mercury, the intellect will be employed
successfully in affairs or on the stage; if towards the Sun, in art and
literature.

The Line of the Head pale-coloured and wide indicates a want of
intelligence; so also does a very short line, only extending half-way
across the hand. This is often seen in persons of medium intellect.

The Line of the Head broken in two immediately under the Mount of
Saturn means, where the sign is on both hands, death on the scaffold,
or at least, a fatal wound on the head. When this sign appears in only
one hand (no matter which), it indicates a probability of madness from
an unfortunate passion, or a broken limb, or a blow, but not fatal, on
the head. When it is broken under the Mount of the Sun it shows injury
to the right arm or, in a very artistic hand, illness from over-strain
of the mental powers.

If the Line of the Head is long, thin and not deeply marked, it shows
infidelity and treachery. If, towards its close, it mounts suddenly to
the Line of the Heart, it signifies early death.

When the Line of Head is cut by a number of small hair lines, it
indicates continuous nervous headaches; a cross in the middle of the
line is a sign of approaching death, or of a mortal wound.

When the Line of the Head is not joined to the Line of Life at its
starting-point, it indicates self-confidence and impulsiveness,
jealousy and that sort of untruth which springs from exaggeration of
facts, from over-impressionability. With the planets of Mars and
Jupiter in excess, the Line of Head separate from the Line of Life
gives audacity and enthusiasm and, therefore, success.

If large, round, red spots are seen on the Line of Head, they indicate
so many wounds on the head; whilst white spots on the Line of the Head
indicate as many successes in literature as there are spots to be seen.

A star on the Line of Head means a wound on the head, or madness if the
line droops much to the Mount of the Moon, and the star appears at its
termination.

A sister (or double line) of Head is rarely seen; but if it appears it
is a sure sign of fortune by inheritance.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE SATURNIAN LINE


When the Saturnian Line starts from the wrist, exactly below the finger
of Saturn, and goes in a direct line to it, cutting through the mount,
but stopping at the root of the finger, it is a sign of a life of
extreme happiness. If the line goes toward the mount of Jupiter, this
happiness is the result of a marriage bringing both riches and love. If
the Saturnian Line stops short at the Line of Head, it is misfortune in
affairs through a false calculation; or, taken in conjunction with a
troubled Line of Life, it would mean a physical brain affection.

If the Saturnian Line is straight and well-coloured at its
termination--that is, as it nears the finger of Saturn--it indicates
happiness and success in old age, however troubled the life may have
been before. If this line only starts from the Line of Head, it denotes
poverty and stupidity.

The age, on the Saturnian Line, is counted from the wrist upwards; from
the wrist to the Line of Head chiromancists count thirty-five years,[19]
from the Line of Head to the Line of Heart fifteen years; and from the
Line of Heart to the root of the finger are the remaining years of
Life.

          [19] If the Head Line it placed very low, then the date where
          it crosses the Saturnian Line would be 30, and if the Heart
          Line is proportionately low the date where it crosses the
          Saturnian would be 45 years.

If the Saturnian Line is broken and irregular, it means trouble and
worry in life; and according to whether these breaks occur on the Line
of Head or on the Line of Heart, so will the troubles be of the head or
heart--troubles arising from affairs or from the affections. If the
Line of Life be irregular, denoting uncertain health, these troubles
may be physical evils to the heart or head.

Short Lines crossing the Saturnian show vexations in either the affairs
or in love-matters. A downward branch from the Saturnian going towards
the Moon shows sorrow from the death or treachery of a woman. This is
the same whether it be on a man's or a woman's hand.

If the Saturnian Line is twisted in a sort of spiral at the
starting-point, but yet the upper part of it goes in a clear, direct
line to the Mount of Saturn, and cuts through it to the root of the
finger without penetrating beyond, it indicates a troubled and anxious
youth, followed by riches and good fortune in middle age. If the
twisted line continues and crosses the Line of the Head and the Line of
the Heart, the troubles will continue until old age, and the good
fortune be only quite at the close of life. A triangle, or small
island, at the commencement of the line, shows death of the father or
mother in early childhood.

If the Mount of Saturn is much wrinkled, and the Saturnian Line cuts
through it, and is of a deep-red colour, and mounts as high as the
third joint of the finger of Saturn, it indicates a violent and
disgraceful end--death on the gallows. Upward lines from the Saturnian
Line mean events of happy omen either in the affections or affairs at
the age shown on the line; downward lines have the reverse
signification.

There are some hands in which the Saturnian Line is very faintly
indicated and, when this is the case, it signifies an uneventful,
insignificant existence. The Esquimaux, for example, who live in a
wretched climate, and live hard, unlovely lives, have absolutely, some
of them, _no_ Saturnian Line in their hands; and M. Serres, a
famous French anthropologist, asserts that this line (which he calls
the Caucasian Line) is only to be found in the hands of the white
races; whilst M. Desbarrolles, another French writer on this subject,
goes farther, and affirms that, among persons condemned to a dry,
unintellectual vegetative life, even among the white races, the
Saturnian Line is often found entirely wanting.

The Saturnian Line is one of great importance, for it corrects and
modifies the significations both of the lines and of the mounts.

A double Saturnian Line, which is sometimes, but very rarely, seen,
indicates great moral corruption and physical infirmities, brought
about by abuse of material pleasures. A cross upon the line shows a
change of position or a crisis in the affections at the age indicated
by its position on the line. A star on the line shows disaster at the
date at which it appears.

Downward lines from the Line of Heart towards the Fate Line show heart
sorrows at the period when they cross the line. Widowhood is indicated
in this way if the Line of Fate breaks and shows a total change in the
way of life immediately afterwards. It sometimes only means a death at
the period when it crosses the Fate Line.




CHAPTER XX.

THE LINE OF THE SUN AND LINE OF HEALTH


The Line of the Sun takes its rise either in the Line of Life or from
the Mount of the Moon, and, ascending, it traces a furrow in the Mount
of the Sun, but stops at the root of the finger; it signifies, when
straight and well defined, and taking the course we have described,
celebrity in literature or art, whether in poetry, painting, sculpture,
or music. The mounts decide in some measure which branch of art is
preferred. With Venus large it would probably be music or painting;
with the Moon much developed, poetry--or at any rate literature of an
elevated kind. Those having the Line of Sun thus traced, even who are
not artists by profession and whom destiny has placed in quite
inartistic careers, will always have artistic tastes, eye for colour,
ear for music, or a perception of beauty in form or in language. Where
the line only begins in the Line of Heart the artistic feeling is only
appreciative, not productive, but when it rises as low as the Mount of
the Moon, it signifies _creative_ power.

If the Line of the Sun subdivides, in traversing the Mount of the Sun,
into several lines, it indicates a tendency to cultivate several
branches of art, which prevents the success which generally crowns
excess of artistic feeling when confined in its expression to one
especial art; it also indicates too great a struggle after effect in
art; it is more significative of the dilettante, or patron of art
generally, than the artist _pur et simple_. When the Line of the Sun,
in its upward course, is barred by several transverse lines, there are
obstacles in the career of art; but if the line continues and marks a
single deep furrow in the mount till it reaches the root of the finger,
these obstacles will, in the end, be conquered and success, riches,
honours and celebrity will be attained. In a hand where the Sun Line
begins above the Head Line, the deep line at its close only means
riches after fifty, and has nothing to do with art.

The Line of Health, or, as it is sometimes called, the Line of the
Liver, takes its rise at the wrist, near the Line of Life, and mounts
in the direction of the Mount of Mercury. If it is well coloured and
the line is not broken, it denotes good health, great power of memory
and success in business pursuits; if the line becomes broken, or is
forked at its close, before it reaches the mount, it indicates severe
illness in old age. If this line starts from the Line of Life it is a
sure sign of weakness of the heart's action. If the line is unequally
coloured and gets redder as it crosses the Line of Head, it indicates a
predisposition to apoplexy; if it stops suddenly on the Line of the
Heart, a serious physical heart affection is likely.

The Line of Health sometimes takes a curved form on _one_ hand, forming
a sort of half-circle, from the Mount of the Moon to the Mount of
Mercury. In this case it is called the Line of Presentiment and
indicates vivid intuition, especially if Mercury is strong in his
influence. When the Line of Health on _both_ hands takes this form, it
indicates mediumistic powers and powerful second sight. Should there be
a long island at the starting-point, that is, near the Mount of the
Moon in the Line of Presentiment, it indicates somnambulism.

When the Line of Health forms a large and distinct cross with the Line
of Head, it shows a disposition for the study of occult science, but
this is not the mystical cross which will be described farther on. An
island on this line shows some internal illness at the date on which it
appears on the line--that is, if before it reaches the Head Line, it
would be _before_ thirty-five; if after and between the Lines of
Head and Heart, it would be between thirty-five and fifty; if later,
during the remainder years of life. A twisted Liver Line is a sign of
biliousness and indigestion; if it is of a red colour (as it frequently
is where Mars is one of the ruling planets) it shows a tendency to
feverish complaints.

The Line of Health is sometimes, but rarely, accompanied by another
line called the Milky Way; when this line commences side by side with
the Line of Health and mounts with it in an unbroken line, towards the
finger of Mercury, it signifies a long life of uninterrupted happiness.
This line, which is sometimes called the Via Lasciva, gives ardour in
love, because a super-abundance of health gives force to passion.




CHAPTER XXI.

ON THE RING OF VENUS, THE WRIST LINES AND THE LETTER M TO BE SEEN IN
MOST HANDS


The Ring of Venus seems to enclose, as in an island, the Mounts of
Saturn and the Sun; this line is not seen in many hands and, when fully
developed, signifies unbridled passion and debauchery of all kinds
when, in conjunction with it, the Mount of Venus is strongly developed
and marked with crossway lines.

If, with the signs mentioned above, the Ring of Venus is strongly
marked, yet _broken_ at its centre in _both_ hands, it is a sign of
eccentric and depraved passion; still, there are always modifications
of these bad signs, and a very good Line of Head would, by bringing
reason to bear upon passion, considerably mitigate the evil indications
of the broken ring.

When the Ring of Venus is seen on a hand where both the planets Venus
and the Moon are strongly indicated and where it is traversed by
innumerable fine lines, it is a true sign of an hysterical temperament.

Sometimes the Ring of Venus will be seen to ascend and lose itself on
the Mount of Mercury, leaving one end of the semicircle open, which
mitigates, in some sort, the terribly strong instincts of
voluptuousness indicated by this mark; but if, on the contrary, the
semicircle, after extending itself to the Mount of Mercury, closes
itself at the root of the finger, such a mark in the hand would
indicate a terrible and absorbing power of passion, which would not
hesitate at any means to secure its end.

A line traced on the wrist is a sign of long life and, if there are
three of these lines, as is sometimes seen, it forms the triple
bracelet. These lines indicate, in Chiromancy, thirty years of life
each and the three lines form what is called the magic bracelet,
indicating long life, health and riches. If these lines are formed
irregularly, like the links of a chain, and more especially if the
first one--that next the hand--is so formed, it indicates a long life
of labour, but acquiring ease and competency at its close. If a cross
appears in the centre of the wrist, it indicates a rich heritage at the
close of life.

When lines start upwards from the bracelet, and ascend towards the
Mount of the Moon, they denote as many travels by land as there are
lines. If a line starts from the wrist and, after traversing the Plain
of Mars, goes to the Mount of the Sun, such a line presages riches and
honours coming from royalty.

When these travel lines go as high as the Line of Head and Heart, they
denote journeys during which some person is met who influences either
the fortunes or the affections, according to whether the line stops at
the Line of Head or Heart.

Lines lengthways on the Mount of the Moon mean sea-voyages; if these
lines terminate with a star, it denotes shipwreck; if on both hands,
death by drowning.

The letter M, formed more or less regularly in every hand by the Line
of Life, the Line of Head and the Line of Heart, represents the three
worlds--the material, the natural and the divine.

The first, the Line of Life, surrounds Love and Generation, as
represented by the thumb, which is, as we have seen, sacred to
Venus--the material world, or world of sense--but the Mount of Venus
may either degenerate love to vice, or perfectionate it to tenderness.
With high instincts the Mount of Venus is a good quality, since,
_without it_, all the other passions are hard and selfish.

The second line--the Line of the Head--stretches across the natural
world; it traverses the Plain and the Mount of Mars, which represent
the struggle of Love and Reason in existence--the natural world, life
as it presents itself to most persons. There is in the hand the Plain
of Mars and the Mount of Mars; both mean a struggle: the Mount is the
struggle of resistance; the Plain of Mars (which is between the Lines
of Head and Heart) is the struggle of aggression.

The third line, that of the Heart, encloses the divine world, for it
surrounds the mounts which represent Religion, Jupiter; Fate, Saturn;
Art, the Sun; Science, Mercury; all of which are especially influenced
by the astral light, or fluid, emanating from the planets.

According to the proportions--the relative proportions--which these
three lines bear to one another, so the life is influenced by the three
different worlds represented. Thus we have a hand in which material
(sensual) pleasure dominates: the line of the material world enclosing
a space greatly superior to that of the two others. It is needless to
give further examples of these differences, for, after all, this matter
is but a _résumé_ of what has been said before about the power of
correction which one line has over the others. Given a wide range to
sensual pleasure in the hand, but a good and extensive Line of the
Head, the former will be corrected by it, as reason dominates passion;
or given the strong powers of sensuality, with a wide range to the
divine world by the space occupied between the Line of Heart and the
mounts, and again, religion, love of art and science, will correct and
keep under extreme sensuality. In reading the hand, each line must be
judged with reference to the others, and the hand must be considered in
all its bearings, before an opinion on the tendencies it indicates can
be arrived at with any degree of correctness.

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter XXII._]




CHAPTER XXII.

CONCERNING CHANCE LINES; THAT IS, LINES WHICH ARE SOMETIMES--BUT ONLY
RARELY--SEEN ON ANY HAND


When two lines, starting from the Mount of Venus, join with a star on
the Plain of Mars (see Plate 3, Fig. 1) it indicates two loves carried
on at once and both having a disastrous issue.

A square with spots at all four corners placed on the Mount of the Sun
(see Fig. 2) shows danger by fire with preservation.

A line from the Mount of Mars going to the Mount of the Sun (see Fig.
3) indicates love of glory, desire to attain distinction in life. A
person with this mark in his hand would be stimulated rather than
intimidated by a large audience, and would have great success in
addressing multitudes. This line is good for soldiers, orators and
actors, as it shows force, energy and moral as well as physical
courage.

The figure of the sign Aquarius when seen on the Mount of the Moon (see
Fig. 4) is a certain sign of death by drowning, _even when marked on
one hand only_.

A circle on the Heart Line beneath the finger of Mercury (see Fig. 5)
denotes the person as likely to cause--though unwittingly--the death of
someone much loved.

A star on the Mount of Venus, low down on the Mount (see Fig. 6),
indicates a man or woman who shall fall into dishonour by reason of
sensual indulgence or unnatural vice.

A line starting from the Wrist Line, crossing the Mount of Venus and
ending in a star on the palm of the hand (see Fig. 7), indicates that
the person will lose some dearly-loved friend in a tragic manner.

The symbol of the planet Saturn, when seen in the palm of the hand (see
Fig. 8), denotes the person to be malicious beyond expression, and
likely to cause the death of someone by poison.

A line starting from the Head Line going through the Mount of Jupiter
with a star (see Fig. 9), is an indication of a violent death before
the age of thirty. Should the person be ruled by Venus, by poison; if
under the Moon, by drowning; if under the Sun, by fire; if under Mars,
by firearms; if under Jupiter, by horse accident; if under Mercury, by
fits consequent on loss of money.

The Saturnian Line, crossed by transverse lines on the Mount of Saturn
(see Fig. 10), indicates dangerous, but not fatal, wounds on the head.

Many rings encircling the thumb (see Fig. 11) indicate an amorous and
very inconstant disposition in either man or woman.

Two lines starting from the middle of the Mount of Venus and
terminating in the form of an apex on the Mount of the Moon (see Fig.
12) indicate a great tendency to hysteria and to abnormal attachments;
the latter is more especially indicated if Saturn and the Moon should
be the ruling planets.




CHAPTER XXIII.

CONCERNING THE FINGERS AND THUMB AND NAILS


As the shapes and relative proportions of the fingers to the palm
modify the indications given by the lines and mounts, it is necessary
to consider them very attentively before giving a judgment in
Chiromancy.

Fingers longer than the palm and with pointed tips show idealism; they
are the expression of the Moon's influence when she is well-dignified
at a birth. The Mount of the Moon in these hands would always be large.
People with these fingers see everything in the golden light of
imagination and find happiness in dreams of intangible beauty; poetical
expression (ethereal, not passionate) is their natural language. They
always incline to the marvellous--the sublime, the spiritualistic side
of all things. Theirs the belief in omens, in occult literature, in the
supernatural. Without, perhaps attaching themselves to any fixed creed,
they are, by nature, worshippers; and the mysterious moan of the sea,
the song of the brook, the roar of the torrent, and the sighing of the
wind, are to them but so many revelations of the Deity. They are loyal
to old associations and are never in advance of their age. They are
easily moved to tears and are graceful in all their gestures. They can,
in exalted moments, do without the necessaries of life and yet, from
their intuitive worship of the beautiful, they are lovers of the
luxurious superfluities which make up an elegant and refined existence.
People with these fingers do not age much; their hearts are eternally
young, for they live a life of perpetual illusion and though often,
alas! necessarily disappointed in both men and things, they never
entirely lose faith in the poetry of existence.

Fingers the same length as the palm, and with slightly pointed tips,
show refinement, correct taste and love of art--these are the fingers
of those born under the dominant influence of the Sun.

Fingers the same length as the palm, but fleshy at their base and
square at the tips, show practicality, family affection, love of
animals, good judgment, respect for the world's opinion and much
appreciation of material comfort. These fingers show the strong
influence of Jupiter.

Long fingers, knotty at the joints and with square tips, show reasoning
power and taste for science. Persons with these fingers are always in
harmony with progress and have little or no veneration and are,
therefore, never stirred by associations; with the antiquity of
Catholicism, its mystical and somewhat sensuous worship, its celibate
priesthood and golden aureole of saints and martyrs, persons having
these fingers have no sympathy. If they belong to any fixed creed (and
their logical powers are rather against this) they prefer
Protestantism--or its offshoot, Dissent--where their real deity,
Reason, is permitted full sway. These people love--with all the force
of their nature--the study of history, jurisprudence, mathematics and
the exact sciences. They are naturally clever at calculation and have
much sense of order. Such fingers show the influence of Saturn, but not
when most dignified; Saturn when most exalted gives mysticism, but then
the fingers are not knotted at the joints and the tips are always
spatulated.

Fingers that are shorter than the palm and with spatulated tips, show
sensuality in love and materialism in all things, energy, love of field
sports and indomitable courage. Such fingers indicate the influence of
Mars at birth.

Fingers shorter than the palm, but with very pointed tips and thick at
the base, show self-indulgence and love of luxury. Persons with such
fingers are very sensuous and are, therefore, ardent pursuers of
material pleasures, but yet with a certain refinement of taste which
prevents their becoming grossly sensual. Such fingers are often seen in
the hands of singers of both sexes; they indicate the strong influence
of Venus in the nativity.

Fingers that are slender and longer than the palm, but with spatulate
tips, indicate versatility, wit and intuitive perception. Such fingers
show the dominant influence of Mercury.

In the relative lengths of the three divisions of the fingers
Chiromancy also recognises the indications of three separate
influences--that of the soul, that of the mind, and that of the body.
Fingers that have the first division (that containing the nail) long,
show high aspirations and power of veneration--soul; fingers with the
second division longer than the other two indicate intellectual
force--mind; whilst fingers having the lowest division longest show a
love of material pleasure: people having such fingers, unless there are
other modifying indications in the hand, are slaves to the body.

The first joint of the thumb (that which is nearest the nail)
represents _Will_; therefore, when this is short, such a form indicates
want of will--a character very impressionable and therefore easily led;
when this joint is long, it indicates great power of will and therefore
force of character. The second joint represents logic, judgment and
reason; therefore, where this joint is long these qualities exist in
excess and, where it is short, they are wanting in both.

The third joint (that which is outside the Mount of Venus) represents
the power which love--more especially the love between the sexes--will
have on the character. If long and thick it implies the existence of
strong passion; if short and flat a cold disposition--no attraction
towards the opposite sex.

Poets have frequently the first joint of the thumb short (because want
of will gives the rein to impulse and impressionability), and whilst
the second--the intellectual one--is fairly long, the third is almost
always large, full and long. This combination of impressionability,
intellectuality and warmth of passion gives us the poets full of "the
sweet, sad music of humanity."

These various types of finger-tips are often seen in the same hand,
which shows that several planets have much the same amount of
influence, in which case the following indications should be
considered: The finger of Jupiter pointed gives idealistic religion and
sense of honour; square, it would show reasoning power; spatulate,
energy and impulse.

The finger of Saturn is rarely pointed, but when it is so, it rather
mitigates the melancholy given by the planet and shows callousness and
(if Mercury is strong in the hand) frivolity. Square tipped, it
indicates prudence, love of agriculture and mechanical genius;
spatulate, which is the ordinary termination of this finger, it
betokens sadness and superstition, and, when the finger is abnormally
long, a tendency to suicide; especially where, with it, there is a
small weak thumb.

The third finger--that of the Sun--pointed shows idealism and artistic
tastes; when square-tipped, realism in art and a love of wealth;
spatulate, it gives spirit of adventure, especially when it is as long
as the first finger; when the third finger is _longer_ than the first
and spatulate it indicates love of gambling and of speculation.

The fourth finger--that of Mercury--pointed shows occultism, intuitive
perception, eloquence and talent for languages; square at the tip it
denotes logic, facility of expression, science and love of research;
spatulate, it gives movement, vivacity and, where the rest of the hand
is bad, knavery in business and theft; a very short little finger shows
unselfishness and, some old writers say, happiness in marriage.

A pointed thumb gives impressionability; square at its tip, decided but
not obstinate will; the thumb bending outward shows generosity and
impulse and, when much bent inwards towards the palm of the hand,
avarice and reticence. People with short fingers are quicker, more
impulsive and have more intuition than those who possess long fingers.
Those with long fingers have much love of detail--often to a worrying
extent; they are inquisitive and somewhat distrustful.

As regards the nails, short strong nails show courage, combativeness
and critical faculties. White polished and filbert-shaped nails
indicate sensitiveness and refinement, but no force of character.
Short, weak, crooked and black-coloured nails show deceit and
slothfulness. Round nails indicate a luxurious, pleasure-loving nature.
Very thin nails--especially when the tips are bent inwardly--show
delicacy of constitution. Red nails with little white marks on them
indicate a choleric and cruel nature.

Those who have on the root of the thumb--that is, on the Mount of
Venus--many crossbar lines are sensual and prone to gross indulgence in
licentiousness. They who have these marks on their hands will have in
their nativity--Venus in the 6th or 8th house (which houses rule the
lower parts of the body), thus showing the entire concordance of
Chiromancy with Astrology.

  [Illustration: _To face Chapter XXIV._]




CHAPTER XXIV.

OF THE VARIOUS MARKS TO BE SEEN ON THE HAND


Besides the Lines and Mounts already described there are other signs or
marks which, as they modify the qualities given by the lines and
mounts, should be carefully considered in giving judgment on the hand
as a whole.

A star (Fig. 1) indicates something beyond our own power of action--a
fatality for good or evil over which we have, personally, no power. A
star on the Mount of Jupiter indicates honours and distinction in
marriage and great and unexpected glory, for Jupiter is always a
favourable planet.

A star on the Mount of Saturn means assassination or death on the
scaffold; or, in an otherwise good hand, death by paralysis.

A star on the Mount of the Sun (with no Line of the Sun) indicates
fatal riches, which bring of themselves unhappiness in the affections.
Should the Sun line be strong it would signify success in art, or
military glory in a hand where Mars is strong.

A star on the Mount of Mercury shows theft and dishonour; on the Mount
of Mars, death in battle; but a star on the plain of Mars, military
glory.

A star on the Mount of the Moon, when on a voyage line, means death by
drowning; when not on a voyage line, an illness connected with water,
such as dropsy or diabetes.

A star in the centre of the hand shows that some person of the opposite
sex will influence the life in an unhappy manner.

A star on the Mount of Venus means unhappiness caused by love.

Two stars on the top joint of the middle finger indicate death on the
scaffold.

A square (Fig. 2) shows power and energy of the qualities of the mount
on which it appears, except on the Mount of Venus, when it means
imprisonment. A square announces preservation from accident when seen
near any indication of such accident.

A circle (Fig. 3) on any of the mounts, but above all on the Mount of
the Sun, signifies success in the qualities given by the mount on which
it appears; but a circle on the lines of the hand has always a bad
signification. A circle on the Line of Life means loss of one eye, and
two circles would indicate total blindness.

An island (Fig. 4) is again always a bad sign; on the Line of Heart, it
signifies adultery; on the Line of Life, illness, corresponding in time
to its position on the line; on the Line of Head, it would mean ruin
arising from false speculations, or if illness is shown on the Life
Line, it might indicate brain illness or neuralgia; on the Line of
Health, disorders of the liver and the digestion; on the Saturnian
Line, an island indicates happiness from an adulterous liaison; but if
the island is broken in shape, it indicates poignant grief arising from
an illicit affection. The duration of these affections is shown by the
size of the island. An island at the commencement of the Saturnian Line
indicates an event of an unfortunate nature, probably death of father
or mother, in childhood or very early youth. The lines which go
lengthways round the side of the hand, between the Line of Heart and
the root of the finger of Mercury, show the serious attachments. A
horizontal line barring these, or a black spot, shows widowhood. If the
lines take the form of islands, it shows love for cousins or near
relatives.

A triangle (Fig. 5) announces aptitudes of a favourable signification.
On Jupiter it shows diplomatic distinction; on Saturn, mystical
ability; on the Sun, success in art or literature; on Mars, military
glory; on Venus, happiness in love; on Mercury, distinction in law,
physics, or mathematics; but on the Mount of the Moon it indicates
danger from the water.

A branch (Fig. 6) shows aptitude in the qualities of the mount on which
it appears.

Chains (Fig. 8) always show obstacles and worries in connection with
the qualities of the mount on which they appear.

A spot (Fig. 9) is sometimes favourable and sometimes the reverse. Red
spots on the Line of Heart mean physical suffering from that organ.
White spots show love conquests, and the lover is indicated by the
mount under which these spots appear by the physical description of the
planet to which the mount belongs.

Curved lines (Fig. 10) mean disaster wherever they appear. On the Line
of Head, madness, especially should the line droop to the Mount of the
Moon.

Hair-lines (Fig. 11) show an excess of the quality of the line on which
they appear.

Cross-bars (Fig. 12) are always obstacles, and show excess in the
qualities of the mounts on which they appear; on the Moon, morbid
imagination; on Venus, lasciviousness.

Two lines going from the Mount of Venus to that of Mars denote the
pursuit of two love affairs at the same time, and a star joined to
these lines shows that the matter has ended or will end in disaster.

A long island, extending from the Mount of Venus to that of Saturn,
shows, on a woman's hand, seduction at the age when the sign crosses
the Line of Life. Should a square appear on the line, she escapes the
temptation.

A Line extending from a star on the Mount of Venus, and terminating
with a fork on the Mount of Saturn, shows an unhappy marriage.

A Line going from a star on the Mount of Venus straight to the Mount of
the Sun, foretells a great inheritance from the death of a near
relation.

  [Illustration: THE HAPPY HAND.

  _To face Chapter XXV._]




CHAPTER XXV.

THE TRIANGLE, THE QUADRANGLE, AND THE HAPPY HAND


The Triangle is the name given to the space enclosed between the Line
of Life, the Line of Head and the Line of Health. If the angle is an
equal one and the lines well coloured, it signifies a good disposition
both as regards mind and body and also much health, courage, good
reputation and a long and happy life. When the angles of the Triangle
are not well defined, it signifies a dull and mean person, who will not
rise above mediocrity. When the Triangle is wide as well as clearly
defined, it indicates liberality and nobility of mind. When it is
narrow, it signifies avarice, cowardice and poverty. If the Triangle is
altogether wanting in a hand, it portends much evil, a short life and
much illness. A cross in the Triangle shows a quarrelsome disposition.

The Quadrangle is the square space contained between the Lines of Heart
and Head. When broad it signifies a liberal, courageous person with
much sense of honour, who will attain to the highest dignities in his
profession and position in life.

Those who have the Quadrangle narrow are covetous and deceitful, and
therefore untrustworthy in all business relations. A star in the middle
of the Quadrangle shows honours and dignities, and a line from the
Mount of Mercury running down to the centre of the Quadrangle indicates
the friendship of great men, and much honour and distinction from these
friendships.

In the plate at the beginning of this chapter we have a sketch of what
is called "The Happy Hand," which is given as showing what are the
happiest prognostications to be shown on the hand. An explanation of
the lines and marks of this is given below.


_The explanation of the Happy Hand._

Double Line of Life, which means good health and long life. The
Saturnian Line straight and well-defined till it reaches its
termination on the Mount of Saturn, which shows happiness in domestic
life and good fortune to the end of life. Branches at beginning and end
of the Heart Line, power of passionate tenderness. Cross on Mount of
Jupiter, love and marriage. Ring of Venus, power of passionate
attachment and much force of sympathy. The Line of Head long with
branches to the Mount of the Moon, intellectual gifts and vivid
imagination. Direct Line of the Sun, success in art and celebrity.
Union of Venus with Mercury, love and good fortune in connection with
the affections. Line of Health strong shows a vigorous constitution.
Triple branches on the wrist, superabundance of vitality and long life.

A Cross on the Mount of Venus. This, taken in conjunction with the
cross on the Mount of Jupiter, shows happiness in married life.

Of course it is seldom that such a conjunction of good lines is seen on
the same hand; but still, in those born under a fortunate conjunction
of the stars, many of these lines are seen together; but such hands are
rare, for anxiety, grief and disappointment are the general rule and
happiness the exception in this world.




Part III.

PHYSIOGNOMY

    "La fisonomia è lo specchio dell' anima."--FINETTA.




CHAPTER XXVI.

PHYSIOGNOMY


"The face is the mirror of the soul," says Finetta, a mediæval Italian
writer on the subject of physiognomy; and, to those who take the
trouble to study the matter, the intelligence, the sentiments and the
instincts of a person are all clearly manifested by the form of the
head and features and their relative proportions, by the colouring of
the skin, eyes and hair, by the fugitive expressions which, to an
attentive observer, are seen to pass over even the most impassable
faces, and "last, but certainly not least," by the lines left by the
habitual passage of the expression of strong feeling, which, to the
physiognomist, are visible even when the face is in repose.

We are in the habit of applying the term physiognomy to the _face_
only, but the word has really a much wider signification. All things
animate and inanimate have their physiognomy and, when judging of the
character by the form of the features of the face, it would be
impossible to ignore that given by the shape of the head, for, without
altogether believing that the brain is mapped out in the manner
described by phrenologists, there is no doubt that a good development
of the front of the head shows intelligence, whilst a head which is
inordinately protuberant at the back indicates the dominance of animal
instincts in the organisation. If the back of the head is quite flat,
it indicates coldness--want of passion in the nature. A head which is
large just above the ears shows a tendency to anger and if the signs of
benevolence on the brow and lips are entirely wanting it would mean
cruelty; but in physiognomy the signs on both the head and face must be
considered as a _whole_, and the qualities shown by _both_ must be
weighed one against another, before any right judgment can be arrived
at. In this study, as in that of graphology and chiromancy, a deductive
power of mind is required. Among twenty persons who may be sufficiently
interested in physiognomy to study it, there will be scarcely more than
one who will become a good physiognomist. One among the countless
objections which have been urged against physiognomy is that many
physiognomists make erroneous judgments; but, granted that they do so,
it is their want of discernment, or more probably their want of
deductivity--not the science--which fails.

There is a certain sort of _instinctive_ power of judging character by
the face, possessed by children and animals, which is in harmony with
the theories of those who have thought and written most upon this
interesting subject.

We are all of us--women, perhaps, more than men--daily influenced by
this sort of _instinctive_ physiognomy: for there are few people who do
not, when they first see a stranger, form a judgment of him, in which
they are, of course, only swayed by his outward appearance, although
they may never have even heard the word physiognomy.

The _temperament_ has an immense amount of influence over the character
and this temperament is shown more especially by the colour and texture
of the skin and hair. It is temperament which precipitates, or retards,
the effects of illness and age and temperament is the result of the
astral influence which presided at our birth.

These temperaments have been classified under four heads--viz., the
sanguine or choleric, the lymphatic, the bilious and the melancholic.

The first, the sanguine or choleric, is the result of the astral
influence of Mars and Jupiter; the lymphatic, of the Moon and Venus,
but more especially the Moon; the bilious (which is especially the
intellectual temperament) of the Sun and Mercury and the melancholic
temperament is the result of the dominance of the sad planet, Saturn.
The sanguine temperament is shown by a skin with a good deal of colour
in it, either of a soft pinky white with a rosy peach-like colour on
the cheeks, in which case it is Jupiter which dominates in the
temperament, or of a deep red colour all over the face, when the
sanguine temperament is dominated by Mars, the hair being red or brown,
crispy or curling.

The lymphatic temperament is shown by a soft, pale skin of a thick dead
white, the lips and cheeks being only slightly coloured; the hair is
fine and long, but not thick, and is light, not golden, but rather
colourless, or what the French call "_un blond cendré_"--that is,
of an ash-coloured fairness, sometimes of a soft brown, when Venus is
the dominating planet. The bilious temperament is the result of the
combination of the astral influences of the Sun and Mercury, the
planets which give artistic feeling and intelligence.

Those having this temperament have yellow skins of a soft, fine texture
and when the Sun is the dominant planet they have a vivid colour in the
cheeks; the hair of those of the bilious temperament is golden and is
generally curly or wavy; if the melancholic temperament given by Saturn
is in combination (and it is frequently so in the bilious temperament)
with the yellow-tinted skin of the bilious temperament, we find also
the straight, deep black hair peculiar to the Saturnian.

The melancholic temperament is that of those born under the dominant
influence of Saturn. People of this temperament are of a pale or livid,
and, sometimes, of a greenish-tinted or earth-coloured skin and their
hair is always of a dead black. It must be remembered that though one
planet may dominate at a birth, there are always present others which
have also their influences, though in a secondary degree, so no person
is of _one_ temperament without any admixture of the others, although
one may and often does dominate the others.

Thus no one is _exclusively_ sanguine, bilious, lymphatic, or
melancholic. One person could be at once bilious, melancholic and
lymphatic. We sometimes see the apparently contradictory temperaments
of the melancholic and sanguine in the same person, but, generally
speaking, one temperament dominates, modified by one or more of the
others. This makes one of the sources of the variety of character we
see in those about us, no one person having precisely the same
modification of temperament, to say nothing of the difference of
intellectual gifts. Now, as the temperament produces the character and
the character the passions, it is very necessary, in order to be a good
physiognomist that we should be thoroughly expert in being able to
assign to each person under judgment the exact amount of domination of
each of these four temperaments and this is only to be done by noting
the colour and texture of the skin and hair. Aristotle has said that
though there is a certain physiognomy of the whole person, the
principal signs to guide us in a knowledge of human beings are to be
found on the face; and this is perhaps because the skin of the face is
somewhat differently constituted to that over the other parts of the
body. It is more transparent than that of the other parts of the body,
and thus more readily reflects the different colours--the vivid flush
of joy, the blush of shame, the livid hue of envy, the pallor of fear,
the different passions by which we are agitated. The face also is the
seat of the eyes and the lips, both of which features (being
continually in movement) make the face, as the old Italian writer has
said, "the mirror of the soul."

Even those who habitually deny the power given by a knowledge of the
science of physiognomy admit that _in certain moments_ they have been
able to judge of what they could ask for from the expression they saw
on the face of the person with whom they were dealing. Now, if this
were so at one moment, why should it not be so always? When the soul is
agitated, that agitation shows itself, at once, upon the face by the
variation of its colours and by the contraction of certain muscles
about the features. Both this changing of colour and this movement of
the features vary according to the passions which produce the agitation
and these different expressions most people can read at a glance. No
one confounds the expression of happiness with unhappiness, of love
with hatred, of hope with despair, of jealousy with trustfulness, of
envy with sympathy. Habitual drunkards show their vice on their faces,
even when they are perfectly sober; so also do the other vices show
themselves by the lines left on the face by the constant recurrence of
the contraction of the features when under the immediate and violent
influence of the ruling passion. By dint of continually exercising the
faculty of observation they come to see expressions and lines on the
face which, though perhaps quite lost upon others, give them
indications of character which are sometimes startling revelations.
Here, again, is another objection which is often advanced against the
study of physiognomy. Does it not, by laying bare the vices and
weaknesses of human nature, induce a cynical opinion of human nature?
No; for, whilst it makes us clear-sighted as to the vices, it also
reveals to us many sweet and noble qualities in those by whom we are
surrounded, which, perhaps, were never suspected by us. No one better
understood his fellow-men, no one was ever more alive to "the sweet,
sad music of humanity," than Shakespeare. His large-hearted,
sympathetic nature gave him intuitive perception of character, and
this, aided by his wonderful powers of observation, must have made him
a physiognomist. He "looked quite through the thoughts of men," and
yet, with all this wondrous knowledge of human nature, he says, "What a
piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculties!
In form and moving how express and admirable! In action how like an
angel! In apprehension how like a God!"

  [Illustration: _THE PLANETS' PLACES ON THE FACE FACSIMILE FROM AN
  OLD WOODCUT, DATE 1657_

  _To face Chapter XXVII._]




CHAPTER XXVII.

THE FOREHEAD AND EYEBROWS


"One part of the forehead," says a Chinese proverb, "shows our
faculties, the other part the use we make of them." This is, in a great
measure, true; for the form and height of the brow show the degree of
thought and power of intellect, whilst the skin of the forehead, its
colour, lines and tension, denote the passions and the state of mind.
Though the skin of the forehead may be equally wrinkled in different
faces, the forms which these lines take vary very much. The first line
next the hair, which is rarely seen till past middle age, is referred
to the influence of Saturn; the second to Jupiter; the third to Mars;
the fourth, over the right eyebrow, to the Sun; the fifth, over the
left eyebrow, to the Moon; the sixth, between the eyebrows, to Venus,
whilst Mercury is assigned his place on the bridge of the nose (see
plate).

When the Line of Saturn is long and well-defined, it indicates the
prudence and sagacity which ought to come with age; when it is broken
or curved in an oblique manner it shows peevishness and avarice.

The Line of Jupiter, straight and clearly-defined, shows an honourable
and just person; if broken or taking oblique curves it indicates a very
voluptuous person.

If the Line of Mars should be long and clear, and stretching across the
forehead in one continuous line, it denotes courage and much warlike
ambition; if the line be broken, such a person will be a brawler and
quarrelsome and will experience ill fortune in war.

The Line of the Sun being perfect and reaching nearly to the middle of
the forehead, shows ambition, good judgment and success; being broken
or oblique in its form, it shows egotism and love of money.

The Line of the Moon, clear and perfect above the left eyebrow, much
imagination and also much travelling into strange places. When this
line is broken or much curved, it indicates caprice and want of truth.

The Line of Venus, delicately marked and straight, shows tenderness and
success in love matters; if broken and curved, the reverse.

If three lines appear in the place of Mercury across the bridge of the
nose, they denote eloquence and wit; if more than three, loquacity and
deceit.

So much for the _lines_ on the forehead. As to the _form_, Aristotle
tells us that "a very large and prominent forehead shows stupidity"; it
is quite true that men of the highest intelligence have foreheads of
medium height, but exceptionally broad and full over the eyebrow.

A forehead which is very full over the eyebrows and rather low than
high, shows intuitive faculty, artistic perception and idealism; we see
this form of brow in all the antique statues of Apollo. A very
projecting forehead, fuller above than below, and so large as to appear
to dominate the whole face, is generally the forehead of a slow if not
a dull intellect. A perpendicular forehead, well rounded at the
temples, rather high than low and having straight, well-defined
eyebrows, shows solid power of the understanding, love of study and
power of concentrating the attention, but it is not the forehead of the
poet, painter, or musician.

Arched foreheads, somewhat low, but full at the temples, with long,
sweeping and mobile eyebrows, appear properly to be feminine, since
they show sweetness and sensitiveness of nature.

High, narrow and wholly unwrinkled foreheads, over which the skin seems
tightly drawn, are indicative of weakness of the will-power, want of
imagination and very little susceptibility. They are the foreheads of
narrow-minded, commonplace persons. Of course other features may soften
these indications; intelligent eyes may give intellect, or a sweet and
tender mouth feeling enough to, at any rate, diminish the unpleasant
indications of this type of forehead.

Foreheads not altogether projecting, but having angular and knotty
protuberances upon them, denote vigour of mind and harsh and oppressive
activity and perseverance. To be in exact proportion, the forehead
should be the same length as the nose. In Greek art, however, it is
generally shorter, which gives softness and elegance to the face. It
should be oval at the top, or somewhat square; if the latter, it gives
more force--if the former, more sensibility of character. It should be
smooth in repose, yet have the power of wrinkling when in deep thought,
or when in grief or anger; for foreheads over which the skin is so
tightly strained as never to change under these circumstances show a
dull, unsensitive and unintellectual nature. A forehead should project
more over the eyes than at the top, and there should be a small cavity
in the centre, separating the brow into four divisions: but this should
be so slightly accentuated as only to be seen when the forehead is in a
strong light coming from above it.

When the eyebrows are far from each other at their starting-point
between the eyes, they denote warmth, frankness and impulse--a generous
and unsuspicious nature. A woman or man having such eyebrows would
never be causelessly jealous. Eyebrows, on the contrary, which meet
between the eyes in the manner so much admired by the Persians denote a
temperament ardent in love, but jealous and suspicious: all Saturnians
have these eyebrows.

Eyebrows somewhat higher at their starting-point, and which pass in a
long sweeping line over the eyes, drooping slightly downwards at their
termination, show artistic feeling and great sense of beauty in form.
The Empress Eugénie's eyebrows are of this form, which gives a sweet
and wistful expression to the face and which some old writers have
asserted to be the sign of a violent death.

Eyebrows lying very close to the eyes, forming one direct, clear line
on strongly-defined eyebones having the same form, show strength of
will and extreme determination of character. This sort of eyebrow
appears on the busts of Nero; but there its indications of
determination are deepened with cruelty by the massive jaw and the
development of the cheekbone by the ear. This form of eyebrow, in
conjunction with other good indications, would mean only constancy in
affection, power of carrying out a project despite all difficulties and
taste for science.

Eyebrows that are strongly marked at the commencement and then
terminate abruptly without sweeping past the eyes, show an irascible,
energetic and impatient nature.

Thick eyebrows, somewhat arched, show artistic perception of beauty in
colour. Delicately marked eyebrows, slightly arched, indicate
tenderness.

Eyebrows lighter than the hair show weakness and indecision. Eyebrows
much darker than the hair denote an ardent, passionate and constant
temperament.

Angular, strong and sharply interrupted eyebrows close to the eyes
always show fire and productive activity. No profound thinker has
weakly marked eyebrows, or eyebrows placed very high on the forehead.
Want of eyebrow almost always indicates a want of mental and bodily
force. The nearer the eyebrows are to the eyes, the more earnest, deep
and firm the character; the more remote from the eyes, the more
volatile and less resolute the nature.

Eyebrows the same colour as the hair show firmness, resolution and
constancy; but in judging of the eyebrows it must be remembered that if
form and colour give different indications, the _form_ (as this also
means that of the brow) gives the most important indication, the colour
and texture of the eyebrow being secondary to its _position_ as regards
the eyes and forehead.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE EYES AND EYELASHES


The eye has been called "the window of the soul," and not without
reason, for it seems more than any other organ to be capable of
expressing all its emotions. The most tumultuous passions, the most
delicate feelings, the most acute sensations, the eye expresses in all
their force and in all their purity, as they arise and transmits them
by variations so rapid as to give to the lookers-on the very image of
that with which it is itself inspired; for the eye receives and
reflects the intelligence of the thoughts as well as the warmth of the
feelings.

The colours most common to the eyes are brown, grey, blue, hazel and
black, or what we _call_ black--for those eyes which appear to be
black will generally be found to be of a deep yellowish-brown when
looked at very narrowly; it is the distance only which makes them seem
to be black, because the deep yellow-brown colour is in such strong
contrast to the white of the eye that it appears black. There are also
eyes of so bright a hazel as to seem almost yellow; lastly, there are
eyes that are positively green. Very beautiful, too, are some of the
eyes of this colour when they are shaded--as is very often the
case--with long, dark eyelashes; but, though beautiful, they are not
indicative of a _good_ disposition.

Green eyes, although their praises are often sung in Spanish ballads,
show deceit and coquetry. We sometimes see eyes which appear to be a
combination of yellow, orange, and blue, the latter colour generally
appearing in streaks over the whole surface of the iris, while the
orange and yellow are set in flakes of unequal size around and at some
distance apart; these eyes are indicative of originality, amounting, at
times, to eccentricity. No commonplace person has this sort of eye;
they show intellectuality, and, in most cases, literary ability.

There are eyes which are remarkable for being of, what might be said to
be, no colour. The iris has only some shades of blue or pale grey, so
feeble as to be almost white in some parts, and the shades of orange
which intervene are so small that they can scarcely be distinguished
from grey or white, notwithstanding the contrast of colours. The black
of the pupil is, in these eyes, too marked, because the colour of the
iris around it is not deep enough, so that in looking at them we seem
to see only the pupil. These eyes are expressionless, for their glance
is fixed and dead; they invariably belong to persons of the lymphatic
temperament, and they indicate a listless and feeble disposition,
incapable of enterprise and a cold and indolently selfish nature.

Blue eyes are more significant of tenderness and of a yieldingness of
purpose than either brown, black, or grey eyes. There are occasionally
to be met strong characters with this tint of eye, but then they will
be found to have other indications in the rest of their physiognomy
which correct the delicacy and yieldingness of this coloured eye.
Blue-eyed people are not inconstant, like those of the hazel and yellow
eyes, but they yield from affection.

Angry, irritable persons have frequently eyes of a brownish tint,
inclined to a greenish hue. Although the purely green eye of which I
have spoken indicates deceit and coquetry, the propensity to greenish
tints in the eyes is a sign of wisdom and courage. Very choleric
persons, if they have blue eyes, have also certain tints of green in
them and, when under the influence of anger, a sudden red light appears
in them. Such eyes as these are generally found in connection with the
sanguine, or, as it is sometimes called, choleric temperament; that is,
in those persons who have been born under the double influence of
Jupiter and Mars; but, when we see these red tints in the eyes, it
would be a sign that, of the two planets presiding over this
temperament, Mars was dominant.

Clear grey-blue eyes, with a calm steadfastness in their glance, are
indicative of cheerfulness of disposition, of a serene temper and a
constant nature. These eyes are peculiar to the Northern nations; one
meets with them among the Swedes, and also sometimes amongst the
Scotch. The blue eyes we see among the rare blondes of the South--that
is, in Italy and Spain--always have eyes in which there are some
greenish tints; and such eyes, though often called light blue, have
none of the qualities of serenity and constancy which belong to the
light blue eyes of the North. Neither must the pleasant light blue eye,
with the honest glance, be confounded with another sort of eye of a
pale blue, almost steel-coloured hue, which has a continually shifting
sort of motion both of the eyelids and the pupils of the eyes. People
with such eyes as these are to be avoided, as they are indicative of a
deceitful and selfish nature. Very dark blue eyes, with something of
the tint of the violet, show great power of affection and purity of
mind, but not much intellectuality.

Grey eyes, of a somewhat greenish grey, with orange as well as blue in
them, and which are of ever-varying tints, like the sea, are those
which denote most intellectuality. They are especially indicative of
the impulsive, impressionable temperament--a mixture of the sanguine
and the bilious--which produces the poetic and artistic natures. The
line--

    "The poet's eye, in a fine phrenzy rolling,"

does not suggest a blue, or even a black, so much as the changeful,
ever-varying tinted, grey eye; and it is a fact that in England (where
there are more varieties of tints in eyes than in any other country)
the poets have almost always grey eyes. A biographer of Byron speaks of
his "beautiful, changeful grey eyes, which deepened in colour when he
was under the influence of tenderness and passion, and which glowed
with a red light when he was angry." Shakespeare also had, we are told,
grey eyes, and so had Sir Walter Scott; whilst Coleridge had eyes of a
greenish grey. Among the artists, too, eyes of this colour abound.

Black eyes, or what are considered such, are indicative of passionate
ardour in love. Brown eyes, when not of the yellowish tint, but pure
russet brown, show an affectionate disposition; the darker the
brown--that is, the more they verge on to that deepest tint of brown
which is seen in eyes we are in the habit of calling black--the more
ardent and passionate is the power of affection. The brown eyes which
do not appear black--that is, which are not dark enough to appear
so--are the eyes of sweet, gentle, and unselfish natures, without the
inconstancy of the light brown or _yellow_ eyes--"golden eyes," as
they were called by a lady novelist--and which are very little more to
be trusted than the green eyes already spoken of. The maiden in
Longfellow's _Hyperion_, of whom he says,

    "She has two eyes so soft and brown,
    She looketh up, she looketh down;
      Beware, beware, she is fooling thee,"

must have had these _light_ brown eyes.

Eyes which show no lines when in sorrow or laughter denote a
passionless and unimpressionable nature. Eyes of a long almond shape,
with thick-skinned eyelids which appear to cover half the pupil, are
indicative of genius; if in conjunction the forehead is that which
shows idealism, and has one deep perpendicular line between the
eyebrows, which is indicative of originality of mind and which is
generally to be seen in the forehead of distinguished writers and
artists. It is very remarkable in all the portraits of Michael Angelo.
The almond-shaped eye, however, even without this peculiar form of
forehead, always means a susceptible, impressionable nature. Eyes which
are large, open and very transparent and which sparkle with a rapid
motion under well-defined eyelids, denote elegance in tastes, a
somewhat susceptible temper and great interest in the opposite sex.

Eyes with weakly-marked eyebrows above them and with thinly-growing
eyelashes which are completely without any upward curve, denote a
feeble constitution and a melancholy disposition. These eyelashes are
often seen in people who combine the lymphatic and melancholic
temperaments--that is, in persons born under the combined influence of
the two melancholy planets, Saturn and the Moon. The eyes of these
people are either of a pale, colourless sort of blue, or of a dull
black without any sparkle in them.

Want of eyelash, like want of eyebrows, shows a general want of force,
both of body and intellect.

Strong, dark and short eyelashes show force of character and a strong
and obstinate will.

Eyes with sharply-defined angles, sinking at the corners, show subtlety
of mind; the sharper the angle and the more it sinks, the greater the
delicacy of perception it denotes; but when very much developed it
shows also craftiness amounting to deceit. Well-opened eyes with smooth
eyelids and a steady and somewhat fixed glance denote sincerity. Lines
running along the eyelid from side to side and passing out upon the
temples denote habitual laughter--a cheerful temperament, or, at any
rate, one in which the sense of humour is strong.

We sometimes see (but it is rare) persons whose eyes are of different
colours. For instance, one eye will be of a bluish-grey, whilst the
other will be so flecked with orange or tawny yellow spots as to appear
what might be called a brown eye. This peculiarity of having eyes of
different colours is sometimes to be seen in dogs, and very often in
cats of the Persian breed, or white cats, but it is very rare in human
beings. An old Italian writer says that people having eyes of different
colours are likely to become mad. Having, during the whole course of my
life, only known two persons having this peculiarity, I do not feel
qualified to pass an opinion as regards this indication. One of these
persons certainly was mad on several points; and, when it is added that
the other is the writer of this book, many of its readers may be
inclined to think that the mediæval physiognomist's theory might very
possibly be correct.




CHAPTER XXIX.

THE NOSE


We often see fine eyes in an otherwise ugly face, but rarely is a
thoroughly beautiful nose found in a face which could be called ugly,
for the nose is the keynote of the face, and in it lies the chief
characteristic of the countenance. Beautiful eyes and beautiful lips
have, it is true, more charm--it is the expression of the eyes and lips
of those we love which we most remember in absence--but it is the nose
which, more than any other feature, most affects the general character
of the face. This will be seen if we try the experiment of drawing the
head and face of any beautiful statue--say the Venus of Milo, for
instance--and, while giving it all its fair proportions of brow and
cheek and chin, we substitute a small turn-up nose, or, worse still, a
flat or snub nose, for the noble yet softly gracious line of the nose
in this most perfect head and how much we should lower the noble type
of beauty this Venus presents! Of course no one in real life could be
unattractive with such a brow and beautifully shaped eyes, to say
nothing of the perfect lips and softly rounded lines of the chin; but
the nobility of the face would be entirely lost by this alteration of
the lines of the nose; whilst we might alter the beautiful lines of the
eyes, narrow the brow, and even take from the softly voluptuous contour
of lips and chin, yet by leaving untouched the perfect form of the nose
we should still retain the dignity of expression which is so
characteristic of this statue.

A nose to be perfect should equal the length of the forehead; it may,
when the forehead is exceptionally low, be even longer than the
forehead (and in most of the beautiful antique statues it is so), but
on no account should it be shorter than the brow. Viewed in front, the
nose should be somewhat broader at its root--that is, where it starts
from the brow--than below. The end of it should be neither hard nor
fleshy, but it should be well defined, though neither very pointed nor
very broad, for all extremes of forms in any of the features are bad.
Viewed in profile, the distance from the line of the wing of the nose
to its tip should only be one-third of the length of the nose. Thus,
those noses which stand very much out from the face as they near the
end of the nose, whilst they are low on the bridge and between the
eyes, are out of proportion. Those having such noses are vivacious, but
wanting in dignity and force of character. They are impressionable,
inquisitive and inconstant.

The nostrils (from the different forms of which many indications are
given) should be pointed above and rounded below. The sides of the nose
at its root between the eyes should close well with the line of the
eyebone (as one sees them invariably do in the antique statues), and
should be at least half an inch in width. Perhaps a better rule of
proportion--as regards the whole face--is that the width of the nose
between the eyes should be exactly the length of the eye.

Noses which are arched from their starting-point between the eyes show
capability of command, energy and force of character. It will be
remembered that the Duke of Wellington--the Iron Duke--had this sort of
nose. Of course, this form in excess (as it certainly was in his case),
without the characteristics of self-control and other good points in
the face, would not have the same indication. A very prominent nose,
like the beak of a parrot, with a narrow brow and retreating chin,
would give stupid obstinacy; but, in an otherwise good physiognomy, a
prominent nose gives force, command and productive energy.

It cannot, however, be denied that one _sometimes_ comes upon noses
which are rather small in proportion to the rest of the face and which
are so devoid of arch as to be almost concave in their line when seen
in profile, in persons of fairly good understanding; but such noses
belong rather to those who appreciate, than to those who produce, works
of literature and art. The people having these noses, provided the
brows show some intellectuality, will be found to enjoy the beautiful
influences of works of the imagination, but they themselves possess
little or no creative power.

Straight noses give indications between these two extremes; they may
belong to persons of the creative, or simply appreciative, order of
mind. The form of the head and brow and the line of the eyebrows would
determine to which class they especially belong. Arched noses with
broad backs denote force of character. Swift and Napoleon Bonaparte had
noses of this type. This sort of nose, with an arch starting from the
root, is seen in almost all the busts of the Roman emperors; it is, in
fact, frequently called the "Roman nose," and is very typical of the
race which was for so many ages dominant in Europe; whilst the
beautiful straight nose (which we are accustomed to call Grecian,
because it is seen in almost all the antique statues) is quite as
indicative of the perception of beauty in art and literature and of the
subtlety of mind which distinguished the Greeks. The creative force in
the antique straight nose is given by its _proportion_ to the rest
of the face, for it is always larger in proportion to the brow, cheeks
and jaws than the strongly-arched broad-bridged nose which we call
Roman, and thus it is indicative of quite as much productive force as
the arched Roman nose, with infinitely more delicacy of perception; a
small straight nose shorter than the forehead and set in a large round
face, shows timidity and foolishness and is the nose of an
unintelligent person.

High noses that are not broad-backed are often seen in the faces of men
of letters, but a high _thin_-backed nose, which seems to start up in a
sharp ridge when seen in profile, is more indicative of penetration and
acuteness than force of mind. These noses have generally fine, sharp
tips, with a downward curve; this is an indication of wit. Voltaire and
Sterne had such noses; they are generally seen in combination with thin
and flexible lips and a somewhat pointed chin. A nose which is bent
downwards is also indicative of sadness of disposition, for it is one
of the signatures of the melancholy planet Saturn; but wit may exist
(in fact generally does so) with a somewhat sad temperament. Voltaire's
wit is almost always cynical, and cynicism grows out of a want of hope,
a want of belief in one's fellow-creatures; whilst in Sterne (the
writer of the inimitable though now little-read work, _Tristram
Shandy_) there is always, even in his brightest sallies, an
under-current of pathetic sadness. People with this sort of nose are
sarcastic, somewhat hypochondriacal and very often reserved and morose.
If, with this form of nose, the nostrils are narrow and almost closed
and the wings of the nose pinched, the indications are still more those
given by the melancholy planet Saturn; the more elastic and freely
moving the nostril with this form of nose, the more bright and the less
sardonic the wit. A person with a broad Roman nose, having this violent
downward curve over the mouth, is one to be avoided, for this
combination denotes a secretly voluptuous temperament--a man or woman
of strong passions hidden beneath a cold and reserved manner.
Broad-backed fleshy noses, round and full at the tips, with
intellectually good brows, show a genial temperament and a sense of
humour. Without the good indications of the brow they would only show
love of good cheer and a certain good-humoured carelessness.

Snub-noses--that is, noses short in proportion to the brow and with
round fleshy tips--are indicative of commonplace, somewhat coarse
natures, especially if the nostrils are round and the bridge of the
nose very low between the eyes.

What is called a turned-up nose shows vivacity of temperament,
jealousy, talkativeness, impudence (growing out of a certain amount of
self-esteem) and petulance.

There is a sort of delicately turned-up nose which we often see in
pretty women, and which, though it shows wilfulness and coquetry--things
not uncommon in pretty women, since the song tells us--

    "For oh! these charming women,
    They all have wills of their own"--

is significant of delicate perceptions and a certain intuitive
cleverness which is thoroughly feminine and, therefore, very attractive
to men. These noses--which are especially the noses of charming
women--are well raised at the root; in fact, have all the delicacy of
line of a straight nose, except that the extreme tip has an upward
curve. It must have been of one of these delicate and thoroughly
feminine noses that Tennyson must have been thinking when he describes
one of his heroines as having a nose--

    "Tip-tilted like a flower."

Flexible nostrils, which quiver under excitement, show an ardent,
poetic, and sensitive temperament.

Very open and flexible nostrils show ardour in love and if seen in
conjunction with large, full and slowly-moving eyes and a full under
lip, indicate a voluptuous and passionate nature.

Closed nostrils show melancholy, timidity and absence of hopefulness--a
person who habitually sees everybody and everything _en noir_.

Round nostrils show animal instincts and a somewhat low type of
individuality; they are generally seen in snub-noses, which of
themselves give the same indication.

Noses which have on both sides many wrinkles, which become visible on
the slightest motion and never entirely disappear, even in a state of
complete rest, show cunning and sarcasm.

When the line (which, after extreme youth, is always more or less seen
from the nose to the mouth) is very strongly marked, and descends at a
great distance from the corners of the mouth to the chin, it evidences
an anxious and melancholic nature.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE MOUTH, TEETH, JAW AND CHIN


A mouth to be beautiful should be in harmony as regards proportion with
the rest of the features of the face; that is, it should be neither
remarkably large nor remarkably small. Neither the upper nor the lower
lip should project beyond the other when the mouth is closed. The lips
should shut easily over the teeth, and in doing so should fall into a
flowing line of curves without compression. The more the lips are
endowed with motion and the more richly they are coloured, the finer
and more delicate are the human passions they indicate.

An excess of even good form is bad; thus if the full rich lines of a
generous mouth are exaggerated, we have the indication of sensuality,
whilst the finer susceptibilities shown by delicately moulded lips may,
by a little excess towards thinness, give fastidiousness and even
avarice.

The middle-sized mouth, which combines strength with warmth of feeling,
whilst it steers clear of coarseness, is what gives the best
indications. Such a mouth shows courage, generosity, and affection.

A mild, somewhat overhanging upper lip generally signifies goodness, or
rather kindliness of disposition; but if very much overhung it shows
weakness of purpose and an irresolute, vacillating character and, where
the under lip is small as well as retreating and the chin also small,
it is an indication of imbecility.

A mouth in which the lower lip projects shows prudence amounting to
distrust and melancholy. We often see this form of mouth with the
down-drooping nose; both are indications of the dominating influence of
Saturn at the birth of the person possessing such a combination of
features. If the under lip should be very full as well as projecting
and droops in a flaccid manner without closing over the teeth when the
lips are in repose, it is a sign of a sensual nature. Of course an
intellectual brow and a firm and energetic form of nose would lessen
the evil of such an indication, but there is always a tendency towards
the grosser pleasures of the senses in a person with such a form of
lips.

A mouth with lips habitually apart denotes eloquence, if the rest of
the face gives intellectual indications; but if none of the signs of
mental power are there, it would only signify a chattering person
wanting in decision and promptness of action.

A firmly closed mouth shows courage, fortitude and determination; even
an habitually open mouth will be seen to close with a sort of forced
compression when endurance is necessary. Everyone closes the mouth
after saying, "I am resolved."

A somewhat long mouth, with an upward curve at the corners and with
thin and very flexible lips, indicates wit. Voltaire had this sort of
mouth.

Full, flexible lips, with a hollow in the centre of the lower lip, and
with the corners turning upwards, show a joyous, hospitable and rather
materialistic temperament, with good spirits and sense of humour.

A mouth with full lips, but in which one side of the lower lip is
larger and fuller than the other, was said by the old writers to denote
ardour in love and general sensuousness. It is one of the signatures of
Venus.

A wart just above the upper lip shows a coarse and cruel nature; a mole
in the same place, love of the opposite sex.

Of course, the shape and placing of the teeth are not without
significance in the character given by the mouth. When the upper gum
shows above the teeth directly the lips are open, it is a sign of a
selfish and phlegmatic nature.

Short, small teeth are held by the old physiognomists to denote
weakness and short life, whilst rather long teeth, if evenly set in the
head, denote long life.

The more the teeth, in point of size, shape and arrangement, approach
to those of the carnivorous animals, the more violent are the animal
instincts in the person; whilst the more the human teeth in shape and
position approach to those of the graminivorous animals, the more
placid is the character.

White, medium-sized and evenly-set teeth, which are seen as soon as the
mouth is open, but which are never exposed--that is, which do not at
any time show the gums--are a sign of good and honest natures.

Projecting teeth show rapacity; small, retreating teeth, such as are
rarely seen unless in laughter, show weakness and want of physical and
moral courage. The lower teeth projecting and closing over the upper
range are indicative of a harsh nature.

In most faces the mouth or the nose is the more prominent. Where the
nose is the dominant feature, energy, command and force of willpower,
combined (unless the mouth and eyes show great kindness) with
selfishness, show themselves in the character. Where the mouth, jaw and
chin are more prominent, the appetites and passions are strong.

Broad jaws, with a broad forehead, mean both force of intellect and
force of animal passion. Byron had this combination of brow and jaw;
but the lips, which were full and flexible and with upward-curving
corners, redeemed the sensuality given by the jaws, and the
intellectual qualities shown by the form of the brow were in excess of
the indications of voluptuousness given by the lower part of the face.

A person who has the jaw much broader than the brow and head has strong
passions and a weak intellect--the very worst possible combination.

When the jaws are massive and yet the head and brow are more so, we
have a powerful character, who can exert all his intellectual powers on
one subject--one who has the very valuable faculty of concentration.

Where the jaws are much narrower than the head, we have a character
where the sensual instincts are feeble, and where intellect is of a
subtle and refined order. Wit is shown by this form of face, especially
if the nose is delicately outlined, the tip pointed and somewhat
drooping over the mouth.

When the lips retreat on each side of the mouth and open into an oval
form, it denotes a subtle intelligence, tact and refinement of nature.

A sharp indentation immediately above the chin, between it and the
lower lip, shows good understanding.

A pointed chin is a sign of craftiness, wisdom, discretion and
intuitive perception.

A soft, fat, double chin shows epicurism and love of sensual pleasures
of all sorts; it also indicates an indolent temperament. We never see
such chins in persons of an energetic, restless nature. Charles James
Fox, who was excessively indolent, had this chin even in youth.

A flat chin shows avarice and a cold, hard nature; a small chin
indicates weakness, want of will-power and cowardice.

A retreating chin is a sign of silliness and, if the brow is shallow,
of imbecility.

Where the space between the nose and the red part of the lip is short
and very sharply cut, it indicates refinement and delicacy of
perception, but not much power--no _force_ of intellect; where this
space is unusually short, it denotes silliness and weakness of purpose.
A rather long but not flat upper lip, especially where the serpentine
line of the middle of the mouth is much defined and the middle of the
lip droops to the lower lip and is very flexible, denotes an eloquent
person. We see this form of upper lip in the bust of Demosthenes, the
greatest of Grecian orators; in Cicero, whose eloquence was unsurpassed
in his age; in Fox, whose powers of oratory were great; in the
demagogue Wilkes, in Edmund Burke, in Lord Palmerston and numerous
other orators.

A very long upper lip, which is flat and which belongs to a straight
and formless or too thick-lipped mouth, is a sign of a low and vicious
type of character. Almost all the faces of great criminals have this
defect, combined with massive jaws and high cheek-bones, which last
defect is, both Lavater and Perneti (a great French writer on the
subject of physiognomy) tell us, a sign of rapacity and egotism.

A round chin, with a dimple in it, denotes kindliness and benevolence,
a tender and unselfish nature. In a very massive double chin the dimple
increases the quality of love of sensual pleasures. A square and
massive chin shows strong perseverance and determined will.

An old Italian writer says that "women with brown, hairy moles on the
chin, especially if these excrescences are on the under part of the
chin, are industrious, active and are good housewives"; they are also,
he says, "very sanguine and given to love follies. They talk much and
whilst they are easily excited to return a love which is offered them,
they are not so readily prevailed upon to become indifferent. For this
reason," he goes on, evidently speaking feelingly and probably
therefore with personal experience of the matter, "they should be
treated with circumspect, calm friendship and kept at a distance by a
mildly cold dignity of demeanour." He gives no directions as to how
this effective "demeanour" is to be arrived at, but at once passes on
to another remark on the subject of moles, and tells us that "a mole
upon the upper lip, especially if it is bristly, will be found in no
person who is not defective in something essential." This is rather a
wide way of putting the matter. Are people with this blemish morally,
mentally, or physically deficient? Wanting in kissableness such a mouth
might be and this, perhaps, where lips are concerned, _is_ "something
essential."




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE HAIR AND THE EARS


Black hair which is perfectly without any wave or curl and which lies
in lank, lifeless masses, shows a melancholic disposition; a black
beard which grows sparsely gives the same indication.

Black hair which is wavy or curling and very thick, shows force of
affection and a certain ardour in love matters; so also does a thick
and crisp-textured black beard and moustache.

The lank, thin and uncurling black hair is one of the signatures of
Saturn alone; the crisp, curling and thickly-growing black hair is the
combination of Venus and Saturn. The united influence of these two
planets on a life gives force of character, for the warmth and impulse
given by Venus is tempered by the distrust of Saturn into prudence;
thus people with the crisp dark hair get the ardour, combined with
prudence, which produces success in life.

Chestnut hair of a soft and silky texture and not very thick, gives
romance of character. This is not the sort of hair which is ever seen
on very commonplace, realistic persons. Men having this soft
chestnut-coloured hair are somewhat effeminate in their tastes and are
wanting in energy and decision. Both men and women having it are
incapable of strong affection: they are attracted by the opposite sex,
but they are more given to having a series of small interests than one
strong love. If this hair is found in combination with the golden
coloured eyes it is indicative of coquetry in the nature; if with pale
blue-grey eyes we have languor and caprice--a sentimental and
inconsistent person.

Bright golden hair of a rich deep colour and of a crisp and waving
texture growing thickly on the head and somewhat low on the brow, shows
an ardent, poetic and artistic temperament. It is the signature of the
Sun. Such people are generally fond of music, painting, or poetry. Both
men and women having this sort of hair are intuitive in their
judgments; they do not reason about things, they feel them; they are a
little quick of temper, that is, easily ruffled, but they are quickly
appeased; they are gay and interest themselves in art, even if they are
not artists themselves.

Persons with red hair are ardent and vivacious, especially if, with it,
they have hazel eyes, in which case they have a bright and quick
intelligence, for reddish hair and bright brown eyes are the signature
of Mercury. They have a great deal of natural facility for study and
good memories, but they are selfish and rather cruel.

Red hair, with blue eyes, shows the same warmth of character, but not
so much intelligence, and if, with blue eyes and red hair, the eyebrows
and eyelashes are white--as is often the case--it is an indication of a
weak and capricious nature.

People with red-brown hair, which is very thick and redder over the
ears and at the temples and on the beard than on the head, are
courageous and hot-tempered. This coloured hair is the signature of the
fiery planet Mars, and (unless the other indications in the face are
widely different) shows activity and energy in all things. It augments
the indications of force and power given by other features and in art
gives sense of colour in painters--force of language and eloquence in
poets--and power in musical composition.

Hair of that colourless, fair colour which French writers call _blond
cendré_, or ash-coloured, denotes persons of an indolent and dreamy
temperament. It is the indication given by the dominant influence of
the Moon at birth. Persons with this sort of hair, in combination with
large blue-grey eyes, with fair, long, but straight eyelashes and very
slightly-defined eyebrows of the same blonde colour and white, soft
skin, are capricious, languid, imaginative and somewhat melancholic.
The imaginative and excessively indolent Théophile Gautier, the French
novelist, was of this type in combination with Venus, giving a
sensuousness amounting to sensuality.

Women having this sort of colouring of skin and hair are romantic and
devoted in a resigned, but not active spirit--that is, they are more
generous in words than deeds, for they are incapable of exertion and
still less of perseverance.

Persons with soft, wavy brown hair are affectionate, gentle and loving.
Their first instincts are always good and kind. They like society and
are gracious in manners and, though they are not quite as indolent as
those having the soft ash-coloured hair--indicative of the Moon's
influence--they are still lovers of repose and elegant comfort.

People with this soft brown hair (which is one of the signatures of the
planet Venus) are very open to the impressions of beauty and they abhor
noise, discords and quarrels; men with this sort of hair, like those
with _pale_ golden hair, are somewhat effeminate and are easily moved
to tears.

Large, fleshy ears (especially those which have the lobes of the ears
red) show coarseness of nature and sensuality.

If the ears stand forward so as to show their entire form when the face
is seen from the front, it denotes rapacity and cruelty.

Long-shaped but small ears indicate refinement; a very small ear, close
to the head, shows delicacy of perception, refinement, but also
timidity.

The ears should be so placed as not to be higher than the eyebrow, or
lower than the tip of the nose; if set in too sloping a direction they
show timidity; if too upright, animal instincts, courage, amounting to
cruelty, especially if they obtrude from the head.

A thin ear shows delicacy and poetry of feeling; a thick ear the
reverse.

Middle-sized ears, rather close to the head, are the signature of
Jupiter; large ears of Saturn; delicate, long-shaped ears of the Sun
and also of Mercury, only those bearing the signature of Mercury are
more coloured, whilst those of the Sun are pale.

Very upright ears, standing forward, are the signature of Mars; small,
round ears, delicately tinted pink and close to the head, show the
influence of Venus; whilst middle-sized round ears, of a very pale
colour, are indicative of persons born under the influence of the Moon.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE SIGNATURES OF THE PLANETS ON THE FACE


Those born under Jupiter have fresh complexions, and large blue or grey
eyes, with thick and well-formed eyelids; and their eyelashes are long;
their hair--which is chestnut, or, if tending towards black, is a
brown, not _blue_, black--and is crisp or curly. They generally have
well-marked and somewhat arched eyebrows, and their noses straight,
with a slight rise on them, and somewhat fleshy; their mouths are
large, but with generous, curved and full lips, the upper lip
projecting over the lower one; their teeth are large, and the two in
front are generally longer than the rest; their cheeks are fleshy and
firm; the cheek-bones are well defined, without being prominent; the
chin is large, with a dimple in the centre of it; their ears are of
medium size and lie somewhat close to the head. The men born under
Jupiter have thick curly brown beards, but they get bald early in life.

Those born under the dominant influence of the melancholy planet Saturn
have no colour in their cheeks and their skin is dark and of a yellow
or leaden tint. It is seldom that anyone is born under the _sole_
influence of one planet; the ugliness of the Saturnian type is much
mitigated by the influence of Jupiter, and the union of Venus and
Saturn often produces positive beauty of a serious and melancholic
sort. Many of the strikingly beautiful Spanish faces show the combined
influence of these two planets.

Those born under the dominant influence of the Sun have regular
features and a soft skin of a yellowish tint, but with colour in the
cheeks and lips. Their hair is of a _red_-gold tint; and their eyebrows
are well defined, but not dark. Their eyes are of a golden brown or
greenish grey, and are brilliant and well shaped; the eyelashes and
eyebrows are a little darker than the hair, but not dark, and are
traced in a long sweeping line extending to the temples. Their cheeks
are well covered, without being plump; their jaws are a long oval and
neither the cheek-bones nor the jaws are at all prominent. Their teeth
are even, but of rather yellowish white; their mouths are neither large
nor small, but well formed, with the lips meeting evenly, that is,
neither the upper nor the lower lip projecting. Their ears are
medium-sized, rather long in shape, lying close to the head and the
lobes of them are fleshy and slightly coloured of a pinkish hue. The
chin is rather prominent, round and well shaped, like those of the
antique statues, but not fleshy. Those born under the influence of the
Sun have frequently weak sight, especially if their birth has taken
place during an eclipse.

Those born under the influence of Mercury have long faces and delicate,
mobile features. Their skin is fine, soft and honey-coloured, but
changes in tint with every passing emotion, for those born under
Mercury are of a nervous, vividly intuitive and highly excitable
temperament. Their hair is of a reddish, not golden, brown (what is
called auburn), very fine and supple. Their foreheads are high and
prominent and their eyebrows, which are long and delicately traced, lie
very low over the eyes and are very mobile, moving up and down with
every emotion. The eyes of those born under this planet are somewhat
sunken, of a hazel or dark grey colour; they move quickly and have a
restless expression; the white of the eye is (like that of those born
under Saturn) of a yellowish tint and the lids of the eyes are thin and
do not droop at all over the eyes. Their noses are straight and long,
with delicate nostrils; the tip of the nose is round rather than
pointed and frequently has a small cleft or dimple, which is, however,
only faintly perceptible in certain lights, at the extreme tip. They
have delicate mouths which droop a little at the corners and the lips
are thin, mobile and often a little apart; the upper lip is thicker and
more projecting than the lower lip; the teeth are small and even. The
chin is long, pointed and a little projecting at the lip. The head is
oval in shape and full at the temples.

Those born under the planet Mars have short, square-shaped, but small
heads, with high foreheads on which the hair grows far back, leaving
the forehead much exposed. Their faces are round, sometimes square at
the lower part and their skin is hard and dry and of a red colour,
especially about the ears, which are long-shaped, set straight rather
high on the head and slightly projecting from it. Their eyebrows are
short, sometimes stopping midway over the eyes, very bushy and lying
close to the eyes. Between the eyebrows are several short upright
wrinkles. The hair is of a red or sandy colour, coarse and very curly.
The beards of men born under Mars are thick, short and of the same
fiery colour as the hair. Their eyes are grey or red-brown and are
large, round, very wide open and have a fierce and fixed glance; the
white of the eye in those born under this fiery planet is often
bloodshot. Their mouths are large, but the upper lip is thin and
compressed; the lower lip is somewhat thicker than the upper lip. Their
noses are short and aquiline, with dilated nostrils. Their chins are
projecting and somewhat massive, for the jaw is strongly developed; the
cheeks are somewhat hollow, and the cheek-bones very marked.

Those born under the influence of the Moon have round-shaped heads,
broad at the temples (showing ideality--the Moon gives imagination).
The forehead is full over the eyebrows, but retreats at the top; it is
broad and low. The complexion is pale, almost colourless and the skin
is soft. Their hair is fine, soft, of a colourless fairness, no golden
tint in it and it is never very thick. The faces of those born under
the dominant influence of the Moon are large and round; the nose is (in
proportion to the face) small and short and its tip is round rather
than pointed. Their eyes are of the same colour as the hair, very
lightly marked, but joining over the nose. Their mouths are small; but
their lips, which are of a pale colour, are full and pouting and are
rarely quite closed. Their teeth are large and often irregular. Their
chins are round, fleshy and retreating. Their ears are also round,
medium size, pale coloured, set in a very sloping direction and lying
close to the head. If born during an eclipse of the Moon, those born
under this influence are sometimes blind.

People born under the influence of Venus have a great resemblance to
those born under Jupiter, only their beauty is more feminine. They have
the white and delicately-tinted skin of the Jupiterians, but it is
still softer, finer and more transparent. They have round faces, the
cheek-bones and the jaw-bones are not at all apparent; their cheeks are
softly rounded and generally ornamented with dimples; their foreheads
are a delicate oval, rather low and have delicate azure veins at the
temples. The eyebrows of persons born under the influence of this
beautiful planet are dark and beautifully marked in long sweeping but
very delicate lines, but not meeting over the nose. Their hair is long,
thick, soft, undulating and of a light brown colour. Their noses, which
are broad at the root between the eyes, are straight and delicate, not
at all pointed, but rather rounded at the tip;[20] the nostrils are
round, but dilated and very flexible. Their eyes are large, clear,
humid and somewhat projecting; the pupils are large in proportion to
the white of the eye, which is limpid and of a clear, transparent,
bluish white; their eyelids are well formed and blue veined. Their
mouths are small and of a beautiful red colour; the lips are full,
especially the lower one, the right side of which is slightly larger
than the left. This is a particular Signature of Venus, as is also a
small dimple near the corner of the mouth. The teeth are white, small,
evenly set in coral-tinted gums and the chin is soft and round and has,
like the chin of Jupiterians, a dimple in it.

          [20] The noses of those born under Venus are frequently
          slightly upturned at the tip; they are never bent downwards
          over the lips.

Although the signs just described are those given by each planet, as it
rarely happens that anyone is born under the influence of one planet
only, but generally of two or more, it is rarely that we see a face
which gives the pure type of any one planet without admixture. It is
for the physiognomist to examine and ascertain which is the dominant
planet.

The union of Saturn and Jupiter gives a pale skin without freshness,
chestnut hair and eyes and a rather dark skin, the face a round oval
and dark grey eyes.

The union of Venus with the Sun gives brilliant beauty, a beautiful
complexion, hair of a golden brown or rich chestnut, full, bright brown
eyes with long eyelashes, a delicately-formed nose and a beautiful
mouth. People born under this junction have much charm of manner, but
they are not very constant; for, although they have much tenderness,
they are of the ardent artistic nature, which, from its very
susceptibility, cannot be expected to be as constant as those who are
less impressionable; they are people of quick rather than deep
feelings; they love readily, but as readily forget.

"Women born under the double influence of Venus and the Sun," says an
old Italian writer on the subject, are "loving, lovely and beloved."




CHAPTER XXXIII.

CONCERNING THE MOLES ON THE FACE AND THEIR REFERENCE TO THOSE ON THE
BODY


All moles are the result of the influences of the planets, or of the
sign of the zodiac rising at birth. The moles which are given by Saturn
are black; those by Jupiter are of a purple-brown colour; those by the
Sun, yellow; by Venus, light brown; Mercury, honey-coloured; by the
Moon, of a bluish white.

A mole on the right side of the forehead, just beneath or on the line
of Saturn (see plate) indicates another on the right side of the
breast. This mole shows to a man, if yellow, that he will have good
fortune in sowing, tilling the earth, or building; if red, he will have
luck all through his life, by his courage and force of character; if
black, his condition will be changeable; if the mole is purple, he will
be advanced to be the head of his family. In a woman a mole in this
position shows fortune by inheritance or legacies; but if black in
colour she will not live long.

A mole on the left side of the forehead on the Line of Saturn indicates
another on the left side of the back and shows to a man imprisonment
and disaster; if honey-coloured, his trouble comes from women; if red,
from quarrels with enemies; if black, he will be unfortunate all his
life. To a woman it foretells that she will live out of her own country
and if black she will be a widow.

A mole in the middle of the forehead on the Line of Saturn shows
another in the middle of the stomach and foretells to a man, if it
should be black, that he will suffer much ill-fortune for the sake of
women; if red, he will get some pleasure out of his troubles with them;
and if yellow, he will rejoice through women; if of a pale bluish
colour and raised, he will be much beloved of women. To a woman, of
whatever colour it may appear, it indicates that she is of a very
luxurious nature and will suffer from her own folly as regards men.

A mole on the right side of the forehead on the Line of Jupiter shows
another on the right side over the liver and indicates, to a man, good
fortune in marriage, long life and large possessions; but if black, he
will not be quite so lucky as regards marriage. To a woman it shows,
whatever its colour, good fortune in all that concerns her.

A mole on the left side of the forehead on the Line of Jupiter shows
another on the left side of the stomach and indicates, to a man, love
of material enjoyments, especially if it be of a purple colour; if
honey-coloured, he is not so sensual. To a woman such a mole shows her
to be imprudent and quite regardless of her own honour.

A mole in the middle of the Line of Jupiter shows another in the middle
of the breast and indicates that a man is of a harsh nature; if red, he
is furious in temper; if black, he is singularly unfortunate in all his
undertakings; but if raised and of a bluish colour, he is less unlucky.
To a woman it indicates that she is foolish, prattling and idle.

A mole on the right side of the Line of Mars shows another on the right
arm and indicates, if red, military distinction; if honey-coloured,
good fortune with horses and other cattle; if black, danger from
four-footed beasts; if much raised and somewhat red, it shows good
fortune in all things relating to fire. To a woman this mole shows a
rich husband, full of kindness and complacency.

A mole on the left side of the Line of Mars indicates another on the
left arm, and shows a man to be of a quarrelsome nature; if black, he
is treacherous and loses much by four-footed beasts and by
horse-racing; if purple or yellow, he is involved in quarrels about
women. Such a mole, whatever its colour, shows a woman to be very
unfortunate in her love affairs, and likely to be betrayed by her
female friends.

A mole in the middle of the Line of Mars indicates another on the left
side of the belly; if red, the man is likely to be guilty of
manslaughter and if any other colour he is sensual. To a woman this
mole shows vanity and, if black, she is likely to be the cause of the
death of some friend, but more by mischance than by design.

A mole on the right side of the forehead on the Line of the Sun
indicates another on the right breast and intimates, to a man, of
whatever colour but black, riches and honours; if black, his good
fortune will not be so great and will come, not from his own merits,
but from the exertions of friends. To a woman it shows an affluence of
the goods of fortune; but if black she will have to be very subservient
to her husband.

A mole near the right ear shows another on the right side of the belly,
not low down and signifies, to a man, a blow on the head, some accident
to that ear, whereby he may lose his hearing; if black, these evils are
the more to be apprehended. To a woman it shows the loss of those
things she most values.

A mole on the left ear shows another on the left side, low down on the
belly. This mole indicates to a man persecution from enemies. If it be
of a red colour, that he will go near to committing murder by reason of
women; if black, or even honey-coloured, it is still of evil indication
and shows quarrels and violent death. To a woman, let it be of
whatsoever colour, it shows that she will be the cause of death to
someone; let her, therefore, shun to meddle with poison.

A mole on the right cheek shows another on the right hip and indicates,
to a man, that he will have great charm of manner towards women, and be
much beloved by them; this, whatever its colour. To a woman also it
shows happy marriage and that she will be vehemently beloved.

A mole on the left cheek shows another on the left hip and indicates,
to a man, a wandering existence and short life; if black, he dies by
violence. To a woman it threatens sharp and hard fortune, especially in
love matters.

A mole on the right side or corner of the mouth shows another at the
right side of the lower part of the spine and shows, to a man, that he
shall much increase his wealth by reason of his own sagacity; but if
honey-coloured, his good fortune will come by women. To a woman such a
mole shows she will abound in wealth and be vehemently beloved; if
black in colour, with all these advantages, she will yet suffer from
the scandal of envious women friends.

A mole on the left side of the mouth indicates another on the left side
of the base of the spine and shows, to a man, that he will be entangled
with a woman he cannot marry, and have illegitimate children. To a
woman it shows a likelihood of the same disgrace.

A mole in the middle of the upper lip shows another on the lowest part
of the body and indicates, to a man, that he will be miserable from
various perils, but above all from women. To a woman this mole shows
sickness and weakness from internal diseases.

A mole beneath the middle of the under lip shows another on the knee
and indicates, to a man, that he will undertake long and perilous
journeys, by reason of which he shall see many strange countries; if
honey-coloured, he will gain wealth from strangers and marry a rich,
foreign wife. Such a mole shows a woman to be thoughtless and likely to
marry a foreigner and live much out of her own country.

A mole upon the middle of the chin shows another upon the right foot
and indicates, to a man, that he shall have good fortune through women.
To a woman happy marriage, but worry for her children.

A mole on the right side of the chin shows another on the right haunch
and indicates, to the man, that he will be of great intellectual
capacity; if black, he will be a searcher in occult matters. In a woman
it shows good fortune, happy marriage and long life, whatsoever may be
its colour.

A mole on the left side of the chin shows another on the left haunch
and indicates, to a man, inconstant fortune, much worry of mind and
bodily discomfort. In a woman it shows ill-health and, if of a pale
bluish colour, danger by water.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONCERNING THE MOLES WHICH HAVE NO CORRESPONDING MOLES ON THE FACE


A mole on the right side of the throat shows to a man great wit but
short life, whatever may be its colour. To a woman it indicates a
reasonably happy life, but danger and pain from childbirth.

A mole on the left side of the throat threatens a man with dangerous
falls from horses or from high places. To a woman the same and, should
the mole be of a pale colour, danger by water.

A mole at the nape of the neck indicates to either man or woman great
danger of untimely death by water.

A mole in the midst of the throat--that is, on the gullet--shows to a
man much danger of death by strangulation or hanging. To a woman peril
in sickness and, if the mole should be black in colour, she dies.

A mole immediately under the right breast shows to a man that he will
be lucky in agriculture. To a woman that she shall receive inheritance
from the dead; if black, her father is killed by accident.

A mole under the left breast shows a man to be of a malignant nature
and furious of temper, but strong in love. To a woman it indicates
great constancy and suffering by reason of that constancy.

A mole on the knee, whether left or right, predicts, to either man or
woman, long and various journeys. Such persons will marry entirely for
their own fancy, probably foreigners, and will be very fortunate in
their marriages.

A mole on the calf of the right leg shows to a man that by his own
ingenuity and learning he shall attain a high position; if black, he
will receive some sorrow from women; but if the mole should appear
_raised_ he marries a lovely person--has only one wife and lives
happily. To a woman it shows a fortunate, good and rich husband and
that she will have many children and live long.

A mole on the lowest part of the body shows to a man that he is of a
very luxurious nature and that he shall be enriched by marriage. A
woman having this mole is rather sensuous, but--on the whole--faithful
to her husband.

A mole on the right shoulder shows a man to be fortunate in his
undertakings; if red, he has a large fortune with his wife. To a woman
it indicates a marriage above her expectations; but if black, she
buries her first husband and marries again.

A mole on the right foot shows to a man that he will be clever in
acquiring foreign languages and that he will be a great student of
occult matters. To a woman it promises a fortunate and happy, long
life; if black, this good fortune is somewhat chequered with troubles.

A mole on the left foot denotes a man to be rash and of an evil and
vagabond disposition. To a woman it shows much care and trouble and, if
black, danger in travelling.

If the second toe in a foot should stretch out much beyond the great
toe, it shows, to either man or woman, riches and a happy and
prosperous life.

A mole on the left shoulder predicts to a man much worry in money
matters. To a woman it shows a life of continual anxiety and
humiliation by reason of her own vanity. If black in colour, she
suffers some serious disgrace from her own conduct.

A mole on the lower part of the neck on the right side near the
shoulder shows a man to be very covetous. To a woman it indicates that
she will be beloved of princes or great personages far above her in
rank.

A mole on the neck near the left shoulder indicates to either man or
woman disgrace from evil practices.




CHAPTER XXXV.

CONCERNING THE MARKS GIVEN AT BIRTH BY THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC


By a knowledge of the signature given by the signs of the zodiac, when
rising at birth, we may sometimes ascertain the hour of nativity, or,
at any rate, go near enough to it to be able to work out the horoscope
after a fashion, supposing the exact date to be impossible of
attainment.

A person born when the first part of the sign Aries is rising will have
a small raised mole amongst the hairs of the head; if the second part
of the sign happened to be rising at the birth, the mark or mole would
be raised in the form of a pea or wart and would be seen on the
forehead; if the third part of the sign arose at birth, the mark would
appear below the mouth, or towards the chin. Those persons having these
marks of Aries on any of the parts described will generally be found to
have the mark of Mars in the lowest part of the body, also in the form
of a raised mole or wart.

When Taurus is rising at a birth, the native bears a mark in the front
of the throat, sometimes in the form of a raspberry or red-coloured
mole, which mark is always ill in its effects. Should the second part
of the sign Taurus have been rising at the nativity, the person will
have the mark at the side of the throat. If the third, the same mark
will appear on the nape of the neck, but then it will be more raised
than the two former moles.

Those born under Gemini have their marks in the arms. If the first part
of the sign arose at birth, they bear its mark on the right arm, near
the shoulder; if the second, on the same part of the left arm and if
the third part of the sign arises at birth, the native bears the mark
on the right arm, but below the elbow and generally near the wrist.

When the sign Cancer is in the ascendant, the mark is on the upper part
of the right breast in the form of a flower or a hare's foot, of a
whitish colour, and commonly having a hair or two springing from it. In
the older days this mark was supposed to be an evidence of witchcraft
in a woman and many poor creatures have lost their lives for this.
Those born under the second part of the sign Cancer have the mark lower
down on the breast and when the third part of Cancer is rising at a
birth, the sign is nearly under the breast.

When Leo is in the ascendant at birth, the sign is on the left breast
and, in the same manner, if the sign appears high up on the breast it
indicates that the first part of the sign was ascending; if near the
middle, the second; and if on one side, towards the left armpit, the
third part of the sign must have been ascending at birth.

In nativities under Virgo the mark is on the upper part of the stomach,
that is, between the two breasts, when the first part of the sign
ascends; those born when the second part is rising have the mark near
the navel; and those when the third part is rising quite low down on
the stomach. Those that are thus marked are very inconstant. The moles
given by Virgo are flat, and of a reddish colour.

When Libra is in the ascendant, the marks are raised like warts, and
are small, soft, and hairy; when the first part of the sign is rising
the mark is near the loins; when the second, towards the centre of the
stomach and the third part of the sign throws the mark to quite the
lower part of the body.

Those born under Sagittarius have the mark of the sign in the thighs
and these moles are raised like bulbs and are very big. When the first
part of the sign is rising, the mark is on the right thigh; when the
second part is rising, on the left thigh and those who have the third
part of Sagittarius rising at their birth are so marked on the right
haunch.

Those born under Capricornus have the marks on the knees, which marks
are quite flat. When the first part is rising, the mark is on the right
knee; when the second, on the left, and when the third, the mole is
under the knee.

It will be remembered that the sign Aquarius governs the legs;
therefore those who are born with this sign ascending have the mark of
it (which is a long-shaped mole) on the right leg (this mark shows
extreme inconstancy); when the sign Scorpio is rising at birth there is
a dark mole on the belly showing ill fortune.

The sign Pisces, or the Fishes, governs the feet; therefore those who
have this sign in their ascendant are marked on the feet. Those born
under the first part have the marks (which are ordinary flat moles) on
the right foot; those under the second, on the left; and those on the
third, on the soles of the feet or on the heels. These last are called
the Royal marks; they are large moles inclining to red, and those who
are marked in those places are assured of honours and dignities.

  [Illustration: ALFRIDARY FOR A DIURNAL NATIVITY.
                 ALFRIDARY FOR A NOCTURNAL NATIVITY.

  _To face Chapter XXXVI._]




CHAPTER XXXVI.

CONCERNING ALFRIDARIES


This word is taken from the Greek and refers to the certain time or
number of years of the several planets which, in those years, dispense
their benevolence or malignity according to their natures.

It will be observed from the plate at the beginning of this chapter,
that each of the planets has his Alfridary, one after the other--and in
this table will be seen the number of years in which each planet more
particularly governs the life.

In all diurnal nativities the Sun begins the first Alfridary, and has
seven years of government; Venus succeeds, having seven years of
Alfridary; then Mercury, who has seven years of government. After him
the Moon rules the existence for seven years; then Saturn for the same
number; Jupiter succeeds him for seven years; afterwards Mars dominates
the existence for seven years; after which the Dragon's Head and
Dragon's Tail influence the life for three years; and then the Sun has
five more years of government, when the life probably ends.

Those that are born in the night have their first Alfridaric years from
the Moon, which are seven, followed by those of Saturn, who has seven
years; after him Mars is dominant for seven years; then the Sun for the
same number of years; succeeded by Venus and Mercury, each only seven
years.

The years of an Alfridary are eighty-two--namely, the Moon, seven;
Saturn, seven; Jupiter, seven; Mars, seven; the Sun, seven; Venus,
seven; Mercury, seven; the Dragon's Head, three; the Dragon's Tail,
two. These two last have their Alfridaric years separate from the
others, and they are those which exceed the seventy years of life,
which are weak and feeble. For these signs are not (as we have seen)
planets, but only symbols of a place in the zodiac representing the
Moon's north and south nodes.

It will be noticed in these tables that, after the years of
seventy-five, the Sun in a diurnal nativity, and the Moon in a
nocturnal nativity, take up again their government, as at the beginning
of the life. These tables are interesting, as shadowing forth the dates
of the events of the subject's life.

Those born under the Sun marry early, whilst those in whose nativity
the Moon is powerful, generally marry rather late than early. In either
nativity, when Saturn comes up, sorrows by death, sickness and loss of
money may be expected; whilst, when Mars is powerful, evils of a strong
and sudden nature appear, such as accidents, sudden deaths, quarrels
and contentions of a vexatious character.

Those born under the Moon have very often serious and passionate loves
quite late in life; this is accounted for in some measure by the fact
that Venus has seven years of government in a nocturnal nativity from
the age of fifty to fifty-seven. The age of forty-four, in a diurnal
nativity, would be likely to bring about some misfortune during that
year of the native's life, _both the infortunes_, Saturn and Mars,
being then powerful. The same thing occurs in a nocturnal nativity at
the age of thirteen, from which age up to twenty there is not much good
fortune; it will be remembered that the latter part of the life of a
person born at night is generally much happier and altogether more
fortunate than the earlier years of existence.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

CONCERNING THE MYSTICAL WHEEL OF PYTHAGORAS AND THE METHODS OF WORKING
IT


This mystical figure is copied from a work in old French on Chiromancy
and Geomancy, compiled by the Sieur de Peruchio, and published at Paris
in 1657.

Arithmancy, or divination by numbers, on which the working of this
figure depends, was much practised in various ways during the Middle
Ages; and much confidence appears to have been placed in this wheel of
Pythagoras, which resolves questions by a species of sortilegy by
numbers, in which the result depends upon the unfettered agency of the
mind and will, or the serious intent to know any difficult thing. The
wheel is said by the old-world writers to be able "to resolve all
questions on all matters upon the result of which the querent desires
information, whether of the past, present, or future."

Concerning the method of working it, the Sieur de Peruchio gives the
following explanations:--

The wheel, it will be perceived, is divided into four equal parts, the
upper part of which contains the numbers which are _fortunate_, and the
lower half those which are _unfortunate_. Around the wheel are seen the
letters of the Alphabet, above which are placed certain corresponding
numbers, which are required in the calculations.

The following table gives the numbers to be chosen by chance (as will
be explained further on) in working the questions:--

    --------------------------
    ¦  1 ¦ 11 ¦ 22 ¦ 28 ¦ 29 ¦
    |----|----|----|----|----|
    ¦  6 ¦  2 ¦ 12 ¦ 23 ¦ 30 ¦
    |----|----|----|----|----|
    ¦ 15 ¦  7 ¦  3 ¦ 13 ¦ 24 ¦
    |----|----|----|----|----|
    ¦ 19 ¦ 16 ¦  8 ¦  4 ¦ 14 ¦
    |----|----|----|----|----|
    ¦ 25 ¦ 20 ¦ 17 ¦  9 ¦  5 ¦
    |----|----|----|----|----|
    ¦ 27 ¦ 26 ¦ 21 ¦ 18 ¦ 10 ¦
    --------------------------

The inquirer, whilst thinking _earnestly_ upon the matter he wishes
resolved by the wheel, must choose a number out of the above Table.

This is better done with the eyes closed, and the number pricked out
with a pin, so that there may be no premeditation in the choice. To
this number, thus chosen, the inquirer must add the number answering to
the first letter of his first name, which number is seen in the wheel
itself where the numbers are above the letters of the alphabet. To this
number must be added the number of the day of the week on which the
question is asked and of the planet ruling that day. Then add all these
numbers together and divide the sum by 30 as often as it can be done.
Then look for that number which is the remainder in the inner circle of
the wheel; observing in what part of the wheel it falls should there
happen to be _no_ remainder, then the number 30 must be looked for. If
the question to be propounded should be whether anything about to be
undertaken will succeed or not, should the number fall in the _upper_
part of the wheel the matter will have a happy issue; but if, on the
contrary, the number appears on the _lower_ part of the wheel the thing
in question will not be a success. In any question where time is
concerned as, for instance, as regarding how long or how short shall be
the matter in hand it must be borne in mind that the numbers in the
right half of the wheel represent _long time_--that is, that the event
about which the question is asked will be some time before it comes to
pass; whilst those in the left half of the wheel signify _short_
time--and so, whether for good or evil, shall the business quickly or
slowly come to pass.

All questions are thus to be asked but _one_, and that is, whether
a sick person shall recover or die; in which case, after proceeding to
add the numbers of the Christian name, the day of the week and the
planet, the number representing the Moon's age on the day the question
is asked must also be added; for example, if a person whose name is
Veronica--asks on a Wednesday, 20th day of the Moon, if a sick friend
should live or die, and chooses from the Table the number of 23, the
matter would be worked thus:--

    Number chosen                              23
    Number answering to the letter V            9
    Number answering to Wednesday             102
    Number answering to the planet Mercury    114
    Number of the age of the Moon              20
                                              ---
                                              268

This, divided by 30, leaves 28 remainder, which will be found to fall
in the unfortunate part of the wheel, showing that her friend will
_not_ recover.

The following table of the mystical numbers representing the planets,
and also those belonging to the days of the week which each planet
governs, is of much importance in working the wheel:--

      PLANETS.                     ¦   DAYS OF THE WEEK.
                                   ¦
    [Saturn]                   55  ¦ Saturday             45
                                   ¦
    [Jupiter]                  78  ¦ Thursday             31
                                   ¦
    [Mars]                     39  ¦ Tuesday              52
                                   ¦
    [Sun]                      34  ¦ Sunday              106
                                   ¦
    [Venus]                    45  ¦ Friday               68
                                   ¦
    [Mercury]                 114  ¦ Wednesday           102
                                   ¦
    [Moon]                     45  ¦ Monday               52

These several numbers attributed to the days of the week, as well as
those of the planet ruling the day, are of very ancient origin and are,
probably, as well as the wheel itself, a relic of former _traditional_
foreknowledge by lots and numbers.

There are certain days, however, which are evil days, on which no
question should be asked of the wheel of Pythagoras. These days are as
follows:--

    Of January, the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 9th and 11th.
    Of February, the 7th, 13th, 17th and 19th.
    Of March, the 13th, 15th and 16th.
    Of April, the 5th and 14th.
    Of May, the 8th and 14th.
    June has but one ill day, which is the 6th.
    July has two, the 16th and the 19th.
    August has also only two, the 8th and 16th.
    September has three, the 1st, 15th and 16th.
    October has only one ill day, which is the 16th.
    November has two, the 15th and 16th.
    December has three, the 6th, 7th and 11th.

This is a very old tradition, and in mediæval ages these days were
universally shunned as "ruled by evil influences." In conclusion, those
consulting the wheel of Pythagoras are advised not to ask more than one
question on the same day and to refrain from all gibing, sporting, or
jesting, and--above all--from all unbelief whilst making use of this
mystical wheel in order to know the truth.


ENVOY.

Go--little book--and teach the present age something of the wisdom
bequeathed us by the Past.





