Distributed Proofreaders Canada team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net from page images generously made
available by the Internet Archive (https://archive.org)





Transcriber's note:
      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).
      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).

                       REPRESENTATIVE CANADIANS




[Illustration: RT. HON. SIR R. L. BORDEN. P.C., K.C.M.G., K.C., LL.D.,
 Ottawa]




                    NATIONAL BIOGRAPHICAL SERIES III


                              A CYCLOPÆDIA
                                  _of_
                           CANADIAN BIOGRAPHY


Brief Biographies of Persons Distinguished in the Professional, Military
          and Political Life, and the Commerce and Industry of
                   Canada, in the Twentieth Century.


                              _Edited by_
                          HECTOR CHARLESWORTH



                                TORONTO
                    THE HUNTER-ROSE COMPANY, LIMITED
                                  1919




                                PREFACE


It is now thirty-three years since the first volume of biographies
bearing the title “Representative Canadians” was issued by the present
firm of publishers. In 1886 the scope of the work was unique, so far as
this country was concerned, for previous volumes of the kind had
confined themselves to the careers of Canadians who have won fame in
either a political or military capacity. The aim of the editors of the
first volume of “Representative Canadians” was to give recognition of
the emergence of Canada from a colonial to something like a national
status by recording something of the achievements of those who had
contributed to the intellectual, industrial and commercial growth of the
country, as well as of its political leaders. The purpose remained the
same in the second volume published in 1888, and is once more the
impulse of the present book.

The vast majority of those whose careers were recorded in 1886 have
passed away; and the same is true of those who figured in the second
volume of the series. Consequently, the earlier issues of
“Representative Canadians” grow every day more precious, for, in many
cases, they contain the sole records of men who initiated great
enterprises or furthered important movements which have left a lasting
mark on the history of Canada. We cannot but think that the reader who,
thirty or forty years hence, may chance to scan the pages of the present
volume will gather a very vivid picture of Canada as it was in one of
the crucial periods of the world’s affairs—a picture in which the
characters of those Canadians who lived and “carried on” through the
years of the greatest war in all history may be discerned in the records
of their lives. There is hardly a page in this book into which the war
does not enter directly or indirectly in some form or other, by way of
allusions to services rendered, bereavements endured, or honours gained
on the field of battle. In that sense the 1919 volume must remain
unique, and a mine of useful information for students in future
generations.

Generally speaking, in comparing the biographies of the Canadians of
to-day with those of 1886 and 1888, the reader gains a sense of this
country’s continuous expansion. The present century has witnessed a
marvellous development in the Canadian West, so that in these pages we
find numerous records showing not merely the commercial, but the
intellectual, progress of the Provinces West of the Great Lakes—stories
of brilliant careers built up by men who were mere children in the East
when the first volume was published. The reader will also note in the
biographies of business men which abound in these pages, the
ever-increasing scale on which Canadian commerce and enterprise
everywhere is conducted, so that what seemed large in 1886 is relatively
small to-day. Though some of the men whose names figure in the index are
of less importance than others, all play their part in our complex and
vigorous social life, and the story of their progress and fortunes
cannot be really tedious to any sympathetic student of humanity.

TORONTO, 1919.




                                 INDEX


        Adamson, Alan Joseph,                               124
        Adamson, John Evans,                                121
        Aikenhead, Thomas E.,                                47
        Aikins, Lieut.-Col. Sir James Albert Manning,        81
        Allan, John,                                         98
        Ames, Sir Herbert B.,                                 4
        Ami, Henry M.,                                      142
        Amyot, Lieut.-Col. John A.,                         299
        Anderson, Alexander James,                          126
        Anderson, Frederic William,                          75
        Anderson, Prof. George R.,                          144
        Anderson, James T. M.,                               65
        Antliff, Rev. James Cooper,                          52
        Arkell, Thomas Reginald,                            180
        Armstrong, Samuel,                                  174
        Arnold, William McCullough,                         114
        Arrell, Harrison,                                    52
        Arsenault, Hon. Aubin E.,                           215
        Ashby, Joseph Seraphin Aime,                        127
        Ashton, Major-General Ernest,                       270
        Askwith, John E.,                                   106
        Asselin, Major Olivar,                              144

        Bâby, Wolstan Alexander Dixie,                      229
        Bachand, Leonide Charles,                            69
        Bailey, Charles Frederick,                          218
        Baillie, Sir Frank,                                 110
        Bain, John,                                          66
        Ball, Emerson Ewart,                                 61
        Ball, Robert James,                                  64
        Ballantyne, James,                                  145
        Barnard, Sir Frank Stillman,                        223
        Barnard, Hon. George Henry,                         126
        Barrow, Hon. Edward Dodsley,                        205
        Barry, Walter H.,                                   124
        Baskerville, William Joseph,                        148
        Bates, Joseph Lever,                                165
        Bates, Thomas Nathaniel,                            272
        Beach, Mahlon F.,                                    49
        Beaumont, Ernest Joseph,                             56
        Bégin, Louis Nazaire,                                17
        Beith, Hon. Robert,                                  40
        Bellemare, Adelard,                                 125
        Bell, Clarence A. H.,                               274
        Bell, Hon. George Alexander,                        230
        Bell, John Howatt,                                   74
        Bell, John Percival,                                257
        Belcourt, Hon. Napoleon Antoine,                     61
        Bender, Prosper,                                     31
        Bennett, Richard Bedford,                           255
        Berthiaume, Arthur,                                 147
        Best, John,                                          43
        Bethune, Rev. Charles James Stewart,                 76
        Birkett, Thomas,                                    125
        Black, Henry,                                       133
        Blair, Lieutenant James K.,                         273
        Blondin, Hon. Pierre Edouard,                       212
        Bole, David W.,                                     221
        Borden, Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Laird,                    1
        Boudreau, L. N. H. Rodolphe,                        180
        Bowell, Sir Mackenzie,                               44
        Bowes, James Leslie Llewellyn,                       69
        Bowie, Lieut.-Colonel Henry William,                251
        Bowman, Charles Martin,                             275
        Boyd, Leslie Hale,                                   98
        Boyer, Major Gustave,                                90
        Boyer, Louis,                                        40
        Braden, Norman Short,                               250
        Braithwaite, Edward Ernest,                          73
        Breadner, Robert Walker,                            132
        Breithaupt, John C.,                                228
        Breithaupt, Louis J.,                                43
        Brennan, John Charles,                              131
        Briggs, William,                                     68
        Bristow, Michael George,                             73
        Brock, Lieut.-Colonel Henry,                         70
        Brock, William Rees,                                 71
        Brodeur, Hon. Louis Philippe,                       220
        Bronson, Hon. Erskine Henry,                         65
        Bronson, Henry Franklin,                             34
        Brossoit, Numa Edouard,                             274
        Buchanan, William A.,                               171
        Buckles, Daniel,                                    119
        Bulman, William John,                               131
        Burgoyne, William Bartlett,                         186
        Burpee, Lawrence Johnston,                           39
        Bulyea George Hedley Vicars,                        143
        Butler, Lieut.-Colonel Thomas Page,                 282
        Butterworth, John George Bissett,                   256
        Byrne, Daniel J.,                                   129

        Callahan, John,                                     190
        Camaraire, Alfred Frederick,                        115
        Cameron, Lieut.-Colonel Sir Douglas,                 16
        Campbell, Colin,                                    103
        Campbell, Donald Grant,                             151
        Campbell, William Brough,                           234
        Cane, James Gilbert,                                111
        Carew, John,                                         22
        Carson, Hugh,                                       145
        Cartwright, Lieut.-Colonel Robert,                  168
        Casgrain, Philippe Baby,                             27
        Cash, Edward L.,                                    157
        Cassils, Charles,                                   151
        Cave, James G.,                                     138
        Chabot, Lieut.-Colonel John Leo,                     63
        Chadwick, Edward Marion,                             37
        Chamberlain, Theodore F.,                            45
        Chambers, Colonel Ernest John,                      283
        Champagne, Napoleon,                                209
        Chapleau, Maj. Samuel Edmour St. Onge,               47
        Chaplin, James D.,                                  184
        Charlesworth, Hector,                               254
        Charlton, William Granville,                         64
        Chauvin, Hon. T. Hector,                            150
        Chisholm, William Craig,                            108
        Choquette, Ernest,                                  138
        Choquette, Philippe Auguste,                        137
        Chrysler, Francis Henry,                             80
        Clark, Lieut.-Colonel Hugh,                         100
        Clark, John Murray,                                  78
        Clute, Arthur Roger,                                 34
        Coats, Robert Hamilton,                             104
        Coburn, John W.,                                    123
        Cockshutt, William Foster,                            2
        Cody, Hon. Henry John,                              109
        Cole, George M.,                                     63
        Cole, Col. Wilmot Howard,                            28
        Colquhoun, Arthur Hugh Urquhart,                    261
        Commeford, James W.,                                139
        Conant, Gordon Daniel,                              131
        Connolly, Bernard Gervase,                          190
        Coombs, Albert Ernest,                               64
        Coristine, Major Stanley B.,                        295
        Corrigan, Ambrose Eugene,                           206
        Côté, Narcisse Omer,                                221
        Cotton, Major-General W. H.,                        249
        Cousineau, Joseph Philemon,                         192
        Cousins, George Vipond,                             159
        Cowan, William Frederick,                            84
        Cox, Herbert Coplin,                                 26
        Coyne, James Henry,                                  14
        Crannell, Levi,                                     302
        Creelman, Lieut.-Colonel John Jennings,             185
        Cronyn, Hume,                                       228
        Cross, Alexander S. G.,                             151
        Cross, Charles Wilson,                               32
        Crossland, E. F.,                                   136
        Crothers, Hon. Thomas Wilson,                        90
        Crowther, William H.,                               190
        Cudmore, Sedley Anthony,                            302
        Currie, General Sir Arthur William,                 165
        Cutten, George Barton,                              193

        Dalley, Frederick Fenner,                           218
        Dalton, Hon. Charles,                               204
        Daniels, Hon. Orlando T.,                           206
        Dargavel, John Robertson,                           133
        Davey, James,                                        68
        David, Hon. Laurent Olivier,                        182
        Davidson, James Wheeler,                            191
        Davidson, William McCartney,                        225
        Davis, Albert Mayno,                                229
        Davis, Aubrey,                                      176
        Dawson, Arthur Osborne,                              32
        De Celles, Alfred Duclos,                            66
        Delage, Cyrille F.,                                 195
        Demers, Joseph,                                     160
        Denis, J. Wilfred,                                   69
        Denton, Frank,                                       62
        Deroche, William Paschal,                           172
        de Tremaudan, A. H.,                                 76
        Detwiler, Noah Bechtel,                             277
        Dewart, Herbert Hartley,                            275
        Dickson, Rev. James A. R.,                          136
        Dinnick, Lieut.-Col. Wilfrid Servington,            193
        Diver, Frederick,                                   125
        Dobell, Sir Charles Macpherson,                      24
        Doherty, Hon. Charles Joseph,                       156
        Dollard, Rev. James B.,                             184
        Donogh, John Ormsby,                                161
        Donovan, Albert Edward,                             300
        Doughty, Arthur George,                             297
        Douglas, James,                                      32
        Douglas, William James,                             195
        Dowling, John S.,                                   176
        Drayton, Sir Henry Lumley,                           23
        Drayton, Philip Henry,                              276
        Drysdale, William,                                  186
        Duclos, Arnold Willard,                             285
        Duff, Hon. Lyman Poore,                             271
        Dunlop, Edward Arunah,                              237
        Dunning, Hon. Charles Avery,                        216
        Dwyer, William Henry,                                72
        Dymond, Allan Malcolm,                               41

        Earle, Rufus Redmond,                               119
        Easson, Robert Henry,                               281
        Eddis, Wilton C.,                                    69
        Edwards, John Wesley,                                45
        Edwards, Hon. William Cameron,                      123
        Elliot, Major-General Harry Macintire,              284
        Elliott, John Campbell,                              60
        Ellis, James Albert,                                102
        Ellis, John F.,                                     178
        Elson, John Melbourne,                              288
        Englehart, Joel Lewis,                              173
        Ethier, Joseph Arthur Calixte,                      133
        Evanturel, Gustave,                                  67
        Ewart, David,                                       174
        Ewing, William,                                     194

        Farris, Hon. John Wallace de Beque,                 214
        Farrow, Robinson Russell,                           238
        Faulkner, Hon. George Everett,                      206
        Ferguson, Hon. George Howard,                       196
        Ferguson, Hon. William Nassau,                       39
        Fielding, Hon. William Stevens,                     279
        Fifield, Albert Frank,                              198
        Finlayson, George Daniel,                           239
        Finnie, David Maclachan,                            179
        Fisher, His Honor Walter George,                    185
        Flavelle, William M.,                               134
        Flint, Thomas Barnard,                               79
        Flynn, Edmund James,                                263
        Foran, Joseph Kearney,                              280
        Forin, John Andrew,                                 122
        Forman, James C.,                                   247
        Forster, J. W. L.,                                  172
        Foster, Thomas Wilfred,                             248
        Foster, Hon. Walter Edward,                         254
        Fraleck, Edison Baldwin,                             67
        Fraser, George B.,                                   71
        Freiman, Archibald J.,                              132

        Galbraith, Walter Stuart,                           147
        Gale, George Charles,                               134
        Gale, Robert Henry,                                 288
        Gariepy, Wilfrid,                                   127
        Garland, John L.,                                   105
        Garneau, Sir George,                                 25
        Gartshore, Lieut.-Colonel William Moir,             180
        Gibbon, Arthur Playford,                            232
        Gibbons, John Joseph,                                69
        Gibson, Brig.-General Sir John Morison,             242
        Gibson, Theron,                                      27
        Gill, Robert,                                       289
        Gillespie, Professor Peter,                          74
        Girard, A. D.,                                      167
        Girard, Joseph,                                      31
        Godfrey, Oswald Julius,                             149
        Goodeve, Hon. Arthur Samuel,                         34
        Goring, C. C.,                                      193
        Gouin, Hon. Sir Jean Lomer,                          22
        Graham, Hon. George Perry,                          267
        Grange, Edward Alexander Andrew,                     74
        Grange, Edward Wilkinson,                            39
        Grant, Gordon,                                      197
        Grierson, Hon. George Allison,                      133
        Groves, Abraham,                                     38
        Guilbault, Joseph Pierre Octave,                     34
        Gwatkin, Major-General W. G.,                       260
        Gwynne, Brig.-General Reginald John,                286

        Hackett, Edward,                                     37
        Hagedorn, Charles Kappler,                          116
        Hamilton, Frank Kent,                               223
        Hamilton, Ralph Bergen,                             189
        Hanna, Hon. William John,                           287
        Hannon, James Willson,                              159
        Hara, Frederick North,                              198
        Hare, Rev. John James,                              269
        Harkin, James, B.,                                  174
        Harper, John Murdoch,                               129
        Harris, Reginald V.,                                 59
        Harris, William Gean,                               175
        Harrison, Nathaniel Isles,                          147
        Hastings, David,                                     75
        Hazen, Hon. Sir John Douglas,                        93
        Heakes, Francis Riley,                              152
        Hearst, Hon. Sir William Howard,                      7
        Heaton, Ernest,                                      87
        Hebert, Zepherin,                                    88
        Helmer, Brig.-General Richard Alexis,               265
        Henderson, Alexander,                               235
        Henderson, William Andrew,                          118
        Henry, David Edouard,                               231
        Henry, Hon. George Stewart,                         282
        Higinbotham, John D.,                               143
        Hill, Hamnett Pinhey,                               140
        Hinds, Leonard D’Arcy Bernard,                       33
        Hocken, Norman Cecil,                               195
        Hodgetts, Colonel Charles Alfred,                   223
        Hogg, Andrew Brydon,                                121
        Hogg, William Drummond,                             285
        Honeywell, Major Frederick Henry,                   164
        Hook, Thomas,                                       300
        Hopkins, Arthur George,                             150
        Hopkins, Innes,                                     188
        Hore, George Charles,                               134
        Hough, John Atwell,                                 198
        Hudson, Hon. Albert Blellock,                       145
        Hughes, Brig.-General William St. Pierre,           258
        Hunnisett, James Edward,                            201
        Hunter, Lieut.-Colonel A. T.,                        37
        Hunter, Major W. E. Lincoln,                        281
        Hurdman, George Charles,                            271
        Hutchison, Colonel William,                         241

        Ingersoll, James Hamilton,                          178
        Ingram, George C.,                                  123
        Innes, Hugh Patterson,                              199
        Irwin, William Nassau,                              234
        Izzard, Dennis Jabez,                                95

        Jacobs, Samuel W.,                                   89
        James, Edgar Augustus,                              178
        Jarvis, Ernest Frederick,                           191
        Jenkins, Lieut.-Col. Stephen Rice Jenkins,          213
        Jetté, the Hon. Sir Louis,                           10
        Johnson, Hon. Thomas Herman,                        238
        Johnston, Ebenezer Forsyth Blackie,                  97
        Jones, George Burpee,                                95
        Jones, Henry Victor Franklin,                        87
        Jones, James William,                               161

        Kastner, Gideon,                                    163
        Keefe, R. Daniel,                                    86
        Kelso, John Joseph,                                 194
        Kemp, Hon. Sir Albert Edward,                        16
        Kennedy, William Costello,                           11
        Kent, Joseph,                                       110
        King, Hon. James H.,                                195
        King, Hon. William Lyon Mackenzie,                  286
        Kyte, George William,                                77

        Labelle, Alfred Eugene,                             158
        Laidlaw, Lorne Nelson,                              148
        Landry, Hon. David V.,                              142
        Langelier, Hon. Sir François-Xavier,                 18
        Langley, James P.,                                   44
        Langton, Brig.-General Joseph Graham,               266
        Laurier, the late Rt. Hon. Sir Wilfrid,               3
        Law, Bonnar B.,                                     200
        Lawlor, H. W.,                                       36
        Leblanc, Sir Pierre-Evariste,                       159
        Lemieux, Auguste,                                    35
        Lemieux, Hon. Sir François-Xavier,                   12
        Lennie, Robert Scott,                               141
        Lennox, Lieut.-Colonel Thomas Herbert,              207
        Leonard, Lieut.-Colonel Reuben Wells,               268
        Lesperance, Albert Paneran,                         246
        L’Esperance, Hon. David Ovide,                       85
        Levy, Gabriel Herman,                               221
        Lighthall, William Douw,                            101
        Longley, Hon. J. W.,                                 51
        Lumsden, John,                                      315
        Lynch, Hon. William Warren,                          19

        MacAulay, Brock,                                    157
        Macaulay, John,                                     101
        Macaulay, Thomas Basset,                             99
        Macdonald, Sir Donald Alexander,                    225
        MacDonald, Donald D.,                               175
        Macdonald, John,                                     50
        MacDonald, Neil S.,                                  48
        Macdonald, Selkirk M.,                               96
        Machado, Jose Antonio,                              211
        Machin, Lt.-Col. Harold Arthur Clement,             203
        Mackay, Hon. Col. Alexander Howard,                 191
        Mackenzie, Daniel D.,                               294
        Mackenzie, Hugh Blair,                              158
        MacKenzie, John Angus,                              177
        Mackenzie, Norman,                                   93
        Mackie, George D.,                                  150
        Mackintosh, Charles Herbert,                         56
        MacLean, Archie,                                     86
        MacLean, Hon. John Duncan,                          117
        Mann, Alexander Robert,                             168
        Marchand, Pierre,                                   249
        Marcile, Joseph Edmond,                             155
        Margeson, Lieut.-Colonel Joseph Willis,             217
        Marnoch, George Robert,                             104
        Marsh, Lieut.-Colonel Lorne Wilmot,                  88
        Marshall, Lieut.-Col. Kenric Reid,                  302
        Marshall, Lieut.-Colonel Noel G. L.,                169
        Martin, Hon. William Melville,                      231
        Massey, C. D.,                                       53
        Massey, Charles Vincent,                            202
        Mather, James,                                      205
        Matthews, George Sands,                             155
        McBrien, Frederick George,                          155
        McCarthy, Jesse Overn,                              201
        McClennaghan, Stewart,                              169
        McConnell, Richard George,                          165
        McCorkill, Hon. Justice John Charles,                20
        McCuaig, Clarence James,                            111
        McCuish, Robert George,                             120
        McCullough, Charles Robert,                          48
        McCurdy, Fleming Blanchard,                         266
        McEvoy, John Millar,                                283
        McFall, Robert James,                               298
        McGiverin, Harold Buchanan,                         177
        McInenly, William,                                   60
        McInnes, William,                                   203
        McKay, Hon. James,                                  159
        McKeon, Very Rev. Dean P. J.,                       178
        McLean, Angus Alexander,                            240
        McLean, Hon. Daniel,                                160
        McLean, Major-Gen. Hugh Havelock,                    62
        McMahon, Edward,                                     89
        McMahon, James Alexander,                           259
        McNeeley, John Strachan Lewis,                      153
        McNeil, Most Rev. Neil,                             175
        McNeillie, James Richardson,                         36
        McQuarrie, William Garland,                         188
        Meek, Edward,                                        58
        Meighen, Hon. Arthur,                                 8
        Merner, Jonathan Joseph,                            154
        Middlebró, William S.,                               87
        Mikel, William Charles,                              54
        Mills, Charles Henry,                                93
        Miller, Frederick Robert,                           213
        Miller, Lieut.-Colonel John Bellamy,                262
        Mitchell, Hon. Robert Menzies,                       11
        Mitchell, Hon. Walter George,                       245
        Minehan, Rev. Lancelot,                              85
        Mondou, Alberic Archie,                             153
        Montgomery, Hugh John,                               96
        Morehouse, Oscar Emery,                             135
        Morgan, Colin Daniel,                                52
        Morin, Pierre Alphonse,                             270
        Morin, Victor,                                       75
        Murphy, Hon. Charles,                                28
        Murray, Hon. Robert,                                252
        Musson, Charles Joseph,                              53

        Nanton, Sir Augustus Meredith,                      183
        Nash, Charles William,                              280
        Nasmith, Colonel George Gallie,                     263
        Neill, Charles Ernest,                              278
        Nesbitt, Arthur Russel,                             249
        Nicholls, Lieut.-Colonel Hon. Frederic,             264
        Nicholson, Arthur Edwin,                            277
        Nickle, William Folger,                             107
        Norcross, Joseph W.,                                201
        Northrup, William Barton,                           250
        Notman, John Charles,                               177
        Noyes, John Powell,                                 257

        Odlum, Edward,                                      141
        O’Hara, Francis Charles Trench,                     118
        Oliver, Hon. John,                                  196
        O’Reilly, His Honor James Redmond,                   86
        Owens, Edward W. J.,                                299

        Paisley, James K.,                                   83
        Panet, Lieut.-Colonel Charles Louis,                279
        Paquet, Eugene,                                     157
        Pardee, Frederick Forsyth,                           33
        Pardoe, Avern,                                      176
        Parent, Hon. Simon Napoleon,                        226
        Parmelee, William George,                            20
        Parsons, S. R.,                                     246
        Paton, Hugh,                                        177
        Patrick, John Alexander Macdonald,                  120
        Patterson, John Pratt,                               61
        Payne, Francis Freeman,                             150
        Pedley, Frank,                                      213
        Pennington, David Henry,                            117
        Perley, Sir George Halsey,                          205
        Perry, Nathaniel Irwin,                             139
        Petrie, Harry David,                                275
        Peuchen, Lieut.-Colonel Arthur Godfrey,             121
        Pope, Major William Walter,                          82
        Poulin, Stanislas,                                  101
        Power, William,                                     161
        Pratt, Edward Courtney,                              82
        Price, Samuel,                                       95
        Price, Sir William,                                  15
        Pringle, Robert Abercrombie,                        105
        Pritchard, Henry Thomas,                            215
        Proudfoot, William,                                 210
        Proulx, Edmond,                                     161
        Pugh, Thomas James,                                 181
        Pullan, E.,                                         277
        Pyne, Lieut.-Colonel Hon. Robert Allan,              90

        Rawlings, Henry Edward,                             197
        Regan, Frank,                                       189
        Reid, Frank,                                         85
        Reid, William Brown,                                237
        Rhodes, Hon. Edgar Nelson,                           13
        Richardson, John,                                   297
        Riddell, Hon. William Renwick,                       82
        Roadhouse, William Albert,                          109
        Robb, Thomas,                                        54
        Robertson, Edward Blake,                            184
        Robertson, Hon. Gideon Decker,                      240
        Robertson, John Ross,                                 5
        Robertson, Norman,                                   94
        Robertson, William John,                             91
        Robertson, William Robert,                          199
        Robinette, Thomas Cowper,                           252
        Roche, Hon. William James,                          102
        Roche, Francis James,                               292
        Rogers, Albert S.,                                  183
        Rogers, John Morrison,                              261
        Rose, George Maclean,                               272
        Rose, Hon. Mr. Justice Hugh Edward,                  93
        Rose, William Oliver,                               188
        Ross, James Gibb,                                    21
        Ross, John Theodore,                                261
        Rowell, Hon. Newton Wesley,                         202
        Russell, Adam Lothian,                              235
        Rust, C. H.,                                        124
        Rutherford, Colonel Hon. Alexander Cameron,         278
        Rutherford, John Gunion,                            226

        Saint Cyr, Joseph Fortunat,                          98
        Sainte-Pierre, F.,                                   97
        St. Jean, Ulric,                                    157
        Samuel, Sigmund,                                     92
        Sauvé, Arthur,                                      203
        Sayles, Edwin Roy,                                  164
        Scott, F. Stewart,                                  183
        Scott, James Guthrie,                                30
        Scott, William Duncan,                              106
        Seguin, Paul Arthur,                                 92
        Senecal, Francis Albert,                            204
        Sharpe, Samuel Simpson,                             100
        Shepherd, Simpson James,                            123
        Shier, Walter C.,                                    91
        Shillington, Lieut.-Col. Adam Tozeland,             236
        Shortly, Orville Benjamin,                          248
        Shutt, Frank Thomas,                                 96
        Sifton, Hon. Arthur Lewis,                          209
        Sinclair, Robert Victor,                            234
        Sinclair, Victor Albert,                             94
        Sine, Frederick,                                    158
        Sloan, Hon. William,                                207
        Smart, Russell Sutherland,                          259
        Smith, Hon. Ernest Albert,                          214
        Smith, John Charles,                                 92
        Smith, William,                                      53
        Stapells, Richard A.,                               219
        Starr, J. R. L.,                                    156
        Stewart, Charles,                                    99
        Stewart, Dougald,                                   160
        Street, Lieut.-Colonel Douglas Richmond,            140
        Struthers, James Douglas,                           163
        Studholme, Allan,                                   115
        Sutherland, Donald,                                  60
        Sutherland, Fred C.,                                296
        Sutherland, Thomas Fraser,                          181

        Taschereau, Hon. Louis Alexander,                    21
        Taylor, Albert William,                             204
        Taylor, Hon. George Edward,                         151
        Taylor, Lt.-Col. Hon. George,                       296
        Tessier, Auguste Maurice,                           111
        Tetreault, Joseph Sylvini,                          108
        Thoburn, William,                                   135
        Thompson, Alfred,                                   162
        Thomson, Levi,                                       70
        Thornton, Hon. Robert Stirton,                      217
        Todd, John Lancelot,                                121
        Tory, John A.,                                      108
        Tourigny, Alfred F. X.,                             115
        Trahan, Arthur,                                     103
        Tremeear, William J.,                                68
        Turgeon, Hon. Adelard,                               12
        Turgeon, Hon. William Ferdinand Alphonse,           215
        Turnbull, Walter Renwick,                           169
        Tytler, William,                                    138

        Vance, His Honor, George M.,                        160
        Vaughan, Marshall,                                  293
        Veale, Philip Henry,                                239
        Veniot, Hon. Peter John,                            208

        Wade, Mark Sweeten,                                 144
        Wainwright, Arnold,                                 164
        Walker, William Simpson,                            187
        Wallace, Thomas George,                             152
        Wallis, Horace,                                     116
        Ward, Lieut.-Colonel Henry Alfred,                  105
        Watson, Brigadier-General Sir David,                162
        Watson, Senator Robert,                             295
        Watt, John Ralston,                                 116
        Webber, John A.,                                    233
        Weichel, William George,                            154
        Weir, William M.,                                   158
        Weld, Edmund,                                       220
        Weld, John,                                         253
        Wetherell, James Elgin,                             222
        Whalen, George Frederick,                           192
        White, Arthur V.,                                    55
        White, Gerald Verner,                               136
        White, James,                                       236
        White, John T.,                                     181
        White, Rt. Hon. Sir William Thomas,                  13
        Whitney, Edward Canfield,                           293
        Widdifield, John W.,                                115
        Wilkes, Alfred John,                                112
        Williams, Herbert Hale,                             171
        Williams, Right Rev. Lennox Waldron,                216
        Williams-Taylor, Sir Frederick,                     200
        Willis, James E.,                                   264
        Wilson, Henry George Wilberforce,                   148
        Wilson, James Lockie,                               114
        Wilson, Peter Edward,                               168
        Winkler, Hon. Valentine,                            208
        Wood, Rev. William Robertson,                       253
        Woods, Lieut.-Colonel James W.,                     146
        Workman, Mark,                                      113
        Wright, Alexander Whyte,                            290
        Wright, George,                                     149
        Wright, George Craig,                               277
        Wright, Harry George,                               199
        Wright, William J.,                                 104
        Wrong, Professor George McKinnon,                   113
        Wylie, Newton,                                      294




                         LIST OF PHOTOGRAVURES


        Askwith, Jno. E, Ottawa.

        Baillie, Sir Frank W., Toronto.
        Baskerville, W. J., Ottawa.
        Beach, the late M. F.
        Beaumont, E. J., Kitchener.
        Birkett, Thomas, Ottawa.
        Blondin, Hon. P. E., Ottawa.
        Borden, Right. Hon. Sir R. L., Ottawa.
        Bowman, Charles M., Southampton.
        Breadner, R. W., Ottawa.
        Breithaupt, J. C., Kitchener.
        Breithaupt, L. J., Kitchener.
        Brennan, J. C., Ottawa.
        Bristow, M. G., Ottawa.
        Bulman, W., Winnipeg.
        Butterworth, J. G. B., Ottawa.

        Cowan, the late W. F., Ottawa.
        Currie, Major-General Sir Arthur William,
        Victoria, B.C.

        Dwyer, W. H., Ottawa.

        Edwards, Senator W. C., Ottawa.
        Englehart, Jacob L., Petrolia, Ontario.

        Finnie, D. M., Ottawa.

        Gale, R. H., Vancouver, B.C.
        Gariepy, Hon. Wilfrid, Edmonton.
        Garland, John L., Ottawa.
        Gibson, Brig.-General Sir John M., Hamilton.
        Gouin, Sir Lomer, Quebec.
        Graham, Hon. Geo. P., Brockville.
        Grant, Gordon, Ottawa.

        Harris, W. G., Toronto.
        Hebert, Zepherin, Montreal.
        Henry, D. E., Ottawa.
        Hodgetts, Colonel C. A., Ottawa.
        Hunter, Major W. E. Lincoln, Toronto.
        Hutchison, Colonel Wm., Ottawa.

        Kennedy, W. C., Windsor.
        King, Hon. W. L. Mackenzie, Ottawa.

        Laurier, the late Right Hon. Sir Wilfrid

        Macaulay, T. B., Montreal.
        Machin, Colonel H. A. C., Kenora.
        Mackenzie, John Angus, Ottawa.
        McClennaghan, Stewart, Ottawa.
        McInenly, William, Ottawa.
        McMahon, E., Ottawa.
        Mitchell, Hon. W. G., Quebec.

        Parsons, S. R., Toronto.
        Paton, Hugh, Montreal.
        Peuchen, Lieut.-Colonel Arthur, Toronto.

        Reid, W. B., Toronto.
        Robertson, E. Blake, Ottawa.

        Shillington, Colonel A. T., Ottawa.
        Shortly, Orville B., Toronto.
        Sifton, Hon. Arthur L., Ottawa.
        Stapells, R. A., Toronto.
        Sutherland, F. C., Toronto.

        Turgeon, Hon. Adelard, Quebec.

        Vaughan, Marshall, Welland, Ontario.

        White, Right. Hon. Sir W. T., Ottawa.
        Whitney, E. C., Ottawa.
        Woods, Lieut.-Colonel James W., Ottawa.
        Wright, George, Toronto.




                              A CYCLOPÆDIA

                                  _of_

                           CANADIAN BIOGRAPHY

=Borden, Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Laird, P.C., K.C.M.G., K.C., LL.D.=,
Premier of Canada (Ottawa, Ont.), eldest son of Andrew Borden and Eunice
Laird, was born at Grand Pré, Nova Scotia, on June 26, 1854. He was
educated at Acadia Villa Academy, Horton, and for a time a Professor in
Glenwood Institute, N.J. His great-great-grandfather went to King’s
County, Nova Scotia, with early settlers from New England, in 1760, and
upon returning to Massachusetts gave his land in Nova Scotia to his son,
the great-grandfather of the subject of this sketch. Upon returning to
Nova Scotia, Sir Robert studied law and was called to the Bar in 1878.
He first practised at Kentville, N.S., and later moved to Halifax,
succeeding the late Sir John Thompson, then Prime Minister of Canada, in
the firm of Thompson, Graham and Tupper. Before removing to Ottawa he
was head of the law firm of Borden, Ritchie & Chisholm, of Halifax, and
for ten years was President of the Nova Scotia Barristers’ Society. He
was made a Q.C. in 1900; an Honorary LL.D. of Queen’s University in
1903; an Honorary LL.D., St. Francis Xavier University in 1905; an
Honorary LL.D. of McGill University in 1913. In 1896 he was elected to
the House of Commons from Halifax in the General Elections, and
re-elected in 1900, but was an unsuccessful candidate at the General
Elections in 1904. Upon the retirement of Edward Kidd, M.P., for
Carleton, Ont., he was elected by acclamation in his stead at the
by-election held on February 4, 1905, and was re-elected by a large
majority at the general elections in 1908, when he was also elected in
Halifax, N.S. He later resigned his Carleton seat, preferring to
represent Halifax. At the General Elections of 1911, he was again
returned for Halifax, and continued to represent that constituency up to
the present time (1918). On February 6, 1901, he was chosen leader of
the Conservative Party in the House of Commons, and upon the resignation
of Sir Wilfrid Laurier and his Cabinet on October 6, 1911, following the
defeat of the Liberal Government on the question of Reciprocity with the
United States, he was sent for by His Excellency Earl Grey and was
entrusted with the task of forming a Cabinet. With a very large majority
at his disposal, he found the task an easy one, and was successful in
gathering around him men who have since carried on the government of the
country in one of the most critical periods of its existence. At the
time the first Borden government assumed office the world war was
unthought of except as a vague speculation, which few students of world
finance and world politics believed would ever become a fact, and the
new Premier did not foresee that before him lay the most difficult task
that had ever confronted a Canadian Government. In the summer of 1914
the conflict which ultimately developed into a war between the Central
Empires and most of the other civilized powers, came like a bolt from
the blue. On August 4, 1914, there was great curiosity in the
chancelleries of Europe as to whether the overseas dominions of the
British Empire would stand behind Great Britain. Germany, on the day she
started the war, believed that they would not, and it was prophesied in
Berlin that Canada would seek separation from the Empire. Sir Robert
Borden at once gave the answer by placing the entire resources of the
Dominion at the disposal of the Motherland; and on receiving an
intimation from the late Lord Kitchener, that men were the first
necessity, immediately called Parliament together to vote the necessary
money. His government commenced the training and equipment of a first
volunteer expeditionary force of 35,000, with provision for its further
extension at need. This expeditionary force was partly trained at
Valcartier camp, Quebec, and partly at Salisbury Plains, England, and
first went into action at the second battle of Ypres in the spring of
1915. In the words of Viscount French, at that time Commander-in-Chief
of the British forces in France, it “saved the situation” and barred the
way to the Channel Ports from the Germans. In 1915 Sir Robert, who had
been honored with the title of G.C.M.G. shortly before the outbreak of
the conflict, visited Great Britain and France and, convincing himself
that the struggle would be very long and difficult, pledged Canada to
provide an aggregate of 500,000 trained men should the need arise. He
and his government also made arrangements whereby Canadian manufacturers
should engage largely in the production of munitions, the credits for
such contracts being financed by the Canadian administration. The same
policy was pursued in connection with contracts for food supplies, with
the result that throughout the war there was a continued trade expansion
and financial opulence that enabled Canada to make sacrifices that would
otherwise have been impossible to her. During his visits to the front
Sir Robert kept himself fully in touch with the needs of the Canadian
army, and resolved to make it a first consideration in all his policies.
A trip to Great Britain and France in the early part of 1917 convinced
him that, in view of the dark outlook for peace, it would be necessary
for Canada to adopt the policy of conscription, which had already been
reluctantly adopted in Great Britain by Mr. Asquith, and had become the
policy of the United States, which had recently entered the war. It was
clear to Sir Robert that this policy could only be effectively imposed
by consent of both parties in the House of Commons, and on his return to
Canada in May, 1917, he announced conscription as his policy and an
abandonment of party government. He was at first stoutly opposed both in
the ranks of his own party and by his political opponents. Nevertheless,
after long and patient negotiations he was successful in winning
practically the entire body of English-speaking Liberals to his way of
thinking, and conscription carried in the House of Commons in the latter
part of July, 1917, by the greatest majority ever given so momentous a
measure. He then proceeded to form a Union Government almost equally
representative of Conservatives and Liberals. Early in December of 1917
this government, with Sir Robert as Prime Minister, appealed to the
people, and was supported by almost the entire mass of English-speaking
constituencies, giving him the largest majority that any political
leader has ever enjoyed in this country. As a result of the adoption of
conscription, Canada was enabled by the time peace was declared to
fulfil her pledge of sending 500,000 men to aid in the war against
autocracy—a contribution which has made this country famous throughout
the world. Already, on January 1, 1912, Sir Robert had been sworn in as
a member of the Imperial Privy Council, the highest office that up to
that time had been held in the Motherland by a Canadian. On his arrival
in London in June, 1918, he was invited by the Prime Minister, Hon.
David Lloyd-George to become a member of the Imperial War Cabinet, a
post which he held during the duration of the war. This was followed in
November of 1918 by an invitation to become one of Great Britain’s
Imperial representatives at the negotiations preliminary to and
coincident with the Peace Conference to resolve the disasters of the war
and at once proceeded overseas. Sir Robert’s Imperial services have been
such, and his legal attainments are so well known that at the time of
writing his elevation to the peerage as a colonial representative on the
legal committee of the Privy Council, which is the Court of Appeal for
the whole Empire, is being strongly advocated in the Motherland. In his
private relations Sir Robert is greatly beloved, and though his duties
have brought him in contact with all the leading figures of Great
Britain, France and the United States, he is a thorough democrat in
bearing. His favorite recreation is golf and he has played with many
world-famous statesmen, though he does not claim to be a champion. He is
an Anglican in religion and a member of many clubs on both sides of the
Atlantic. In September of 1889 he married Laura, daughter of the late T.
H. Bond, of Halifax, and never fails to acknowledge the great aid and
assistance that has been rendered him by Lady Borden in building up his
illustrious career. They reside at 201 Wurtemburg St., Ottawa.




[Illustration: THE LATE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR WILFRID LAURIER]




=Laurier, the late Rt. Hon. Sir Wilfrid, P.C., G.C.M.G., K.C., D.C.L.
(Oxon.), LL.D.= (Ottawa, Ont.), son of the late Carolus Laurier, P.L.S.,
and his wife, Marcelle Martineau; born at St. Lin, Quebec, on November
20, 1841, and educated at mixed schools in his native parish and at
L’Assomption College. As a law student he entered the office of the late
Hon. R. Laflamme in 1860, and studied at McGill University; received
B.C.L. in 1864 and was called to the Bar in the same year; was appointed
a Q.C. in 1880, and became head of the law firm of Laurier & Lavergne.
In the earlier years of his professional career he edited and
contributed to several newspapers. In May 13, 1868, he married Miss Zoe
Lafontaine. He was elected to the Legislative Assembly for Drummond and
Arthabaska in 1871, and resigned to contest the same riding for the
House of Commons at the general elections in 1874, and was elected; was
sworn in a Privy Councillor and appointed Minister of Inland Revenue in
the Mackenzie administration, on October 8, 1877, and on going back for
re-election, was defeated by D. O. Bourbeau, who obtained a majority of
forty. Later he was elected for Quebec East, a seat vacated by I.
Thibaudeau, and was re-elected for the same Riding at the general
elections of 1878, 1882, 1887, 1891, 1896 and 1900, and also elected for
Saskatchewan, N.W.T., at the general elections of 1896; was re-elected
to the House of Commons at general elections of 1904 for Quebec East and
Wright, and elected to sit for Quebec East; in 1908 was re-elected for
Quebec East, and was also returned for the City of Ottawa, and again
elected to sit for Quebec East; in 1911 he was elected for both Quebec
East and Soulanges; and in 1918 for Quebec East. In October, 1878, he
resigned with the Mackenzie Government, and was elected leader of the
Liberal Party in the House of Commons in 1887. He issued a call for a
Dominion Liberal Convention in 1893, which was held at Ottawa. Upon the
defeat of the Tupper Government at the general elections, June 23, 1896,
he was called on by Lord Aberdeen, Governor-General, to form a ministry
on July 8, 1896, on which date Sir Charles Tupper resigned office; was
sworn in as President of the Privy Council, July 11, 1896, and formed
his Ministry, July 13, 1896. He was appointed by a sub-committee of the
Privy Council to arrange for the settlement of the Manitoba School
Question and an agreement was reached in November of the same year. On
the occasion of the celebration of Her Majesty Queen Victoria’s Diamond
Jubilee at London, Eng., June, 1897, he represented Canada, and was
created a Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St.
Michael and St. George; was received in audience by the Sovereign and
accorded the leading place in the great Jubilee State Procession of all
the Colonial dignitaries. Oxford and Cambridge Universities conferred
upon him the degree of D.C.L. (hon.) during this visit. He was sworn in
an Imperial Privy Councillor July 6, 1897; was made an honorary member
of the Cobden Club, and received from it a gold medal in recognition of
his services in the cause of international free exchange; was presented
by the President of France with the Star of a Grand Officer of the
legion of Honour, at Havre, July 29, 1897, being the highest but one of
that order; was received in audience by His Holiness the Pope, August
12, 1897. While in England he succeeded in securing Her Majesty’s
Government’s assent to the denunciation of the commercial treaties with
Germany and Belgium, which stood in the way of Canada’s new tariff,
extending a preference to the United Kingdom. On his return to Canada he
was accorded public receptions at Quebec, Montreal, Toronto and Ottawa,
and received from Toronto and Queen’s Universities the honorary degrees
of LL.D. In November, 1897, he went to Washington in the interest of
better relations between the two countries, and was a member of the
Joint Commission which met at Quebec, August 23, 1898, to discuss
questions affecting jointly Great Britain, Canada and the United States.
He welcomed the present King, then Duke of Cornwall and York, to Canada
in September, 1901, and accompanied the Royal Party through the
Dominion; was invited, and attended, the Coronation of King Edward VII,
in 1902, sailing June 14, arriving in Liverpool June 21, and in London,
June 22. The Coronation, fixed for June 26, was postponed on June 24,
but took place on August 9. On June 30 he attended a Colonial Conference
at London, and on July 26 received the freedom of the City of Edinburgh,
and was honored with the degree of LL.D. by the Edinburgh University. He
was entertained by the City of Glasgow, July 28, visited the continent,
and sailed for Canada on October 7, arriving at Quebec, October 17, and
at Ottawa, October 18, receiving a great civic welcome at the City Hall.
On New Year’s Day, 1904, he was presented by His Excellency the
Governor-General, with the Fenian Raid medal for services as a volunteer
in 1866. In 1907 he attended the Imperial Conference at London, Eng., as
a representative of Canada, and was accorded the freedom of London,
Bristol, Liverpool and other cities; and in 1911 he attended the
Imperial Conference in England and represented Canada at the coronation
of King George and Queen Mary. Following the defeat of his Party at the
polls on September 21, 1911, on October 6 he tendered the resignation of
himself and Cabinet to Earl Grey, and advised His Excellency to call
upon Mr. R. L. Borden, to form a Cabinet. From that date until his death
on Feb. 17, 1919, he continued to lead the Liberal Party, and in 1917
celebrated his seventy-fifth birthday. He again led his party in the
general election of December, 1917, but was defeated owing to the fact
that many followers had parted company with him on the issue of
Conscription. Sir Wilfrid’s end came suddenly as a result of an effusion
of blood to the brain. He was stricken while preparing to go to church
on Sunday, Feb. 16, and passed away the following afternoon. The death
of no Canadian had previously evoked such tributes as were printed and
uttered, not only in Canada, but throughout the British Empire and the
United States. His remains were accorded the honor of a State funeral in
Ottawa on Saturday, Feb. 22, 1919, which was the most impressive
function of its kind known on any continent since the death of Lincoln.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ames, Sir Herbert B., K.B., LL.D., M.P.= (Montreal, Que.), born June
27, 1863, at Montreal, of which city he has been a life-long resident.
He is the only son of the late Evan Fisher Ames (who founded the shoe
manufacturing concern of Ames, Holden & Company in 1856), and of
Caroline Matilda Brown, his wife, who was a native of New York City. Mr.
E. F. Ames came to Canada from Conway, Mass., which district he
represented in the Massachusetts Legislature in 1852. He established
himself in Montreal, and became one of the leading Canadian
manufacturers. Sir Herbert Ames was educated in the schools of Montreal,
subsequently entering Amherst College at Amherst, Mass., graduating from
there with the degree of B.A. in 1885, and having had conferred on him
the further title of LL.D. in 1915. When in college he was a member of
the Alpha Phi Fraternity. In August, 1885, after leaving Amherst, he
entered the firm of Ames, Holden & Company, at Montreal, remaining in
that business until 1893. He next interested himself in municipal reform
and became President of an organization of young men known as the
Volunteer Electoral League, which body was largely instrumental in
bringing about the reformation of the City Council. In 1898 Mr. Ames was
elected a member of the Montreal City Council for St. Antoine Ward, and
served his constituency for eight years. During that period he was a
member of the Police Commission, of the Road Commission and for four
years served as Chairman of the Board of Health. In 1895 Mr. Ames was
named a member of the Council of Public Instruction of the Province of
Quebec, which body supervises the entire school system of the province.
Mr. Ames was first elected a member of the House of Commons, Canada, in
1904, having a majority of 650. In 1908 he was again elected by 850 of a
majority, and in 1911 elected for the third time by a majority of over
2,000; again re-elected in December, 1917. On the formation of the
Borden Government, in 1911, Mr. Ames was appointed to the important
position of chairman of the Select Standing Committee on Banking and
Commerce, to which all bills pertaining to Banks, Trust and Loan and
Insurance Companies are referred for examination and report. In 1903 he
was a member of the National Committee to entertain the Chambers of
Commerce of the Empire, and with them travelled throughout the Dominion.
In 1909, as representative of the Montreal Board of Trade, Mr. Ames
attended the meeting of the Chambers of Commerce at Sydney, Australia.
He has travelled extensively throughout Australia, Japan, Egypt, India,
Europe, the United States and West Indies, and has given much time and
attention to the discussion of trade questions, tariff and treaties with
other countries. In 1896 he wrote and published a monograph entitled
“The City Below the Hill,” being a sociological study of the District of
the City of Montreal, in which such questions as wages, rents, health
conditions, etc., were carefully received. At the request of the
Department of Commerce and Labor of the United States Government, Mr.
Ames prepared an article on the same subject which appeared in the
journals of this department. At the present time Sir Herbert Ames is a
Director and Vice-President of the Ames, Holden, McCready Company. He is
also one of the three gentlemen composing the Canadian Board of the
Gresham Life Insurance Company, and also a Director of the Dominion
Guarantee Company. He is a member of the Mount Royal Club, the Montreal
Club, the Montreal Curling Club, the University Club of Montreal, the
Rideau Club, Ottawa. On May 19, 1890, Mr. Ames was married to Louise
Marion Kennedy, daughter of Sir John Kennedy, C.E., of Montreal, and
they occupy a residence on the slopes of Mount Royal. He is an elder in
the Presbyterian Church, a Director in the Y.M.C.A., a governor in
several benevolent institutions. At the outbreak of the great War, Mr.
Ames was asked by His Royal Highness, the Governor-General of Canada, to
assume the position of Honorary Secretary of the National Canadian
Patriotic Fund, which provides for the wives and dependent relatives of
soldiers serving in the armies of the Allies. On behalf of the Fund he
has visited all parts of Canada, speaking and organizing, and the marked
success to his initiative and effort. Through this great national
benefaction there will have been raised and expended during the war
period no less a sum than $45,000,000. On June 3, 1915, Mr. Ames had
conferred upon him the Honor of Knighthood by His Majesty the King, and
in 1916 was made a Knight of Grace of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem
in England. On December 1, 1918, the Government of Canada created by
Order-in-Council a National War Savings Committee for the encouragement
of thrift and the promotion of investment of small savings in government
securities. Of this Committee Sir Herbert Ames has been appointed
Chairman.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, John Ross=, journalist. The direct descendant of Duncan R.,
chief of the clan of Robertson of Strowan, 1347; eldest son of the late
John Robertson, wholesale dry goods merchant, Toronto, and Margaret R.,
daughter of Hector Sinclair, Stornoway, Island of Lewis, Scotland. He
was born in Toronto, Dec. 28, 1841, and educated at Upper Canada
College; married, 1st, in 1871, Maria Louisa (d. Aug., 1886), daughter
of Edward Earle Matthew Gillbee, Northamptonshire, Eng., grandson of the
late Rev. Dr. Edward Gillbee, Vicar of Barby, near Rugby, descendant of
the noted Anthony Gilby, one of the translators of the first edition of
the Geneva or “Breeches” Bible, 1560; 2ndly, 1888, Jessie Elizabeth,
daughter of George B. Holland, a prominent insurance man of Toronto.
While still at college he occupied his spare hours in acquiring a
knowledge of the printer’s craft, and was a fairly rapid compositor;
commenced a small office which he established in his father’s residence,
John St., Toronto, and with a few fonts of type he issued to the boys at
Upper Canada College a paper under the name of the “College Times,”
which later took the name of the “Boys’ Times,” a monthly publication
that existed 1857-60. He also published in succession to the “Boys’
Times,” during a year at the Model Grammar School, a newsy paper for
boys called “Young Canada.” Picking up a general knowledge of setting
type and small job work in city offices, his face was a familiar one in
the old “Christian Guardian” office, where occasionally he used to work
off odd jobs, the composition of which he did in his own office; in the
“Globe” Office, where in 1859, when opportunity offered, he sometimes
used to feed one of the Hoe single cylinder presses when printing the
inner pages of the four-page “Globe,” for the inside was always printed
the afternoon before the morning issue; in the “Leader,” where he at
times worked off on a small job cylinder Hoe press, the “Grumbler,” the
weekly that he issued in 1860; the following year he equipped a
newspaper and job office, and issued “Sporting Life,” the first paper in
Canada to be devoted to athletic sports, and subsequently continued the
publication of the “Grumbler,” a weekly satirical paper, at one time
edited by W. J. Rattray, W. A. Foster, and the late Chief Justice Thomas
Moss. He worked on the reportorial and advertising staff of the
“Leader,” when Charles Lindsey and Charles Belford were editors and
Ephraim Roden, City Editor, continuing at the same time the management
of his printing office. He also issued for a year, Robertson’s Canadian
Railway Guide, the first of its kind in Canada, and early in 1865 joined
the Toronto “Globe” staff as city Editor, in May, 1866, becoming one of
the founders of the “Daily Telegraph,” a journal that had a high
reputation among the newspapers of Canada. Owing to political
complications it ceased publication in 1872. Prior to this, in December,
1869, Mr. Robertson, then of the “Daily Telegraph,” made a trip to the
North-West, accompanied by Mr. Robert Cunningham of the “Globe.” They
travelled by rail from Toronto to the end of steel at St. Cloud, Minn.,
and there with a French half-breed guide and a two-horse farmer’s
sleigh, fully equipped, began a journey of about 400 miles over the
prairie. Snow storms raged and the thermometer ran from zero to 20
below. The travellers camped every night in the woods along the Red
River, and arrived in Fort Garry after a perilous journey of ten days,
to be locked up by the so-called “President” Riel, in Fort Garry for a
week, and only allowed out to see their friends in the town, under a
guard. They both secured interesting information, but were ordered out
of the territory, as Riel thought they were “dangerous characters,” so
they left Fort Garry for Pembina, U.S., the boundary post, one day when
the thermometer was about 40 below zero. They declared they would not do
the trip again for the whole North-West. Mr. Robertson, after the “Daily
Telegraph” ceased publication, proceeded to London, Eng., where for
three years he acted as resident correspondent and business
representative of the Toronto “Daily Globe.” On his return to Canada,
1875, he assumed the business management of the “Nation,” edited by the
late Prof. Goldwin Smith. It is said that during his managership of the
“Nation,” his friend, Mr. Goldwin Smith asked his opinion as to the
opportunities offered for an independent daily evening paper in Toronto,
and that this conversation led up to the establishment of the “Evening
Telegram,” which first saw light in April, 1876. It is said to be the
only daily paper in Canada that has paid its way from the start. Mr.
Robertson continued to conduct it until his death, May 31, 1918. “The
immediate success of this paper,” said the “Globe,” in a sketch of his
career published during his lifetime, “is ample evidence that he has
graduated from a good school of journalism. Neither accident or luck had
aught to do with his success. He launched out in new and original lines,
and the good fortune that attended his efforts was the outcome of his
energy, enthusiasm and experience, reinforced by a persistence and
resource that would admit of no failure; it is these qualities that he
brings to his every undertaking, and on the “Globe” he left behind him a
reputation that is worthy of his later achievements.” This was publicly
demonstrated by his Masonic career and his management of that great
charity—the Hospital for Sick Children. From the first he has held high
rank in the Masonic order. He entered the Craft in 1867, and was W.M. of
his Mother Lodge, King Solomon’s, in 1880-1, and of Mimico, No. 359, in
1879-80. After having served successively as Grand Senior Warden, as
District Grand Master of the Toronto District in 1886, he became in 1890
Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Canada, and was subsequently chosen
Grand First Principal of the Grand Royal Arch Chapter of Canada, 1894-5,
and Provincial Grand Prior, Ontario Centre, Sovereign Great Priory of
Canadian Knights Templar, 1882; was Grand Representative of the Grand
Lodge of England in Canada, having been appointed to succeed Sir John A.
Macdonald in that office on the latter’s death, 1891; indeed, every
honor at the disposal of his fellow-craftsmen had been accorded him. In
September, 1902, in commemoration of the coronation of His Majesty King
Edward, the Duke of Connaught (q.v.) then and now Grand Master, was
pleased to confer the honorary rank of Past Grand Warden of England upon
several eminent personages, including the subject of this sketch. For
many years Mr. Robertson was president of the Canadian Copyright
Association and rendered important services in that regard, and also
Vice-President and President of the Canadian Associated Press, and Hon.
President of the Toronto Press Club. He was present, with his wife, by
invitation, in Westminster Abbey, at the coronation of King Edward and
Queen Alexandra. As an author of Masonic works, Mr. Robertson is well
known, having written the “History of the Degree of the Cryptic Rite in
Canada,” etc. (1888); “History of the Knights Templar of Canada, from
the Foundation of the Order to the Present Time” (1890); “Talks with
Craftsmen” (1893); “Freemasonry in Canada,” 2 vols., 1,000 pages each
(1899). He was a contributor to the U.C. College Memorial Volume, 1893,
edited the “Diary of Mrs. John Graves Simcoe, wife of the First
Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada, 1792-6” (1911), as a press notice
said, “The book of the year, a superb work,” and the author and compiler
of “Robertson’s Landmarks of Toronto” (7 vols.). In 1888 the ambulance
system in Toronto was unsatisfactory, and with a view to making it
efficient, he imported from London, Eng., a modern ambulance, fully
equipped, and presented it to the city. There are about sixty ambulances
in Canada made from this model. The presentation marked a new era in
this branch of humane work. He later gave a collection of 4,000 Canadian
historical pictures to the Toronto Public Library, the largest
collection of its kind in the world, valued at $150,000. In January,
1917, he acquired and presented to the Public Library a magnificent
ornithological collection of birds and game of Canada, done in
water-color by William Pope, an English sportsman and artist, who
resided for forty years at Port Ryerse, Ont. This collection of
water-colors is pronounced by eminent Canadian biologists to be equal of
and in some respects superior to, the work of Audubon. Mr. Robertson
later added to this another collection of Canadian birds, exquisite
reproductions in color of hundreds of birds that are not in the Pope
Collection, so that the entire collection is unparalleled in Canada. He
founded and gave three magnificent silver cups, made by eminent British
silversmiths, from special patterns, for the promotion of cricket,
hockey and bowling; but it was as chairman of the Board of Trustees of
the Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, that he will be most gratefully
remembered. For thirty-five years he carried the chief burden of this
important charitable institution, bringing to its needs not only much
money of his own, but aiding it with the full force of his powers as a
financier and organizer. He took an active part in the management and
visited the Hospital every day. His gifts to the Hospital amounted to
about half a million dollars during his lifetime, for he completely
equipped the Hospital buildings on College St. and on Elizabeth St., and
built and founded, in connection with the Hospital, the Lakeside Home
for Little Children, at Lighthouse Point, Toronto Island, with an
accommodation for 250 patients and an entire hospital equipment; here,
during the summer months, the suffering little ones are won back to
health and strength with the aid of the cool breezes which sweep across
Lake Ontario. Included in his benefactions to the Hospital he erected,
equipped and presented to the Hospital (as a memorial of his first wife)
a five-storey nurses’ brick residence, containing 125 rooms, which has
been declared to be the most perfect building of its kind ever erected;
in July, 1911, he presented to the Heather Club an extension to the
pavilion for tubercular children in connection with the Lakeside Home.
He built and established a complete plant for the pasteurization of
milk, on the Hospital grounds, College St., Toronto, the only one of its
kind in the Dominion. By his will the whole of his estate will
ultimately go to this philanthropy. He was an all-round amateur athlete,
and has been sometimes called “The Father of Amateur Hockey in Ontario”;
was President of the Ontario Hockey Association, 1899-1905. He sat for
East Toronto in 1896-1900 in the House of Commons as an Independent
Conservative, pledged to oppose any Government which would attempt to
establish separate schools in Manitoba, to support the “National
Policy,” and to vote for the general good of the country. According to
Sir Charles Tupper (q.v.) he was in all respects “a model member,” and a
devoted Imperialist. In religion he was a Presbyterian. In February,
1917, Mr. Robertson was offered in the New Year’s honors a knighthood
and a senatorship, both of which honors he gratefully declined. A
well-known politician said, “It is the first time in the history of
Canada that anyone declined a knighthood and a senatorship in the same
day.” He was a member of the National, Victoria and Arts and Letters
Clubs; Constitutional (Conservative) Club, London, Eng. “A born
journalist”—“Canada,” of London, Eng.; “A truly independent man”—D.
McCarthy, Q.C., M.P.; “Possesses a heart as big as that of an
ox”—Hamilton “Spectator”; “The good angel of many of Toronto’s
charitable institutions”—Hamilton “Times”; “No man need desire a more
noble monument than these Hospital buildings, which would keep Mr.
Robertson’s memory green if all other achievements were
forgotten”—Toronto “Globe”; “He has risen step by step until he is
to-day recognized as one of the keenest, most practical and successful
publishers of the Dominion. The blind goddess had nothing to do with his
success”—Ottawa “Citizen.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hearst, Hon. Sir William Howard, K.C.M.G., K.C., M.P.P.=, Prime
Minister of the Province of Ontario, was born on February 15, 1864, in
the township of Arran, Bruce County, Ontario, the son of William and
Margaret (McFadden) Hearst. His father was a farmer, and the subject of
this sketch was educated at the public schools of Arran Township and
later at Collingwood Collegiate Institute. Subsequently he studied for
the legal profession at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and was called to the Bar
of Ontario in 1888. He commenced the practice of law in Sault Ste.
Marie, Ont., where he became prominent in municipal affairs and active
as a speaker in the Conservative interest. He was an unsuccessful
candidate in Algoma East in 1894, but in the Ontario Legislative
elections in 1902 he helped to organize a group of newly defined
constituencies in Northern Ontario for Mr. (afterward Sir) James P.
Whitney, and by his effective methods largely assisted in placing them
in the Conservative column. When the Whitney Government was formed in
1905 Mr. Hearst was appointed Government agent in connection with the
guarantee loan furnished to the Lake Superior Corporation, under the
provisions of which the Government had a voice in the management of the
corporation until the loan should be liquidated. In this capacity Mr.
Hearst proved a business success but resigned the office in 1908 to
contest the riding of Sault Ste. Marie for the Ontario Legislature. He
was successful and in September, 1911, when Hon. Frank Cochrane resigned
the Portfolio of Forests and Mines to become Minister of Railways and
Canals in the first Borden cabinet, Sir James Whitney tendered the
vacancy in his cabinet to Mr. Hearst. The latter accepted and was
re-elected by acclamation by his constituents, whom he has ever since
continued to represent. On the death of Sir James Whitney in 1914, he
was asked to form a Government, all his former colleagues accepting
office under him. He was sworn in as Prime Minister and President of the
Council on October 2, 1914, this being practically the last official act
of Sir John Gibson, as Lieutenant-Governor. Following the death of Hon.
James Duff in December, 1916, he also assumed the post of Minister of
Agriculture, retaining it for two years until the elevation of Hon.
George Henry to the cabinet in 1918. In connection with his profession
as a lawyer he was created a K.C. in 1908 and was elected a bencher of
the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1912. On February 13, 1917, he was
created a Knight Commander of the Order of St. Michael and St. George.
The Premiership of Sir William Hearst has been marked by energetic
administration and progressive legislation. He took office at a time of
peculiar difficulty in Canadian affairs, when the great war had been in
progress for two months and when it was becoming evident that it would
be necessary for a vast and united effort if it was to be successfully
prosecuted. Perhaps his most radical step was his act of 1916, to
prohibit the sale of intoxicating liquors throughout the province of
Ontario. Subsequent orders-in-Council by the Federal government gave
this act the effect of absolute prohibition. In 1917 he introduced and
carried an act to confer the Parliamentary franchise on women. Under his
leadership a comprehensive measure previously enacted providing for
compensation to workmen for injuries was put into successful operation
and extended. An important measure of his provides for loans to
settlers, and he has also taken practical steps to deal with the housing
problem. The policy of Sir James Whitney and Sir Adam Beck of government
control and operation of the water powers of the province, known as the
Hydro-Electric system has been amplified under Sir William Hearst. In
connection with the war he visited the battlefront to personally
ascertain the needs of the situation. Under his administration the
Orpington Military Hospital in England was built as the gift of the
people of Ontario. As Minister of Agriculture he organized measures for
increased food production to meet the needs of soldiers and civilians
overseas; and is taking active measures to assist in reconstruction, by
helping returned soldiers to settle on the land. In religion Sir William
is a Methodist. On July 21, 1891, he married Isabella Jane Dunkin of
Sault Ste. Marie by whom he has four children, Lieutenant Howard Vernon
Hearst and Lieutenant Irving Hearst, both of whom are on active war
service; and Misses Isabel and Evelyn Hearst. Sir William resides at
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Meighen, Hon. Arthur, K.C.= (Portage la Prairie, Man.), was born June
16, 1874, at Anderson, Blanchard Township, Perth County, Ont., and is
the son of Joseph and Mary Meighen, of St. Mary’s, Ont. He was educated
at St. Mary’s Collegiate Institute and Toronto University; received
degree B.A. (Tor.), 1896; graduated with honors in mathematics. Taught
High School, Caledonia, Ont., 1897-98. After graduating as a Barrister,
he entered business for himself, 1902, and built up a large practice at
Portage la Prairie. Bencher Manitoba Law Society since 1908; Bencher of
Upper Canada Law Society since 1914. Having a capacity for public life,
at the solicitation of his friends, he accepted the nomination as
Conservative candidate for the Constituency of Portage la Prairie, Man.,
and was elected by a majority of 250. In 1904 Mr. Crawford, Liberal, had
been elected by a majority of 358. In the general elections, September
21, 1911, when the Laurier Administration was defeated at the polls on
the question of Reciprocity with the United States, Mr. Meighen was
again elected by a majority of 675 over his opponent R. Patterson. When
the position of Solicitor-General became vacant, June 26, 1913, Sir
Robert Borden invited Mr. Meighen to accept that office, and at a
bye-election held July 19, 1913, he was returned by acclamation. In
August, 1917, he became Secretary of State for Canada and Minister of
Mines, and as such devised and installed the organizations in Canada and
overseas for the holding of the war election of that year. On the
formation of the Union Government in the autumn of 1917 he accepted the
portfolio of Minister of the Interior, and was re-elected by a handsome
majority at the general elections which ensued. As a parliamentarian he
has been a success, and is held in high esteem by members on both sides
of the House. As a debater he is considered one of the ablest, and
always commands the respect of his colleagues when he rises to speak on
any important subject. Mr. Meighen was married June 1, 1904, to Jessie
Isabel Cox, to whom were born three children, Theodore Roosvelt Meighen
(1905), Maxwell Charles Gordon Meighen (1908), and Lillian Meighen
(1910). In religion he is a Presbyterian; in politics, a Conservative.
Clubs, Portage la Prairie, Rideau, Ottawa. Address, 21 Cooper St.,
Ottawa.




[Illustration: MAJOR-GEN. SIR. ARTHUR WILLIAM CURRIE
 Victoria, B.C.]




                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cockshutt, William Foster, M.P.=, and Financial Agent (Brantford,
Ont.), is the son of I. Cockshutt, merchant of Brantford, and E. Foster
Cockshutt, was born in Brantford, October, 1855, and educated at the
Brantford and Galt Collegiate Institutes. Mr. Cockshutt’s chief public
efforts have been exercised in the direction of Imperial Unity and
Empire Trade development. He has been associated largely with Boards of
Trade and has attended several Congresses of the Associated Boards in
London, England, Montreal and Sydney, Australia, and in this direction
has been able to exercise considerable influence in Empire trade
co-operation. In the year 1909 he visited in this connection the
Commonwealth of Australia, making a very extensive tour of that great
country, and delivering addresses at all the important centres on the
theme of Empire Trade and Defence, and received much credit for the work
accomplished there. He also made an extensive tour of India, visiting
most of the cities of that great member of the Empire, and studying the
conditions of the country as well as trade matters and has taken part in
two extended campaigns in Great Britain, addressing many large meetings
at the important centres, including London, Manchester, Newcastle,
Portsmouth, Bournemouth, Torquay and many other towns and cities, for
which he was honored by letter from the then leader of the opposition,
the Honorable Arthur Balfour. Mr. Cockshutt was a member of the first
Hydro-Electric Commission of Ontario, appointed by the Municipalities
and labored in that work for nearly three years. The report of the
Commission has been a standard reference for development in this line
ever since, and was really the basis of the development that has taken
place more recently at Niagara Falls. He has travelled in most of the
great countries of Europe, made many tours in the United States and the
West Indies and Mexico, as well as having visited all the principal
cities of the Dominion and has addressed meetings in a great number of
them. He was first elected to the House of Commons in 1904, where he
served until 1908, being defeated in that year and re-elected in 1911,
and is at present serving throughout the present long Parliament. He is
ex-President of the Cockshutt Plow Co.; has been six times a delegate to
Chambers of Commerce of the Empire and is connected with a large number
of industrial enterprises, particularly in Brantford and also in other
centres, and has served on many industrial boards. In 1891, married M.
T. Ashton, daughter of Rev. Robert Ashton of Brantford, Principal of the
Mohawk Institute and has six children, Ashton, George, Eric, Maude,
Clarence and Phyllis. In politics he is an Independent Conservative and
is a member of the Anglican Church; has been a representative of the
Church of England at many important gatherings and a member of the Huron
Synod for close on to twenty-five years, been elected and re-elected to
the Provincial General Synod on many occasions and is still an active
member of all these Church organizations; is also Chairman of the
Orphanage situated on the outskirts of Brantford, known as the Jane
Laycock School; has taken considerable interest in local hospital work.
Mr. Cockshutt had the honor of being the official representative of
Brantford at the funeral of King Edward the Seventh; is Hon. Colonel of
the 125th Battalion, C.E.F., and is a remote relative of the late
Florence Nightingale, the distinguished woman who did such great work
for the British Army during the Crimean War and was one of the first
women to relieve soldiers of their sufferings on the battlefield. Mr.
Cockshutt took great interest in the recruiting of the 125th Battalion
at present overseas and has the honor of being the father of three sons,
all of whom are serving in the army at present and have all reached the
front at least once. His son, Major Ashton Cockshutt, now of the 125th
but formerly of the 10th Battalion, 1st Contingent, was a fully
qualified Lieutenant in the 103rd Calgary Rifles when the war broke out
and immediately enlisted and went overseas with the first Contingent,
training during the winter at Salisbury Plain, crossing to France in the
early spring, saw heavy fighting at St. Julien, Festubert, and Givenchy,
was wounded on June 6, 1915, and after convalescing at various military
hospitals was given furlough back to Canada and after a long hard
struggle regained his health and immediately re-enlisted with the 125th
Battalion and is now serving at Bramshott Camp. Another son, Lieut.
George Cockshutt, also enlisted early in the war with the 19th Overseas
Battalion, was a qualified Officer of the Dufferin Rifles, he served the
19th at the front for many months and was invalided home in September,
1916, owing to ear trouble and at the present time is serving with the
205th Machine Gun Section, and now overseas with 1st Tank Battalion. The
third son, Lieut. Eric Cockshutt, was at one time Captain of the Cadet
Corps of Upper Canada College, Toronto, and upon going to McGill
University, Montreal, later joined the Officers Training Corps of that
University, was accepted as a candidate at the Royal Artillery School at
Kingston, March, 1915, and after duly qualifying, trained at Petawawa,
going overseas from there with a draft, took further training at Ross
Barracks and Woolwich and then crossed over to France and served with
the First Divisional Artillery, First Canadian Brigade, and is at
present serving with the 2nd Howitzers. Mr. Cockshutt is a member of the
Brantford Golf and Country Club, the National Club, Toronto, and also
connected with the Empire Club and Imperial Institute. His recreations
include golf, tennis and skating, and he has spent many summers in the
Highlands of Canada occupying an extensive tract of land on the shores
of Lake of Bays.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jetté, The Hon. Sir Louis=, Chief Justice and late Lieutenant-Governor,
was born at L’Assomption, P.Q., on January 15, 1836. He is the son of
the late Amable Jetté, who married Miss Caroline Gauffreau, the daughter
of a wealthy planter of Guadaloupe, in the West Indies. Finishing the
full course of study at the College of L’Assomption, he became a member
of the Provincial Bar, establishing himself as a legal practitioner in
the city of Montreal, where in a few years he came to be recognized as
an astute advocate as well as a prospective candidate for political
honors. In 1870 his legal fame was enhanced by the part he took
professionally in the famous Guibord Case, and by his service before the
Privy Council in England in behalf of the Provincial Government of
Quebec. At length, in 1872, he was elected member for Montreal East,
defeating Sir George E. Cartier, the French-Canadian colleague of Sir
John A. Macdonald. When the Liberal Leader, the Hon. Alexander Mackenzie
was Prime Minister, Mr. Jetté was offered the position of Minister of
Justice, but accepted in preference a place on the Bench. This he
retained for twenty years up to 1898, when he was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of his native province. While still practising his
profession in Montreal, he became Professor of Civil Law in Laval
University and a Dean of its Faculty, having been honored by the same
with the degree of LL.D., as well as by Bishop’s College University with
a D.C.L. and by Toronto University with an LL.D. In 1891 he was
appointed Chairman of the Royal Commission charged with the
investigation of affairs connected with the Baie-des-Chaleurs Railway,
finally refusing to agree, however, to the decision of his two
colleagues. The several other offices he has filled are many and
important. After his term as Lieutenant-Governor had expired, he was
given a second term. And at the end of his second term he was appointed
Chief Justice of the Court of King’s Bench, retiring in 1911. Few
Canadians have had so many honors conferred upon them as has Sir Louis
Jetté. These include his university degrees; his knighthood from the
King of England; his Legion of Honour from France, of which he is a
Commander; the many addresses he has received from his fellow-members of
the Bar, as well as from the people; not to speak of his receptions by
King George and his late royal father, King Edward, and His Holiness the
Pope. He has been associated with the Société de Legislation Comparée;
with the Société d’Histoire Diplomatique of Paris (France); was a member
of the Alaska Boundary Tribunal; a Director of the Montreal Polytechnic
School; a member of the Council of Public Instruction, and an honorary
member of the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec. In his earlier
years he was a contributor to certain city journals, having been editor
of one of them known as “L’Ordre.” His “Observations Relating to the
Code of Civil Procedure” proves him to be possessed of a wide vision and
keen insight, both as a lawyer and a literary expositor. The encomiums
which have been passed upon his services as a public servant go to show
Chief Justice Sir Melbourne Tait was in no way astray in his high
estimate of Sir Louis Jetté’s mental culture and administrative
astuteness, not only as a public speaker, but as a writer and overseer
of what is in line with justice and dignity of rule. He was married in
1862, to Miss Bertha Laflamme, daughter of the late Touissant Laflamme,
and sister of the Hon. R. Laflamme, the distinguished barrister and
advocate of Montreal. Lady Jetté, who is an authoress in her own right,
having written a Life of Madame d’Youville, won a further good name for
herself and her distinguished husband for the hospitalities they were
always pleased to extend to their guests at Spencer Wood during the two
terms and more of Governor Jetté’s residence there as Governor.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kennedy, William Costello=, Member for North Essex in the House of
Commons of Canada, is a resident of Windsor, Ont., and a prominent
figure in the oil and gas industry of the Essex Peninsula. He was born
at Ottawa, Ont., August 27, 1868, the son of William and Julia
(Costello) Kennedy. While he was yet a boy his parents moved to Toronto
to reside and he was educated in the Separate Schools and De La Salle
Institute, of that city. He began his business career in 1887 as a clerk
in the offices of the London and Canadian Loan and Agency Company,
Toronto, at that time one of the best known financial corporations of
the province. With this company he remained until 1897 when he accepted
an offer to go to Windsor, Ont., and engage in the oil and natural gas
industry. In 1903 he became President of the Windsor Gas Company and
continued in that office until 1917. At the present time he has many
interests in the city of his adoption. He was President of the Board of
Trade for the years 1909 and 1910, and a member of the Windsor Board of
Education from 1913 to 1918; and also a councillor of the municipality
of Ojibway during the same period. From early manhood Mr. Kennedy had
been a Liberal in politics and in 1917 when Sir Robert Borden formed a
Union Government and decided to carry out the policy of conscription
without submitting the question to the Canadian people through the
medium of a referendum, he was one of those Liberals who stood back of
Sir Wilfrid Laurier in opposing such a course. Though at the time it was
supposed that he was facing almost certain defeat he accepted the
Liberal nomination for North Essex. He was opposed by Col. Wigle, who
was generally regarded as a very strong candidate. In the two months’
campaign that ensued Mr. Kennedy made many friends by his sane and
reasonable methods of electioneering and when the ballots were counted
on December 17, 1917, it was found that he had been elected by a
handsome majority, which was not annulled by the vote of the soldiers
overseas, details of which were received later. During the parliamentary
session Mr. Kennedy made his maiden speech as a legislator in the budget
debate, and made a very fine impression on friends and political
opponents alike by his brilliant handling of financial questions. Old
parliamentarians were agreed that it was one of the most promising
initial speeches ever made at Ottawa, and ever since the member for
North Essex has been regarded as an important factor in the future of
his party. His recreations are golf and motoring, and he is a member of
the following clubs: Detroit, Detroit Athletic, Essex County Golf,
Windsor and Ontario, Toronto. In religion he is a Roman Catholic and on
May 8, 1907, married Glencora, daughter of George W. Bolton, Detroit,
Michigan.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mitchell, Robert Menzies, Hon.= (Weyburn, Sask.), is a native of Port
Union, Ont., where he was born October 28, 1865, the son of James
Mitchell, a farmer, and Elizabeth Rodger, his wife. His father came of
Scottish ancestry, some of whose descendants settled in Canada and some
in Australia. Madame Melba, the great Australian prima donna, whose
maiden name was Nellie Mitchell, is a cousin of the subject of this
sketch. The latter was educated at Orangeville High School and Trinity
Medical School, Toronto, graduating M.D., C.M. in April, 1892. He at
once commenced the practice of medicine at Dundalk, Dufferin County,
Ont., and remained there until 1899, when he settled at Weyburn, Sask.,
and continued in active practice there until 1907. He was Chairman of
the Weyburn Public School Board for ten years, and of the High School
Board for five years. In August, 1908, he was elected to the
Saskatchewan Legislature as a Liberal for the constituency of Weyburn,
and has been re-elected at each ensuing election. He was Chairman of the
Private Bills and Railways Committee of the Legislature for six years,
and was chosen as Deputy Speaker in 1916. Shortly afterward he was made
Speaker, and on his return to the House after the general elections of
1917 was re-elected to that office. Though a Liberal his fairness and
impartiality in the conduct of debate has made him universally popular
among politicians of all shades of opinion. He is a member of the
following fraternal orders: A.F. & A.M., I.O.O.F., and C.O.F.; of the
Weyburn Club, and the Assiniboia Club, Regina. His recreations are
football and curling, and in religion he is a Presbyterian. On August
17, 1892, he married Margaret, daughter of Donald and Flora McKinnon,
Badjeros, Ont., and his two sons have both served their country with
honor in the great war. R. C. Mitchell, born July 11, 1893, went
overseas with the First Canadian Expeditionary Force in 1914, and D. J.
Mitchell, born February 15, 1895, became a member of the Royal Air Force
a year or so later.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lemieux, the Honorable Sir François-Xavier=, Chief Justice of the
Superior Court of Quebec, was born at Levis on the 9th of April, 1851,
the son of Antoine and Henriette (Lagueux) Lemieux. From the Levis
College he entered the Quebec Seminary and afterwards graduated from
Laval University, in 1872, taking the degree of LL.B. In the same year
he started on his career as a lawyer in the city of Quebec, taking rank
almost immediately as an efficient pleader in the criminal courts of the
Lower St. Lawrence districts. His eloquent fluency and finesse as a
defender brought him into a lucrative practice; and there were in time
few prominent cases of criminality brought into court in which his
services were not sought after. Nor did his legal acumen in winning
cases arouse any envious feeling against him among his legal brethren,
since in 1896 he was elected Batonnier of the Quebec Bar, and in the
following year Batonnier-General of the Provincial Bar. Turning his
attention to politics, he sat as member of Levis in the Legislative
Assembly for nine years, and afterwards as member for Bonaventure, for
three years. As an orator, he has a marvellous faculty on the hustings
of carrying any large audience with him in his argument. At length the
widest fame came to him when he was called upon to defend Louis Riel,
the rebel leader of the half-breeds and Indians in the North-West, in
1885. The charge of high treason against the culprit was sustained, but
his legal defender was nevertheless acclaimed as one of the shrewdest
lawyers that could have been engaged to defend him. Subsequently, in
1892, he was chosen to defend the Honorable Honore Mercier, Premier of
Quebec, before the criminal court, under charges of maladministration.
Mr. Mercier was honorably acquitted. Five years after the subject of
this biography was appointed Puisne Judge in the district of Arthabaska
and afterwards in Sherbrooke. From Sherbrooke, he was finally removed to
Quebec where he holds the office of Chief Justice for the Province of
Quebec. The literary talents of Sir François have been proven by his
lectures and essays. His acumen as a judge has been openly acknowledged
by his professional associates. He is a citizen well worthy the honor
conferred upon him by King George and by Laval University, in the one
case of Knighthood and in the other an LL.D. His father-in-law, the late
Justice Plamondon, was a judge of the Superior Court of Quebec, Miss
Diana Plamondon becoming his wife in 1874.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Turgeon, The Hon. Adelard, LL.D., C.M.G., C.V.O., Knight of the Legion
of Honour of France= (Quebec City), President of the Legislative Council
of the Province of Quebec, and a Governor of Laval University, was born
at Beaumont in the Province of Quebec, on December 19, 1863. He is the
son of Mr. Damase Turgeon, and was educated at Levis College and at
Laval University. Called to the Bar in 1887, he opened a law office in
Levis, but afterwards entered into partnership in Quebec with the
prominent legal firm of Roy, Langlais & Godbout. His career as a
parliamentarian was inaugurated by his election as member for
Bellechasse in 1890, a constituency which he continued to represent up
to 1909, when he retired from the Legislative Assembly to take his seat
in the Legislative Council and assume the high office of Speaker or
President of that body. While a member of the Assembly his eloquence
became an attractive feature in the many important debates in which he
took part, alike as Member and Minister. As an administrator and
public-spirited citizen, he has taken high rank as a publicist, having
retained the favor of Bellechasse from term to term for over a decade.
During the Tercentennial Celebration at Quebec in 1908, he was honored
by the Prince of Wales, now King George V, and was shortly afterwards
chosen as one of the members of the National Battlefields Commission,
which has ever since been engaged in laying out and beautifying one of
the most spacious public parks in Canada. In 1897 he was called to join
the Marchand Government as Minister of Colonization, holding the same
office in the Parent Cabinet, until he was chosen to act as Minister of
Agriculture and Provincial Secretary. In 1905, the Parent Administration
was transformed into the Gouin Administration, and in the latter Mr.
Turgeon accepted the portfolio of Lands and Forests, holding the same up
to 1909. On resigning his seat in the Assembly as a challenge to some of
his detractors, he was re-elected against Henri Bourassa by the electors
of Bellechasse as an acknowledgement of his mature administrative
abilities, and a warrant to his resuming his place in the Gouin Cabinet,
as well as preparing the way for his being called to the high office of
President of the Legislative Council. During his public career, he has
held many important positions outside of his parliamentary functions,
among these being President of the Quebec Land Company, Vice-President
of the Provincial Securities Company, Director of the Quebec Transfer
and Cartage Company, and member of the Comptoir Mobilier-Franco-Canadien
Company. He was one of the founders of the Society of L’Union Liberale,
and prominently connected with various political clubs. In July, 1887,
he married Miss Eugenie Samson, the daughter of Mr. Etienne Samson, of
Levis. As President of the Upper Chamber of the Provincial Parliament,
Mr. Turgeon has his residence within the precincts of the Parliament
Buildings, wherein his hospitalities form a prominent feature in the
social life of the community when parliament is in session, as well as
at other times.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rhodes, Hon. Edgar Nelson, K.C., B.A., LL.B.= (Amherst, N.S.), son of
Nelson A. Rhodes and Sara D. C. Curry. Born at Amherst, N.S., on January
5, 1877. Educated at Amherst Academy, Horton Collegiate Academy, Acadia
University and Dalhousie University. Degrees: B.A., Acadia; LL.B.,
Dalhousie. Member of the Board of Governors of Acadia University.
Married, July 12, 1905, to M. Grace, second daughter of Hon. W. T.
Pipes, K.C., Attorney-General of Nova Scotia. He is the father of the
following children: Edgar N. Rhodes, Jr., born on April 19, 1906, and
Helen S. Rhodes, born on October 18, 1907. Appointed a King’s Counsel in
May, 1916, by the Provincial Government of Nova Scotia. President
Brooklyn Lumber Company, Ltd.; director Nova Scotia Trust Co., Ltd.;
British America Nickel Corporation, Ltd.; Amherst Boot & Shoe Company,
Ltd., and Amherst Pianos, Ltd. Has been, since its inception, a member
of the Dominion Executive and of the Nova Scotia Executive of the
Canadian Patriotic Fund; also an Honorary Vice-President and member of
the Dominion Council of the St. John’s Ambulance Association. First
elected to House of Commons at General Elections, 1908; re-elected, 1911
and 1917. Elected Deputy-Speaker at the opening of the 6th session of
the 12th Parliament, January, 1916. Was one of the Canadian
representatives at the Imperial Parliamentary Conference in London,
1916, and accompanied the members of that body on their visit to the
Munitions plants, The Fleet, and to the front. Elected Speaker of the
House of Commons, January 18, 1917. Re-elected Speaker at the opening of
the first session of the 13th Parliament, 1918. Member Rideau Club and
Country Club, Ottawa. A Unionist. Amherst, N.S.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=White, Rt. Hon. Sir William Thomas, P.C., M.P.=, Finance Minister of
Canada, is a Canadian statesman whose meteoric rise to fame during less
than a decade, has attracted more than national attention. He was born
at Bronte, Ont., November 13, 1866, the son of James and Elizabeth
(Graham) White. His father was a farmer and his early education was
obtained at Oakville public school and Brampton High School. Later he
entered Toronto University and graduated in 1895 with the degree of B.A.
and honors in classics. During his university career he won two
first-class scholarships and a gold medal. Subsequently he took up a
course of law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto and was called to the Bar of the
province in 1899, but never practised. During his period as an arts and
law student he supported himself, first as a reporter on the Toronto
“Telegram,” where his writings showed singular eloquence and ability;
and later, as one of the assessors of the Civic Assessment Department.
The knowledge of real estate values and of financial questions which he
had gained in the latter capacity, as well as his general abilities, led
a group of Toronto capitalists to tender him in 1900, the General
Managership of the National Trust Company, which they had recently
formed. This post he held for nearly eleven years and during that
interval attained a high status in the financial community. Though a
Liberal in politics, he had never been known as an active politician. In
the summer of 1911, when Sir Wilfrid Laurier, then Prime Minister,
appealed to the country to ratify the Knox-Fielding pact calling for
reciprocity in natural products between Canada and the United States,
Mr. W. T. White, as he was then known, was one of eighteen prominent
Toronto Liberals who issued a manifesto against the proposals of their
former political chieftain and decided to support Mr. Robert Borden. He
himself took the platform against the pact as liable to disturb the
equilibrium of trade at a time when Canada was enjoying unexampled
prosperity. The result of this and other appeals was that many thousands
of voters, previously Liberal, abandoned the party lines and defeated
the Laurier administration by a large majority. When called upon to form
a government in the latter part of September, 1911, Mr. Borden felt that
it was due to the large number of Liberals who had supported him, that
they should be represented in the Cabinet. On consultation with the
leaders of the group, known as “Borden Liberals,” they were unanimously
of the opinion that Mr. White was the best available choice. Despite the
fact that he was without previous political experience, the Conservative
Leader decided to offer him the most important portfolio in the Cabinet,
that of the Ministry of Finance. On Mr. White’s accepting the office, a
seat was found for him in the House of Commons by the elevation of Mr.
George Taylor, M.P. for Leeds, and formerly Conservative whip, to the
Senate. At a by-election held on November 4, 1911, Mr. White was elected
to Parliament by a considerable majority, despite the fact that the
election was marked by severe personal attacks on him, because of his
so-called “desertion” of the Liberal party. Mr. White answered the
challenge by the statement that he “believed that there was no healthier
sign of the times than that an honest man should change his party in the
interests of his country.” His maiden speech in the House of Commons,
which was delivered on Nov. 29, 1911, was awaited throughout the country
with great interest, and at once stamped him as one of the coming men in
Canadian politics. Since then his budget speeches have proclaimed him as
a financier of masterly intellect. Had Mr. White known in 1911 that the
task lay before him of financing Canada’s contribution to the
prosecution of the greatest war the world has ever known, he would
possibly have declined office. When in 1914, Germany made war against
all Europe, and Canada decided to support the Motherland, perhaps the
gravest task of all fell on the Minister of Finance, because up to that
time Canada had been a heavy borrower from the Motherland, and these
sources of supply would naturally be cut off if the war continued for a
lengthy period. In fact, in 1914, many eminent financiers believed that
the financial resources of the world would not stand the strain of a war
of more than six months’ duration. The Canadian Minister of Finance
however laid his plans for a long war; and in addition to the task of
financing Canada’s magnificent military effort, applied himself to the
problem of keeping up Canada’s trade at a figure that would enable her
to continue as a belligerent. He had also the task thrust upon him of
acting as banker for Great Britain, France, Russia and other
belligerents, who made the finance department at Ottawa the clearing
house for their enormous financial dealings with the merchants and
manufacturers of the United States. During the first year of the war
Great Britain was able to render financial assistance to Canada and
others of the overseas dominions; and Mr. White floated some large loans
in the United States. But it was already apparent that Canada must
shortly finance herself. In 1916 he visited England and fully acquainted
himself with the situation, and in the same year was created a Knight
Commander of St. Michael and St. George, in recognition of his war
services. Sir Thomas decided to test Canada’s own resources and floated
a large war loan the bulk of it being taken by Canadian capitalists,
although a certain number of small investors were also attracted to it.
Up to 1917, however, there were only about 60,000 holders of Canadian
bonds in this country. In the summer of 1917, when Canada seemed to face
a serious financial crisis, Sir Thomas decided to try the experiment of
a great popular loan to be known as the Victory Loan, on the lines of
the popular loans floated during the American Civil War, by the
celebrated financier Jay Cooke. He collected a superb organization,
embracing all the leading financiers, newspapers and selling agencies of
Canada and asked the people to lend their government $300,000,000, to be
spent entirely in Canada for war purposes. The result passed all
expectations, for the loan was over-subscribed by more than one hundred
million dollars, and about 875,000 became holders of Victory Bonds.
Canada was enabled to do this by the fact that Sir Thomas and the Borden
administration as a whole had, by adopting the policy of financing
British credits in this country, secured enormous war orders for
agricultural supplies and munitions for her farmers and manufacturers,
so that the flow of money during the war reached unexampled heights. The
first Victory Loan of 1917 was fruitful of good results, because it
enabled Canada to continue this policy on a more extended scale, so
that, though this enormous sum was invested in bonds, and added to the
savings of the people, a few months later the average of deposits in the
savings banks of the country was larger than it had been before the
first Victory Loan was floated. In the latter part of 1917 the health of
Sir Thomas broke down as a result of his stupendous anxieties and
labors, but after a vacation of several months in California he returned
to this country restored in health. In the autumn of 1918 he decided to
float another Victory Loan, asking, as in 1917, for $300,000,000, but
setting the real objective at $500,000,000. The result was another
enormous over-subscription, nearly $700,000,000 having been subscribed.
That such a showing should have been made by a country so limited in
population as Canada, is the best proof of his skill as administrator of
the nation’s finances during the most trying epoch in the history of the
world. So thoroughly has Sir Thomas the confidence of his leader, Sir
Robert Borden, that when in November, 1918, he left Canada for an
indefinite absence as a member of the European Peace Conference, he
appointed the Minister of Finance Acting Prime Minister, to take charge
of the hazardous task of re-organizing the country on a peace basis. Sir
Thomas is a profound student and thinker and a public speaker of rare
ability. Among his activities prior to his removal to Ottawa were those
of a member of the Board of Governors of Toronto University and Trustee
of Toronto General Hospital. He is a Methodist in religion, and a member
of the Rideau Club, Ottawa, and the York and Toronto Clubs, Toronto. On
Sept. 20, 1890, he married Annie Isabel, daughter of Ellis Silverthorne,
Jarvis, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Price, Sir William=, the prominent capitalist of Quebec City, who has
been engaged in military operations during the European War as Colonel
of the 171st Battalion, at Valcartier, and later as an officer at the
front, is a son of Mr. Henry Ferrier Price, who married Miss Florence
Rogerson. He was born at Talca, Chili, on August 30, 1867. His uncle was
the Hon. Senator E. J. Price, on whose death he became leading partner
of the firm of Price Brothers & Company, in 1886. He was educated at
Bishops College School, Lennoxville, P.Q., and later at St. Mark’s
School, Windsor, England. He has been prominent in the public life as
well as the business circles of Quebec, having been a member of
parliament for one of the electoral divisions of the place and
afterwards Chairman of the Harbor Commission. It was while he held the
latter office that he took service as one of the organizers of the
Valcartier Military Camp, earning high praise from the Governor-General
and the Militia Department, and finally receiving his knighthood at the
hands of King George. As Colonel in Command he raised the 171st
Battalion, which he took over to England in 1916, continuing his
services with the army as one of the officers of a Railway Construction
Battalion in France, after the 171st had been absorbed in other
battalions, in terms of what is known as the Territorial System. No
citizen of Quebec has earned higher credit for patriotic effort than Sir
William. Setting aside his many business duties and resigning a
lucrative government position, he ably fulfilled the duties assigned to
him as a soldier. The responsible positions he has held as a business
man and a public-spirited citizen have been manifold. Besides being
President of the Price Brothers & Company, he has been Director and
Honorary Chairman of the Union Bank; a Director of the Quebec Railway,
Light, Heat and Power Company; Vice-President of the Canadian
Lumberman’s Association; as well as being President of the Metis Lumber
Company, the Jonquiere Pulp and Paper Company, the Gravel Lumber
Company, and President of the Canadian Export Co. Nor did his business
engagements hinder him from taking an active part in civic and
charitable enterprises to which he has given beneficently of his means.
At one time he was a Governor of the Jeffrey Hale Hospital, President of
the Board of Trade, Director of the Trans-Canadian Railway project, an
energetic supporter of the movement in favor of the National
Battlefields Park, and President of the Quebec Turf Club. As far back as
1887, he took a practical interest in local military affairs, having
been a lieutenant in the Eighth Royal Rifles, and being raised to his
captaincy before his withdrawal from that company in 1903. As a prelude
to his activity as a military organizer at the Valcartier Camp, he
raised two companies for service during the Boer War, and encouraged
rifle practice by presenting the Price Cup for competition at the
targets. As a parliamentarian he had a term of three years; but his
earlier defeat in the Rimouski constituency was repeated by Quebec West
in 1911. As has been well said of him, he has proved himself to be a
citizen of whom any community might well be proud. He was married in
1894, to Miss Amelia Blanche Smith, daughter of Mr. R. H. Smith, another
of Quebec’s most prominent and worthy lumber merchants. His family
consists of four sons and two daughters. Sir William has since his early
days been an enthusiast as a “portageur,” and a keen sportsman. He owns
two salmon-breeding rivers and extensive hunting grounds. While
soldiering abroad, he continued head of his firm, which has in its
employment several thousands of employees.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kemp, Hon. Sir Albert Edward= (Toronto, Ont.), son of Robert Kemp, an
Englishman, and Sarah A. Kemp, his wife, a Canadian; born at
Clarenceville, Que., August 11, 1858, and educated at Clarenceville and
Lacolle Academy. For many years the subject of this sketch has been one
of the leading manufacturers of Canada, and a successful business man.
Since 1895 he has devoted considerable time to questions of public
interest. In 1879 he married a Miss Wilson, of Montreal. He was
President of the Canadian Manufacturers Association in 1895 and was
re-elected in 1896. He was elected President of the Toronto Board of
Trade for the year 1899, and re-elected in 1900. In 1898 he was
appointed a delegate by the Board to the British Association, at its
annual meeting held in Bristol, also to the Fourth Congress of the
Chambers of Commerce of the Empire, held in London, June, 1900. He is a
member of the Board of Regents of Victoria University, Toronto; a member
of several Orders, among which is included the Orange Order, and many
National and Philanthropic Societies. Mr. Kemp was first elected to the
House of Commons at the general elections in 1900, and again returned in
1904. In 1908 he was defeated, but was re-elected at the general
elections in 1911 by a very large majority. Upon the resignation of Sir
Wilfrid Laurier and his Cabinet on October 6, 1911, following the defeat
of the Liberal Party at the polls the previous September, he joined the
Borden Government as Minister without Portfolio, and was sworn in a
member of the Privy Council for Canada on October 10, 1911. After the
outbreak of the war he was called upon by his Government to assume many
important positions, among which was included the Chairmanship of the
War Supplies Purchasing Commission, a position that required the keenest
foresight, courage and action, and which practically demanded all his
time. It later developed that the Government made no mistake in placing
him at the head of this Commission, and great credit is due him for the
manner in which he conducted its affairs. Upon the resignation of Sir
Sam Hughes, Minister of Militia in the Borden Government, in November,
1916, Mr. Kemp was asked by Sir Robert Borden to accept the position as
Minister of Militia, and accepted, and on December 14, 1916, was
re-elected by acclamation by his constituents in East Toronto.
Subsequently he was asked to accept the post of Overseas Minister,
resident in London, and in this capacity he served throughout the
momentous period of 1918, when he was directly in touch with Canada’s
Army in France. In social life he has many friends, and is always ready
to receive them in a manner that draws them closer to him. As a public
man there is a great future before him, and he has won praise for having
accepted office at the most critical moment in the history of Canada.
When the greatest war the world has known draws to a close, and the
history of the noble sons who fought and worked with the Allies in their
different nations is written, the name of Hon. Albert Edward Kemp will
come in for a full share of credit for the able and systematic methods
adopted in helping the Motherland to continue to wave the flag that
stands for freedom and justice. In religion he is a Methodist.




[Illustration: E.J. BEAUMONT, KITCHENER
 M.G. BRISTOW, OTTAWA]




=Cameron, Lieut.-Colonel Sir Douglas, K.C.M.G.=, ex-Lieutenant-Governor
of Manitoba (Winnipeg, Man.), was born in Prescott County, Ont., June
18, 1854, the son of Colin and Annie Cameron, and was educated at the
High School, Vankleek Hill, Ont. He was engaged in farming in the
Province of Ontario from 1871 to 1880, afterwards moving to Winnipeg, in
1880. He engaged in various occupations until the fall of 1883, when he
entered the lumber business under the firm name of Cameron & Company;
later, Cameron & Kennedy. The business was incorporated as the Ontario &
Western Lumber Company in 1892, and was later changed to the Rat Portage
Lumber Company, and he has acted as General Manager since 1892, and
President since 1894. He is also President of the Maple Leaf Flour
Mills, a Director of the Northern Crown Bank, and a Director of the
Manitoba Bridge and Iron Company. In 1902 he was elected to the Ontario
Legislature for Fort William and Lake-of-the-Woods, and was defeated in
the general elections of 1905 and 1908; was also an unsuccessful
candidate for the House of Commons for Winnipeg in the Federal general
elections in 1908. On August 1, 1911, he was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba, which office he filled
with the greatest satisfaction until succeeded by the present incumbent,
Sir James Albert Manning Aikins, K.B. He was a Councillor for Rat
Portage in 1891, and Mayor from 1891 to 1894; was appointed a K.C.M.G.,
December 31, 1913. In 1910 he was appointed Honorary Lieutenant-Colonel
of the 79th Highlanders, and has been very active in connection with the
Militia since the outbreak of the war, as well as in Patriotic work. He
married Margaret Cameron Ferguson, of Vankleek Hill, in 1880, to whom
were born two sons and one daughter; is a member of the Manitoba Club
and the St. Charles Country Club, and as a recreation is an admirer of
horses. Sir Douglas is a staunch Liberal in politics, and is considered,
by the leaders of his party, as one of the ablest statesmen in Canada.
In religion he is a Presbyterian and an active worker in Church and
Social Reform movements.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bégin, Louis Nazaire, Cardinal Archbishop of Quebec=, was born on
January 10, 1840. He is the son of Charles Bégin, of Levis, his mother’s
maiden name having been Miss Luce Paradis. His earlier education was had
in the schools and colleges of the Quebec district, up to the time of
his leaving for Europe, to prepare himself as a priest and professor.
Ordained in Rome in 1865, he returned to Quebec to assume the duties of
Professor of Theology and Church History in Laval University, with
collateral duties for a time as Prefect of Studies in what is known as
Le Petit Séminaire. It was in 1885 he was appointed Principal of Laval
Normal School at the time that institution occupied the premises of the
old Chateau Haldimand, over the site of which the spacious Chateau
Frontenac now extends its massive wings. Three years after, he was named
Bishop of Chicoutimi, eventually returning to Quebec to take up his
residence in the Archbishop’s Palace as Coadjutor of Cardinal
Taschereau, under the title of Archbishop of Cyrene. From 1894 to 1898,
he continued to be the Administrator of the Archdiocese of Quebec,
during the declining years of Cardinal Taschereau. On the death of the
latter, he succeeded him in the See of Quebec, the ceremony of his
official investiture in 1899 being an historic event of the greatest
interest to the whole province, as was the later celebration of his
election as a Cardinal under the title of Saint Vitalis. The details of
the distinguished ecclesiastic’s career form a brilliant page in the
annals of Canada. Alike at home and abroad, His Eminence Cardinal Bégin
has ever been known to fulfil his duty towards his Church and as a loyal
citizen of Canada. Frequently he has been called to foreign parts to
share in celebrations, such as the solemn coronation ceremonies of Our
Lady of Guadalupe at Mexico City, in 1895, where he preached one of the
memorial sermons, as well as at Rheims, during a like celebration in
1896, and at Grosse Isle in 1909, when he was the principal speaker at
the unveiling of the monument erected to the memory of the Irish
immigrants who had fallen victims to the typhus epidemic in 1847. He has
also been several times a guest at the Vatican, having enjoyed the
confidence of the three successive popes, Leo XIII, Pius X, and Benedict
XV, from the last of whom he received his red hat. He has ever been a
participant in all the public movements that tended to improve the
social and educational conditions in his diocese, having taken a leading
part in the founding of one of the leading newspapers of Quebec, known
as “L’Action Catholique” and having likewise obtained the restoration of
the Cathedral Chapter of Quebec, an institution that had become extinct
from the days of the Conquest. He was prominent in the enterprise of
unveiling a monument to the memory of Bishop Laval, as he has also been
in the various efforts put forth towards beautifying the city with parks
and monumental structures commemorative of historic events. He is a
Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, and has been honored by
scholastic degrees of the highest merit, bestowed on him by the
University of Innsbruck, in Austria, as well as those he has received
from Laval and the Gregorian University of Rome. He virtually began his
professional career as a teacher of the young, and has never lost his
zeal in promoting, as a Member of the Council of Public Instruction, the
reforms that make for a right pedagogy in school and college work. His
pen has been an active one in adding to the literature to be found in
the library collections of his Church, such as “La Règle de Foi” and the
“Culte Catholique” not to speak of his writings on Canadian historical
topics, as for instance, his “Chronologie d’Histoire du Canada,” his
pastoral letters on the “Three Hundredth Anniversary of the Foundation
of Quebec,” and his address on the “Second Centenary of the Death of
Bishop Laval.” So wide is his knowledge of human affairs, so urbane is
he in his manner and so just in his decisions, so charitable is he in
his approach to the two sides of a public question, that he has more
than once been called upon to act as arbitrator between employer and
employees. During the many years of his episcopate he has organized over
fifty new parishes, and has never failed to urge the building of
spacious churches and school-houses and convents in the most of them.
The events of his life have been for the most part the events of his
native province and of Canada as well. Even during his travels abroad he
always seems to have had in his mind the maturing of a policy of
betterment for his people, and the fostering of good will among the
various elements of the populations of Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Langelier, The Honorable Sir François-Xavier=, Statesman, and
Lieutenant-Governor of Quebec, comes of very distinguished ancestry, and
is one of the most respected, capable and learned of French-Canadian
gentlemen, who has taken a leading part in the public life of Canada,
and by his brilliant achievements, ripe scholarship and administrative
ability, has served as an inspiration and shining example to all who
would win a high place in the confidence and esteem of their
fellow-countrymen. His parents were Louis Sabastien Langelier and Julie
Esther (Cassault). Paternal ancestor came to Canada from Fresquiennes,
near Rouen, Normandy, 1652; mother’s family from Granville, France; born
at Ste. Rosalie, Province of Quebec, Dec. 24, 1838. Educated at St.
Hyacinthe College and Laval University (LL.B., 1860; LL.L., avec grande
distinction, 1861; LL.D., 1878), and Paris, France; D.C.L. (honorary)
Lennoxville, 1903; married, first Feb., 1884, Virginie Sarah Sophie
(died May, 1891), daughter of the late I. Legare, Quebec; secondly, May,
1892, Marie Louise, daughter of late Frederic Braun, late Civil Service,
Ottawa; advocate, 1861; was one of the leaders of the Provincial Bar;
K.C. (Province Quebec), 1878; also created K.C. by Dominion Government,
1880 (Marquis of Lorne); Batonnier (district Quebec) 1887;
Batonnier-General of the Province, 1888; practised his profession
successfully in the city of Quebec, where he was many years, from 1866,
a member of the law faculty, Laval University, and subsequently, Dean of
the Faculty and a member of the Council of the University; was also
Vice-President of the Canadian Bar Association; President of the
Institute Canadien and President of the Council of the Arts and
Manufacturers’ Association; served as Mayor of Quebec, 1882-90; entered
political life as a Liberal, and a free trader; was in turn a follower
of Mackenzie, Blake and Laurier; unsuccessfully contested Bagot (Local),
1871; subsequently successively sat for Montmagny and Portneuf; sat for
Megantic (House of Commons), 1884-87, and for Quebec Centre, 1887-1898;
was Commissioner of Crown Lands and Treasurer, successively, in the
local Administration of Sir H. G. Joly de Lotbinière, 1878-89; one of
the signers of the address from the Liberal party to the Pope, 1896,
resulting in the appointment of a Papal ablegate to Canada; a puisne
Judge of Supreme Court of Province of Quebec, Jan. 14, 1898; delegated
to perform the duties of the Chief Justice for the District of Quebec,
June 6, 1906; as Chief Justice, became a member of the Board of
Arbitrators, appointed 1891, for the settlement of accounts outstanding
at Confederation between the Dominion and the Provinces of Quebec and
Ontario; acted as Administrator of the Government of Quebec during the
absence of Sir L. A. Jetté, 1903; knighted by his late Majesty King
Edward, 1907; and made a Knight of Grace in the Order of St. John of
Jerusalem in England in 1912; appointed Lieutenant-Governor, Province of
Quebec, May, 1911; died February 8, 1915; has served as a Royal
Commissioner on several occasions; was prominently identified with the
movement for the organization of the Anti-Alcoholic League and its first
President, 1907; was also President of the special committee appointed
in connection with the tercentenary of the foundation of Quebec, 1906.
Elected F.R.S.O., 1908; President, 1910; in addition to other legal
productions, is the author of “Traite de la preuve, en matiere civile et
commerciale,” and of “Cours de Droit Civil de Quebec.” Is the father of
the following children: Juliette, Braun, who took service in the present
war, was wounded three times, got the military cross for his bravery,
and was promoted captain in the 22nd Batt. French Canadians; Françoise,
Marc and Gerard. His Honor is a member of the following clubs: The
Quebec Garrison and The Canadian. In religion, a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lynch, Hon. William Warren, B.C., Q.C., D.C.L., LL.D.=, was born near
the Village of Bedford, County of Missisquoi, Province of Quebec, on
September 30, 1845. His father, Thomas Lynch, came from the County of
Cavan, Ireland, about the year 1830. He served during the Canadian
Rebellion in the Shefford Troop of Cavalry, and died at Knowlton, Brome
County, on March 19, 1883. His mother, Charlotte R. Williams, was born
at Stukely, County of Shefford, Province of Quebec, in the year 1805.
Her parents were descendants of U.E. Loyalists, who came from the State
of Vermont at the close of the American Revolutionary War. She died in
1885. Mr. Lynch, after taking advantage of the elementary schools in the
vicinity of his birthplace, went to Stanbridge Academy in 1858, then a
most flourishing institution, under the direction of Hobart Butler,
M.A., where he prepared himself for a university course. During his last
years at Stanbridge he acted as assistant teacher to Mr. Butler, and
then entered the University of Vermont, Burlington, in August, 1861, but
owing to the Civil War, which had shortly before broken out, the
university course was considerably affected, and Mr. Lynch did not
continue his studies there. In September, 1862, he entered the Arts
Course of McGill University, Montreal, having secured one of the
scholarships offered at a competitive examination. His health failing,
he was obliged to abandon his studies before the Christmas examinations.
He then engaged in school teaching in winter, and worked on his father’s
farm in summer. In 1865 he was admitted to the study of the law, and
pursued his studies in the office, first of S. W. Foster, of Knowlton,
and afterwards of John Monk, of Montreal. He took his degree of B.C.L.
at McGill in May, 1868, and secured the Elizabeth Torrance gold medal,
and was admitted to practice in June. The following year he commenced
the practice of his profession at Knowlton, and subsequently removed to
Sweetsburg, the chef lieu of Bedford District. In the fall of 1870 he
assumed the editorial control of the “Observer,” which was started at
Cowansville, an adjoining village, and which became an influential organ
of public opinion in the district. In June, 1871, during the provincial
elections, which were then in progress, he went to Knowlton to report
for his paper the proceedings of nomination day. There were then two
candidates in the field, and to the surprise of Mr. Lynch, and without
his interference, both candidates withdrew, and he was declared member
elect for the County of Brome. During the Fenian troubles of 1866 Mr.
Lynch took an active part in the formation of a company of volunteers at
Brome, of which he became lieutenant, and remained such until his
resignation in 1871. During the Fenian raid of 1870 he was at the front
with his battalion. In keeping with the promise made to his electors, he
became a resident of the County of Brome, returning to Knowlton in the
fall of 1871. He has held successively the offices of school
commissioner and chairman of that body for a number of years; and was
also the Mayor of the Township of Brome, and Warden of the County. In
May, 1874, he married Ellen Florence, eldest daughter of J. C. Pettes, a
successful merchant of Knowlton, by whom he has two children. He is a
member of the Masonic fraternity, and was some years since, deputy grand
master for the District of Bedford. Mr. Lynch early in life identified
himself with the Conservative party, to which he has ever borne faithful
allegiance. He took an active part in the political discussions in the
Legislature of Quebec on the subject of the dismissal of the De
Boucherville Government, by M. Letellier, and it was upon a motion made
by him that the Joly Government were defeated on October 30, 1879. He
was made a Q.C. by the Joly Government in 1879, which was subsequently
ratified by a similar title conferred upon him by the Federal
authorities in 1881. When M. Chapleau assumed office as premier of the
province, he invited Mr. Lynch to the council as Solicitor-General,
which appointment was subsequently ratified by the electorate of Brome.
On the abolition of the office of Solicitor-General, Mr. Lynch was
appointed Commissioner of Crown Lands, on July 31, 1882. In September,
1887, his constituents tendered him a reception in the shape of a
picnic, which was attended by a large number of public men, and at which
a presentation of a handsome sum of money was made to him by his
political admirers and friends. He then went to Montreal to resume the
practice of his profession, in partnership with the present Mr. Justice
Archibald and Mr. Geo. G. Foster, K.C. Shortly after, he was appointed
by the Dominion Government a Commissioner, in conjunction with the late
Mr. Justice Burridge, then Deputy Minister of Justice, and Mr. Dingman,
of the Department of the Interior, to settle the Indian title to certain
lands in the Township of Dundee, County of Huntington, and continued to
hold that office during the successive administrations of Messrs.
Mousseau, Ross and Taillon, and until the defeat of the last-named
administration in January, 1887. During the session of 1887 he was named
by the House of Assembly one of the Commissioners to perfect the
revision of the provincial statutes. He was one of the leaders of the
Opposition to the Government of the late Honore Mercier until his
appointment to the bench in July, 1889, as Judge of the Superior Court
for the District of Bedford, his native district. He has always taken a
warm interest in educational matters, was twice President of the
Provincial Association of Protestant Teachers, was for some years a
member of the Protestant Committee of the Council of Public Instruction,
and was the first President of the District of Bedford McGill Graduates’
Society. In June, 1883, the University of Bishops’ College offered him
the degree of D.C.L., but owing to absence it was not conferred. In
1904, McGill University gave him the degree of LL.D. He is a devoted
member of the Church of England and has often been a delegate to its
synods. Since he became judge he has devoted his leisure to the
promotion of various matters of local concern, such as good roads,
historical societies and the Knowlton Conference.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Parmelee, William George, LL.D., D.C.L.= (Quebec City), English
Secretary of the Department of Public Instruction, and Joint Secretary
of the Council of Public Instruction of the Province of Quebec, was born
at Waterloo, in the Eastern Townships, in 1860. He is a son of Rufus E.
Parmelee, whose father had come originally from the United States. On
the mother’s side, the subject of this sketch is of Scottish descent. He
received his early education at Waterloo Academy, finally graduating as
a teacher from the McGill Normal School of Montreal. He afterward became
head master of the Model School Department and, later, a Professor of
the Normal School. Previous to his holding these positions, he had been
a member of the staff of St. Francis College, Richmond, P.Q., from 1881
to 1885. From McGill Normal School he was selected for his present
position in 1891; and for more than a quarter of a century he has been
in touch with the educational affairs of Quebec. He has proved himself a
departmental administrator of widely recognized professional acumen. The
academic honors that have been bestowed upon him from the time of his
extra-mural course at Queen’s University, from which he graduated in
1889, stand as an endorsation of his scholarship, these including a
D.C.L. from Bishop’s College in 1902, and an LL.D. from McGill
University in 1911. He has likewise been honored by being chosen more
than once, President of the Teachers’ Association of his native
province; President of the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec for
three several terms; President of the Young Men’s Association; a
delegate to the Federal Council of the United Empire Educational League
in London, England, and later on as a delegate to the Imperial
Conference on Education in the same centre. Taking an interest in local
military affairs he was awarded a Captaincy in the 8th Royal Rifles
Company, and later on received the honorary rank of Colonel. Nor has he
neglected literary pursuits in his spare moments, having had published
two of his papers read before the Literary and Historical Society, and
entitled, “Wolfe as a Man and a Soldier,” and “The Fraser Highlanders.”
He has also won high literary credit as joint-collaborateur with Dr.
Arthur Doughty, the Dominion Archivist, in six volumes dealing with the
“Siege of Quebec.” In 1886 he married Miss Louise Foss, of Waterloo.
Their family consists of four daughters.




[Illustration: HON. P. E. BLONDIN
 Ottawa]




=McCorkill, The Hon. Justice John Charles= (Quebec City), was born in
the town of Farnham, P.Q., on August 31, 1854. His father was Mr. Robert
McCorkill, of Farnham and the Eastern Townships. His mother’s maiden
name was Miss Margaret Meighen. His wife is a daughter of the Hon.
Senator Leonard of London, Ontario, their marriage having taken place in
1884. From the district elementary school, he entered the classes of the
McGill Model School, and in time obtained a certificate to teach from
the McGill Normal School. For a period he acted as Principal of the
Montreal British and Canadian School, thereafter taking his degree of
B.C.L. as a preliminary step to his becoming a lawyer. At first he
became a partner in the Greenshields legal firm, but subsequently
removed to the Bedford District and finally opened a central office at
Cowansville. While rising to a high rank as an advocate, he was
encouraged to enter the political field, and after suffering defeat
twice in succession, was at length elected to the Legislative Assembly
as the representative of Missisquoi. In time he was appointed
Legislative Councillor for the District of Bedford, where he was so
appreciatively known as a public-spirited citizen and an able lawyer,
who had held the position of Batonnier of the Bar and other offices of
rank. In 1903, he resigned his seat in the upper chamber of the
Provincial Parliament, to become Provincial Treasurer in the Parent
Administration, and was elected to the Legislature by the Constituency
of Brome. This office he held for three years, up to the time of his
appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court for the District of Quebec.
While Treasurer, his term was marked by important legislation, such as
the revision of the taxation laws relating to banking institutions and
succession duties, which resulted in a surplus for the province of
half-a-million dollars. After the date of his appointment to the Bench,
he was made a Joint Commissioner with the Hon. Mr. Mathieu and Mr. L. J.
Gauthier, to revise the Municipal Code of the Province of Quebec. His
record as a legal practitioner and advocate, as well as a financier and
public-spirited citizen, has been a full one, wherever he has resided,
in Montreal, in the Eastern Townships, or in the city of Quebec. For
several years he was Mayor of Cowansville, where he was also President
of the Missisquoi Historical Society. He has been President of the
Literary and Historical Society of Quebec, and is a member of the
Council of Public Instruction. Even in military affairs he has taken an
active part, having been Captain as well as Major in the Militia between
the years of 1879 and 1887. His literary tastes have expressed
themselves in the historical papers he has written from time to time.
Altogether the Hon. Justice McCorkill may truly be spoken of as
possessing a forceful and clear-visioned personality, able and willing
always to share in the civic and provincial advancement of the community
in which he lives or has lived.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Taschereau, The Hon. Louis Alexander= (Quebec City), Minister of Public
Works for the Province of Quebec, is the son of the Hon. Justice
Taschereau, who married Miss Josephine Caron, the daughter of the Hon.
Justice Caron, formerly Lieut.-Governor. He was born on the 5th of
March, 1867. He was educated at the Quebec Seminary and Laval
University, graduating as a Licentiate of Law in 1889, preliminary to
his entering upon his professional career as partner of Sir Charles
Fitzpatrick, now Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada. Later he
became associated with what is now the legal firm of Taschereau, Roy,
Cannon, Parent & Casgrain. As a lawyer, Mr. Taschereau came at once to
be recognized as one of the leading legal practitioners of the district,
among his successes being the part he took in the Gaynor and Greene
extradition case in 1902. In addition to his duties as an advocate he
took part in civic affairs, and for a time held a seat as an alderman of
his native city. In 1900, he was elected for the constituency of
Montmorency in the Legislative Assembly, and has continued ever since to
be its representative. Seven years after, with his skill in debate, duly
recognized by his parliamentary associates, he was selected to take his
place in the Gouin Administration as Minister of Public Works and Labor.
His administrative ability has been in keeping with his statesmanlike
insight and foresight, and his skill in debate. His advice is ever in
demand when any legal technicality has to be examined and explained to
both sides of the Assembly. In fact, he has taken a high place as the
Premier’s ally in all matters pertaining to the progress of the
province, while he has won the highest credit within parliamentary
circles and beyond them, for the efficiency of the Department in his
charge. He has been a member of the Battlefields Park Commission since
the day it was organized, and is likewise a Governor of the Catholic
Church Society. He is a nephew of the late Cardinal Taschereau,
Archbishop of Quebec. In 1891 he married Miss Adine Dionne, daughter of
the Hon. E. Dionne, of the Legislative Council of Quebec, by whom he has
had three sons and two daughters. Altogether he has made a record for
himself in his native city and province as an able advocate, an astute
governmental administrator, and a loyal citizen. Sprung from a
distinguished and talented family, his career as a public man has added
to its fame.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ross, James Gibb= (Quebec City), Senator of Canada, was born in
Carluke, a village of Lanarkshire, in Scotland, on April 18, 1819. He
came out to Canada in 1832, in company with his elder brother, John
Ross; and, after attending one of the private schools of Quebec for a
year or two, he entered the business office of his uncle, Mr. James
Gibb. At this time the firm of James Gibb & Company was one of the
largest of the wholesale grocery and provision houses in what has always
been known as the Lower Town of Quebec; and there the Scottish lad laid
the foundation of his business career, which was eventually to place him
among the wealthiest merchants of Canada. In 1843, Mr. Thomas O. Gibb,
son of Mr. James Gibb, returned to Quebec, after finishing his school
education in Edinburgh; and in the same year a company was formed in
which Thomas O. Gibb, John Ross, and James G. Ross were the partners,
until the first mentioned of the three died in 1845. Eventually, on Mr.
James Gibb’s death, the two Ross brothers took the business name of Ross
& Co., and as such continued in active operation up to the year 1868. By
this time the firm had amplified its business by other branches of
trading; and in 1868 the older of the two members of the firm withdrew
to conduct a business of his own, for the most part confined, as it was,
to the grocery and provision trade. With him was associated his youngest
brother, Frank Ross. At the time of the Senator’s death, in 1888, the
firm of Ross & Co. had developed into one of the wealthiest business
concerns in the country, having depots for the distribution of their
wares in nearly all the larger cities of Canada and the United States.
With millions at his command, the sole partner of the firm took an
active interest in shipbuilding and railroad construction. Nearly every
branch of industry was enhanced by the money advances of the
multi-millionaire. The shipping interests, especially, felt the effects
of his business acumen, especially when he took in charge for sailing
purposes the ships the building of which he had assisted with advances
of money, but which, for market reasons could not for a time be sold.
The railroads which came in for assistance included the Quebec and Lake
St. John Railway and the Quebec Central, both of which may trace their
success as paying concerns to the financial foresight of Senator James
G. Ross, who thus both directly and indirectly aided the colonization of
the country and its trading interests by the assistance he extended to
their promoters. Nor was it easy for one so prominent in the commercial
interests of the ancient capital to refuse to be nominated as a
candidate for parliamentary honors. On two several occasions he was
called upon to contest the electoral division of Quebec Centre, once in
the Conservative interest in 1872, against Mr. Cauchon, afterwards
Governor of Manitoba, and a second time as an Independent, in 1878,
against Mr. Malouin. In both instances he was defeated, though
afterwards he was considered worthy to succeed the Hon. David Price as
Senator, in 1884. He was unmarried; but in the families of his two
brothers, John and Frank, he is notably represented to-day by Mr. John
Theodore Ross, the only son of the former, and Frank W. Ross, surviving
son of the latter, both of whom have evidently in them the desire
inherited from their uncle, James G. Ross, to advance the interests of
their native city. The Hon. Senator Ross was a prominent citizen other
than in business and political circles. He took an interest in school
improvements and church advancement. He was for many years President of
the Quebec Bank, a Director of the Quebec High School, and an elder in
Chalmers Church. As may well be said of his beneficent uncle, James
Gibb, Senator James Gibb Ross was a liberal benefactor to the
institutions of Quebec, both before his death and after it. He
accumulated his millions in Peter Street, and every Protestant
institution in the city of his adoption benefited by his wealth in some
way or another.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gouin, The Hon. Sir Jean Lomer, K.C.M.G., LL.B., LL.D.=, Premier of the
Province of Quebec, was born at Brondines, of the County of Portneuf, on
March 19, 1861. He comes from a French-Canadian stock whose lineage can
be traced as far back as 1662. His father was J. N. Gouin, M.D., who
married Miss Victoire Seraphine Fugère in 1852. In his earlier years,
their son Lomer became a pupil of Sorel College, thereafter entering as
an under-graduate the College of Levis, and afterwards graduating at
Laval University. His collegiate honors include the degree of LL.D.,
received successively from Laval in 1902, from Bishop’s College
University in 1913, and from Toronto University in 1915. He was called
to the Bar in 1884, after studying law under the late Sir John Abbott
and the Hon. B. Laflamme. He had thus been a student under the
supervision of a Prime Minister of Canada and of a Minister of Justice.
During his partnership with Judge Pagnuello and the Hon. Premier Honore
Mercier, whose daughter Eliza he married in 1888, he came into
prominence in the law courts of Montreal, being finally elected
Batonnier-General in 1910, after having served a term as Alderman of
that city, and elected a Member of the Local Legislature. In 1900 he
became Commissioner of Public Works in the Parent Administration for
four years. Resigning his place in the Parent Cabinet in 1904, he was
called to the premiership the year after, holding the portfolio of
Attorney-General up to the present time. During the general election of
1916 his administration of public affairs was upheld by a majority never
before vouchsafed to a Quebec premier; while the list of honors
conferred upon him since his advent to power is perhaps one of the
longest on record. He was knighted by the reigning Sovereign of the
Empire at the Quebec Tercentenary Celebration of 1908, and was made a
K.C.M.G. in the year 1913. Ever animated with a desire to see his native
province an advancing factor in the general progress of the Dominion of
Canada, as well as of the British Empire, he has been diligent in
promoting the public works that have to be fostered within the counties
and parishes, as well as in the cities and larger towns, in line with
the general advancement of the commonwealth. He has done his best to
improve the educational conditions of the communities, not forgetting
likewise to improve the highways and the industrial activities all over
the province. His zeal in establishing and liberally subsidizing
Industrial Schools and Technical Colleges has become a proverb in all
the provinces; while, in view of his support of a provincial grant of
one million dollars to the Canadian Patriotic Fund during the time of
war, his reputation as a broad-minded Canadian citizen has been placed
beyond all questioning. Senator David has pronounced a eulogium on
Premier Gouin that places him in rank with, if not beyond, those who
have preceded him in the Quebec premiership. Within these war-times he
has advocated a National War Service in the most fervent terms,
illustrating Senator David’s estimate of his statesmanship as that of a
highly capable servant of the State, in his impartial judgment,
prudence, eloquence, and administrative acumen. His share in the Bonne
Entente mission to Ontario in 1917, to plead, with others, for a closer
mutual understanding between the two leading races in Canada, has given
an éclat to his statesmanship. He would see Canada a unit while aiding
the mother lands in Europe by force of arms, and thus uphold the
prestige of the British Empire. And the various offices Sir Lomer Gouin
has held from the day he entered public life in 1891, indicate the
strenuous part he has played as a public-spirited Canadian. In 1891, he
was President of the National Club in Montreal, which was virtually “the
Executive of the Liberal Party” in the Montreal district. That year he
was defeated in his first election contest. Six years after he was
elected representative for the St. James Electoral Division of Montreal,
and thereafter has been member for his native County of Portneuf. He has
continued to be a Member of the Council of Public Instruction since
1898; became President of the American Fish and Game Protection
Association in 1910; was Chairman of the Ottawa Inter-provincial
Conference in 1906, and afterwards a delegate to a like Conference in
1910. As from one “learned in the law,” his edition of the Municipal
Code is a standard work; while no one has so well at his command the
details of parliamentary law-and-order as he has, as leader of the House
of Assembly. The record of his regime is concisely given in a neat
little volume published in 1916, under the title of “Le Gouvernment
Gouin et Son Oeuvre.” Another volume referring to the federal subsidies
in favor of the provinces was published in 1903, giving the amplified
record of an address delivered by Sir Lomer under the heading of “The
Actual Question.” These volumes, together with the reports of his
speeches from time to time, indicate how Sir Lomer Gouin has ever had in
mind the public interest—seeing to the improving of the conditions in
his native province, even to the widening out of its area as in the case
of the annexation of the District of Ungava, building government works,
and highways, and bridges, and never forgetting to urge it to keep pace
with its sister provinces in the federacy which includes them all within
the Dominion of Canada. In seeing to the advancement of the province he
has in charge as premier, he has made fame for himself as a loyal
statesman and dignified scholar, duly honored by the King and his
country’s seats of learning. He was married to Miss Alice Amos, his
second wife, in 1911. By his first wife he has had two sons—Leon, who
is practising law in Montreal; and Paul, who is a lieutenant on active
service.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Drayton, Sir Henry Lumley, K.C., K.B.=, Chief Commissioner, Board of
Railway Commissioners for Canada, was born in Kingston, Ontario, April
27, 1869. He is the son of Philip Henry Drayton, who came to Canada with
the 16th Rifles of England, and Margaret S. (Covernton) Drayton. He was
educated in the schools of England and Canada. On September 14, 1892, he
married Edith Mary Cawthra, daughter of the late Joseph Cawthra,
Toronto, and has three daughters. Sir Henry Drayton was called to the
Ontario Bar in 1891 and soon became recognized as one of the leaders in
the legal profession. In September 1893, he was appointed Assistant City
Solicitor for Toronto, and when he resigned in September, 1900, he was
presented with a gold watch in recognition of the valuable services he
had rendered to the city in his legal capacity. He immediately
(September, 1900), formed partnership with Charles J. Holman, K.C., and
in January, 1902, was appointed Counsel to the Railway Committee of the
Ontario Legislature by the Chairman, the Hon. John Dryden. The following
year he was appointed representative of the Ontario Government for the
purpose of adjudicating upon and paying, on behalf of the Government,
the claims of workmen of the different Clergue Companies operating at
Sault Ste. Marie, and on January 29, 1904, he was appointed County Crown
Attorney for the County of York, on the recommendation of the Hon. J. M.
Gibson. In 1905 he was appointed Counsel on Civic Bribery Investigation,
Toronto, the Civic Investigation Court House in 1906, the Public School
Board Investigation, and also the Civic Investigation into the Medical
Health Department. January the 20th, 1908, he was created K.C. He
resigned his position as County Crown Attorney in 1909, and the
following year, April 25, 1910, was appointed Counsel for the
Corporation of the City of Toronto. May 11, 1911, he was appointed as
representative of the Ontario Government a member of the Toronto Power
Commission. When on July 1, 1912, he was appointed Chief Commissioner of
the Board of Railway Commissioners for Canada the Toronto City Council
presented him with an illuminated album. In July, 1913, he was appointed
Commissioner to deal with the question of Control of Ocean Freight
Rates. In 1917 Sir Henry Drayton was appointed a member of the
Drayton-Smith-Acworth Commission which investigated the Canadian railway
situation. When the work of the Commission was completed and their
report presented to the Government, he, as his fee for his able services
on the Commission, was presented with a cheque for $15,000 by the
Dominion Government. He refused to accept payment and returned the
cheque. Acknowledging the receipt of the returned cheque the then
Minister of Railways and Canals, Hon. Mr. Cochrane, wrote in part as
follows: “I can assure you that your very patriotic attitude in this
matter is most sincerely appreciated by the Government at a time when
every dollar which can be saved is of material importance to the
successful prosecution of the war.” In very many other ways since the
war commenced in 1914, Sir Henry Drayton has rendered valuable
services—financially, as a member of committees and in the direction of
transportation, supply and other matters. He is ever to the fore to do
all he can to help Canada successfully bear the burdens—financially,
commercially and otherwise—that this war has forced her to carry and no
one has ever rendered such services more freely and willingly. Sir Henry
Drayton is a member of the Toronto, Toronto Hunt, Ontario Jockey,
Rideau, Ottawa Royal Golf, Country (Ottawa), Connaught Park Jockey
(Ottawa), and the Kaministiquia (Fort William) Clubs. His address is 233
Metcalfe St., Ottawa.




[Illustration: S. R. PARSONS
 Toronto]




=Dobell, Sir Charles Macpherson, K.C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O.= (Quebec City),
Lieutenant-General of the British Army, is a son of the late Hon. R. R.
Dobell, lumber merchant, of Quebec, and a grandson of Senator Sir David
Macpherson, at one time Speaker of the Canadian Senate. He is a native
of Quebec, having been born on June 22, 1869. Receiving his elementary
education at the Rev. Canon Von Iffland’s Private School, he became a
student at the Quebec High School and later at the Charterhouse School
in England, previous to his entering the Royal Military College at
Kingston, Ontario. From that institution he graduated in 1890. After
serving as a Lieutenant in the Hazara Expedition, wherein his bravery
was mentioned in dispatches and by the award of a medal and clasp, his
advancement has proceeded steadily with his experience in active
service. He took part with the International Forces in the occupation of
the Island of Crete, and was there raised to the rank of Major. During
the South African War, he joined the Canadian Contingent, and won his
D.S.O. with other honors, during the several engagements of the
campaign. In command of a regiment of mounted infantry he shared in
conflict after conflict with the Boers, taking part in the relief of
Kimberley, and in the engagements of Paardeberg, Poplar Grove,
Prefontaine, Johannesburg, Pretoria and Diamond Hill, and many others.
After serving in Nigeria, he was given the rank of Lieut.-Colonel, his
name from time to time occurring in the dispatches to the War Office. As
an interruption to his service in Nigeria, he was called to China during
the Boxer uprising, and was present at the relief of Pekin by the
International Forces. On his return from China, he was appointed by the
War Office to the South African Intelligence Department, and became an
A.D.C. to the King. Later on he was gazetted as Inspector-General of the
West African Field Force, with the rank of Brigadier-General, a position
he was holding when Germany declared war in 1914. Since then he has
gained further distinction and promotion. With a combined force of
French and English troops numbering nearly ten thousand, he shared in
the conquest of the German Colony of the Cameroons, a territory covering
an area in all of 300,000 square miles. On New Year’s Day, 1916, the
order of C.M.G. was bestowed upon him by King George, and eventually, at
the close of the Cameroon Expedition, he received the honor of K.C.B.,
as well as the Legion of Honor from the President of the French
Republic, being at the same time gazetted as a Major-General of the
British Army. A still later event in his career as a “soldier of the
king” led to his being placed in command as Lieut.-General of the Coast
Forces that were to advance from the Suez Canal into Palestine.
Altogether Sir Charles Dobell’s career has been a splendid one. Hailing
as he does from a district in Canada that has provided several military
officers of high rank to the forces of the Motherland, his
fellow-Canadians cannot but be proud of the record made by one of their
own as a soldier and commander. He was married in 1908, to Mrs. (Elsye
Bankes) Campbell, daughter of the late Lieut.-Colonel Meyrick Bankes, of
London, and widow of Captain F. L. Campbell, R.N. His two brothers, Mr.
William Molson Dobell, lumber merchant, and Mr. Alfred Dobell, advocate,
as well as his uncle, Mr. William Molson Macpherson, banker, are
prominent citizens of the city of Quebec.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Garneau, Sir George=, formerly Mayor of Quebec City, and one of the
prominent merchants and capitalists of that city, who has been for many
years President of the National Battlefields Commission, is a son of the
late Hon. Pierre Garneau, Member of the Legislative Council of the
Province of Quebec, and several times member of the Provincial Cabinet.
On the mother’s side he was a grandson of Mr. Edward Burroughs, the
Prothonotary. Sir George is a native of Quebec, having been born on
November 19, 1864. He received his earlier education at the Quebec
Seminary, afterwards entering as a student the Montreal Polytechnic
School, where he graduated as Civil Engineer, in 1884. Four years
afterwards he took the degree of Bachelor of Applied Science in Laval
University, where for a period he was Titular Professor of Analytical
Chemistry. For a time he held the position of assistant engineer on the
construction staff of the Quebec and Lake St. John Railway, previous to
his being taken in as a partner in his father’s wholesale dry goods
establishment. Aside from his business pursuits, he identified himself
with civic affairs, and on being elected alderman, he was chosen as
Mayor in 1906, and at the close of his term was unanimously re-elected
for a second term of two years. It was while he was Mayor that he became
Chairman of the National Battlefields Commission, in 1908. During that
year there occurred the Tercentennial Celebration of the founding of
Quebec. In association with Earl Grey, he was prominently identified
with the supervision of the preliminaries to that Celebration, and has
since deeply interested himself, with his associate Commissioners, in
the laying out of the Battlefields Park, which is still in course of
completion as one of the most striking of Canada’s historic landmarks.
His zeal as an overseer of that enterprise and the interest he took in
the events of the Celebration, graced, as it was, by the presence of the
Prince of Wales, now King George V, and other notables of Canada and the
Motherland, was signalized by the honor of knighthood at the hands of
King Edward VII, an honor subsequently supplemented by the President of
the French Republic, in the bestowal of the Legion of Honor. On the
creation of the Quebec Public Utilities Commission, in 1910, he was
appointed member of the same and acting President, the appointment being
extended for a period of ten years. His career has been marked by the
holding of many other high positions connected with the progress of his
native city. For a time he was a Director of the Railway Company, under
which he had been in his earlier years a civil engineer. He has been
Director of the Prudential Trust Company, a Director of the Quebec
Steamship Company, a member of the Advisory Board of the Richelieu and
Ontario Navigation Company, a Director of the Quebec Land Company, and a
Governor of Laval University. His brother, the Hon. E. B. Garneau, was
appointed to the Legislative Council on the death of his father. Since
the demise of both of them, Sir George has continued to be President of
the firm of “Garneau Limited.” He was married in 1892, to Miss Alma
Benoit, daughter of Alphonse Benoit, for many years Secretary of the
Department of Militia and Defence of Canada. His family consists of five
sons and three daughters. In these later years Sir George has taken a
deep interest in the Entente Conferences for the promotion of unity
between the two distinctive races of Canada; and during the Toronto
Conference, he was received at a special Convocation of the University
of Toronto, and had the honor of LL.D. conferred upon him. The ancestors
of the Garneau family came originally from France in 1663; and the
subject of this sketch as a French-Canadian, using the French and
English languages with equal facility, has never failed to acknowledge
himself as an all-Canadian, devoted to the cause of a common
Canadianism, under the aegis of the British Empire. He also served in
the Canadian Militia, from which he retired with the rank of Captain of
Field Artillery in 1894.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cox, Herbert Coplin= (Toronto, Ont.), son of the late Hon. George A.
Cox, Senator, and Margaret (Hopkins) Cox, was born at Peterborough,
Ont., on June 29, 1873, and received his education at Jarvis Street
Collegiate Institute and Victoria University, Toronto. Mr. Cox was
trained to business life and in an extensive experience under his father
early developed aptitude and ability as a financier. In July, 1895, he
married Louise Bogart Brown, daughter of Charles Brown, Toronto. On
completing his education Mr. Cox entered the service of the Canada Life
Assurance Company and rapidly rose to the management of the company’s
largest branch. He entered into partnership with his father under the
firm name of George A. & H. C. Cox, in the management of the Eastern
Ontario and Michigan branches of the company in July, 1899, and became
sole manager of the business of that territory upon his father’s
appointment to the presidency. In October, 1912, he was invited to
accept the presidency of the Imperial Life Assurance Company, where he
obtained an invaluable experience in executive work. He retired from
this position in August, 1914, to become President of the Canada Life
Assurance Company on the death of his brother, E. W. Cox. He also
assumed the responsibility of various other offices and directorates
held by his late brother. While, however, his career as an insurance man
and financier has been such as very few men of his age have attained,
that represents but one side of a character remarkable for activity and
public spirit, as well as ability. In movements toward the betterment of
conditions in the life insurance business Mr. Cox has naturally taken a
keen interest, but his pursuits outside of business, especially in the
field of social betterment, are varied and important. He took a deep and
active interest in the erection of Toronto’s General Hospital, serving
upon several committees in this connection. He is a director of the
Toronto Conservatory of Music and is a member of the Music Committee of
the Metropolitan Church, of which he is also a trustee. He is likewise
chairman of the Toronto Symphony Orchestra, and Honorary Colonel of the
Mississauga Horse. Mr. Cox is President and General Manager of the
Canada Life Assurance Company, President of the Imperial Guarantee and
Accident Company, President of the Toronto Savings and Loan Company,
President of the Provident Investment Company, Vice-President of the
Central Canada Loan and Savings Company, Director of the Dominion
Securities Corporation, Director of the National Trust Company, Director
of the Canadian General Electric Company, Director of the British
American Assurance Company, Director of the Western Assurance Company,
Director of the Dunlop Tire and Rubber Company, and Director of the
Robert Simpson Company. He is a member of the following clubs: Toronto,
York, Toronto Hunt, Toronto Golf, Mississauga Golf, Royal Canadian
Yacht, National, Ontario, Arts and Letters. In religion Mr. Cox is a
Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Carew, John, M.L.A.= (Lindsay, Ont.), born Jan. 5, 1862, at Emily
Township, County of Victoria, son of John Carew and Jane Wilson, both
Irish. He was educated at Lindsay Public School. Married, Feb. 11, 1885,
to Margaret, daughter of Francis and Margaret Kelly, of Red Rock,
Verulam Township, County of Victoria, and is father of the following
children: Hazel May, Lieut.-Col. Francis John Carew, Annie, Ethel,
Gertrude J., Charles Lawrence, Arthur W. and Roberta Grace. Mr. Carew
has been successfully engaged in the lumber business at Lindsay for
about thirty years and is a large employer of labor. He is President and
General Manager of The John Carew Lumber Company, Limited;
Vice-President of Horn Bros. Woollen Mills; Vice-President Hodgson Bros.
Chemical Co.; Vice-President The Halton Brick Co.; Vice-President The
Canada Sand Lime Brick Co. Was elected a member of the Ontario
Legislature at the general elections in 1914 as the Conservative
representative for South Victoria. Mr. Carew is a Presbyterian in
religion, a member of the Masonic Order, and of the Independent Order of
Oddfellows. He is a Governor of the Ross Memorial Hospital at Lindsay, a
member of the Board of Education of the town, and President of the
Lindsay Central Exhibition. Mr. Carew is an enthusiastic member of the
Lindsay Curling Club. He is recognized as one of the country’s most
public spirited and progressive citizens.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Casgrain, Philippe Baby= (Quebec City), lawyer, parliamentarian and
author, is of an old and distinguished family, which includes in its
record besides himself, the late Abbé P. H. Casgrain, of literary fame;
the Hon. Senator Charles E. C. Casgrain, M.D.; the Hon. Thomas Chase
Casgrain, the distinguished lawyer and Minister of the Crown, and the
Hon. Senator J. P. B. Casgrain. The subject of this sketch was born in
the city of Quebec, on the 30th December, 1826. He is the son of Mr. C.
E. C. Casgrain, who was at one time the Deputy Commissioner of Public
Works. His mother’s maiden name was Miss Anne Baby, a daughter of the
Hon. James Baby, Cabinet Minister. He had his earlier education at St.
Anne’s College. In 1850 he was called to the Bar, and was given his K.C.
in his thirty-third year, after being associated as a law-partner with
the Hon. Mr. Cauveau, the Solicitor-General of his time. After this he
was given a position as assistant in the Prothonotary’s Office, and was
later on chosen Clerk of the Circuit Court. Subsequently he was elected
a member of the House of Commons for the constituency of L’Islet, which
he continued to represent from term to term for nearly twenty years. It
was not until 1891 he was defeated by Mr. Georges Desjardins. During his
parliamentary days he was ever diligent in assuming his share of
committee work, having taken a prominent part in the Royal Commission
appointed to investigate the administration of public affairs in the
constituency of Rimouski. Two years after his defeat in L’Islet, he was
given the presidency of a second Royal Commission to enquire into the
affairs of the Montreal and Sorel Railway. During his long term of
office in the Court House, he gained a prominence as a writer and
investigator of the traditions that fringed the historical atmosphere of
his native city. He was elected for a term of two years President of the
Literary and Historical Society in 1898, and seven years afterwards he
was chosen for the same position a second time. He also was a member of
the Navy League, and took an active part in securing the Plains of
Abraham as a federal asset, thus preparing the way for its becoming a
permanent acquisition of the National Battlefields Parks Commission. In
1907 he was elected Vice-President of the Canadian Landmarks
Association, and was later awarded a diploma from the Royal Society of
Canada for his zeal in archæological research. The Transactions of the
Royal Society and of the Literary and Historical Society bear testimony
to his industry in preparing historical and antiquarian matter for
publication, which otherwise might have been lost. For instance, he
successfully located the site of the fountain from which the founder of
the colony, Samuel de Champlain, had water drawn to supply his
habitation, as well as the site of the house in which General Montcalm
lived during his sojourn in Quebec, and the house in which he died; the
site of the place of abode of Abraham Martin, whose name is perpetuated
in the name of the historic battlefield; the site of Dumont’s Mill, near
the baylet curvature of the St. Lawrence known as Wolfe’s Cove; the
location of Claire Fontaine, that gave its name to the street which, as
an elevated pathway on the brow of Perrault’s Hill, saw the marshalling
of Montcalm’s troops in three divisions; besides the locations of many
other historical landmarks in the Ancient Capital. Learned in the law,
he was held in high respect as an official of the Palais de Justice. His
long tenure of office in Parliament and out of it has always been
characterized by integrity of purpose in dealing with public matters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gibson, Theron= (Toronto, Ont.), Valuator and Financial Agent, began
his career as an accountant with John Hogg, dry goods merchant, Guelph,
Ont., in 1875, after an early education in the Public Schools and
British American Business College. He was successively, Treasurer of the
Guelph Lumber Company, 1878-1880; Office Manager, John Hogg & Son,
Guelph, 1880-1885; Financial Manager, A. R. McMaster & Bro., Toronto,
1885-1886; Accountant, Freehold Loan & Savings Co., Toronto, 1886-1887;
Inspector of the same, 1887-1898; and Inspector, Canada Permanent &
Western Canada Mortgage Corporation, 1898-1903. Since when he has been
engaged in business on his own account valuing real estate for
investors, conducting arbitrations, managing estates, in addition to
negotiating investments and fire insurance. He is interested in State
Consolidated Oil Co., and a director both of Wm. Cane & Sons Co.,
Newmarket, and of Fire Insurance Exchange Corporation, Toronto. Mr.
Gibson has always taken a prominent part in church and benevolent work.
For some years he was President of the Guelph Y.M.C.A. and Treasurer and
Member of the Board of the Toronto Y.M.C.A. For thirteen years he has
been Superintendent of Central Presbyterian Sunday School, and for seven
years Treasurer of the Ontario Branch of the Dominion Alliance. Since
1905 he has been a member of the Executive of the Provincial Sunday
School Association, and is to-day Vice-Chairman of that body, as also a
member of the Executive Committee and Board of Trustees of the
International Sunday School Association, and Secretary of that board and
life member of the Association; Treasurer and Member of the Executive
Committee, Presbyterian Sunday School Association; Vice-President of the
Toronto Sunday School Association, and director of the Upper Canada
Bible Society. He has been an elder in the Presbyterian Church since
1883. Mr. Gibson was born in Huron County, Ont., February 19, 1852, the
son of David and Sarah Jane Gibson, and married Mary Jean, daughter of
the late John Stephen Holmwood, Flamboro W., Ont., September 11, 1877.
He has five children, David Holmwood, Norman Rothwell, William Ernest,
Douglas and Jessie Winnifred.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Murphy, Hon. Charles, B.A.= The son of James Murphy of Birr, King’s
County, Ireland, and Mary Conway, of Limerick, was born in Ottawa,
December 8, 1863. He was educated in the Separate Schools, the
Collegiate Institute and Ottawa University (B.A.), and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto. He is a Barrister-at-law and has been for several years
honorary solicitor for the Christian Aid Society. In September, 1908,
upon the retirement from the Cabinet of Hon. R. W. Scott, Secretary of
State, Mr. Murphy was chosen to succeed him and was sworn in on October
10. This office he held until the resignation of Sir Wilfrid Laurier’s
Cabinet, October 6, 1911. He was nominated by the Liberals of Russell
County as their candidate for the House of Commons, and at the general
election of 1908 was elected by a large majority. He was re-elected at
the general election of 1911. He is recognized throughout Canada as one
of the most persistent advocates of Home Rule for Ireland, and his
efforts and eloquence have ever been prominently evident in that cause.
He is a member of the Laurentian, University and Rivermead Golf Clubs,
Ottawa, and the Ontario Club, Toronto. He is a Roman Catholic, a Liberal
in politics, and resides at 174 Maclaren Street, Ottawa. His father, the
late James Murphy, was a well-known contractor and built, among other
important public works, the Pembina branch of the Canadian Pacific
Railway.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cole, Wilmot Howard, ex-M.L.A., Colonel= (Brockville, Ont.), was born
at Brockville, February 16, 1834. The patronymic Cole is of very ancient
Saxon origin: It appears in the “Domesday Book.” The public records show
that in the year 1640, Sir John Cole, of Shenley, in Hertfordshire,
England, was a landed proprietor. His son, Adam, married and had issue a
son, Cornelius. This Cornelius Cole emigrated to America in the year
1708; in 1711 he became a justice of Albany County comprised within the
limits of what was called “Livingston Manor.” His land was next to that
of W. T. Livingston, and extended from the Manor House road to Jansens’s
Kill, or creek, and was one of the finest farms in the Manor. He had
three sons, named Nicholas, John and Adam. On the breaking out of the
rebellion, Cornelius Cole and his sons, John and Adam, espoused the
cause of England, and the sons joined the Royalist forces. As the war
proceeded the feeling ran so high against the “Tories,” as the Royalists
were called, and Cornelius Cole, although an old man, was seized and
imprisoned, where he died a victim of fidelity to Motherland. His
property was confiscated, and his sons forced to seek a home in the
wilds of Canada. In 1773 John and Adam Cole with his wife and her two
brothers, Jonathan, Jr., and Abel Fulford, left with other United Empire
Loyalists for Canada, and passing up the St. Lawrence, they landed and
settled in the County of Leeds, in that part now called the Township of
Elizabethtown, at a point on the River St. Lawrence about five miles
west of the present town of Brockville, which place is still called
“Cole’s Ferry.” Here Adam Cole settled, being, as he was frequently
heard to say, the first person to begin a settlement in the Township of
Elizabethtown. Some years after the close of the war, Peter, a son of
John Cole, returned to his grandfather’s old home in Ulster County, to
ascertain whether he could recover some of the family estate, which had
been confiscated, but failed, as the authorities had granted the
property to other persons. Adam Cole’s wife was Thankful Fulford, also
descended from Loyalist stock. Her father, Jonathan Fulford, sen., with
the rest of his family came in 1784, and settled in the same
neighborhood, and left numerous descendants. Adam Cole’s family, in
1812, consisted of nine sons and seven daughters, besides four who died
in infancy. Five of the sons served in the War of 1812, the eldest,
Peter, having assisted in the capture of Ogdensburg, and subsequently
held the rank of captain. The house of Adam Cole was the general
headquarters of the military, when they were in that section of country,
or when moving between Montreal and Kingston. It is related of Peter
Cole, the eldest son, that in the year 1810, the mail carrier was taken
sick at his father’s house, and Peter took the mail to Kingston, where
he received that from Toronto and carried it back to Montreal. At
Montreal he took charge of the mail for the west, which had been
accumulating for a month and weighed upwards of sixty pounds, and
carried it to Kingston. He accomplished the whole trip, going and
coming, of 430 miles on foot, in fourteen days, and this was in March,
when the trail most of the way was through the forest and very
difficult. He received for this service, from the Government the sum of
fifteen dollars. Abel Cole, who was the youngest son of Adam Cole, died
December 9, 1893, aged 88 years. His wife, Catherine Seaman, a
grand-daughter of Caleb Seaman, died Nov. 2, 1893, aged 83 years, being
one of the sons of Caleb Seaman who was with Lord Cornwallis at York
Town. Wilmot Howard Cole, second son of Abel Cole, was educated at
Brockville. He commenced mercantile business in 1855, and continued in
the same until 1882. The old spirit of loyalty which he inherited,
prompted him upon the organization of the Volunteer Militia of Canada in
1855, to become a member of the old “Brockville Rifle Company,”
commanded by Major Smythe (later of the 100th Regiment, British Army).
The late Col. James Crawford, William Fitzsimmons (a former postmaster
of Brockville), the late Samuel Ross, William Morris, Thomas Camm and
other business men of Brockville, shouldered their muskets and learned
the drill at the same time. Wilmot Howard Cole filled every position in
rank from private to colonel of battalion. In December, 1864, he went
with the Brockville Rifle Company, as lieutenant, to Amherstburg, in the
County of Essex, remaining there on duty until the following May. In
November, 1865, the fear of a Fenian Raid was so strong in the vicinity
of the River St. Lawrence, that the officers of the Brockville Rifle
Company (who were at the time, the late Col. Crawford in command, Lieut.
Cole, Lieut. Robert Bowie, and the late Lieut. Windeat), offered their
services without pay, and to increase their company to 100 men to do
duty for the protection of Brockville and vicinity, by drilling the men
and mounting a heavy guard every night, with sentries posted in
different parts of the town, the men only being paid twenty-five cents
per day. The offer was accepted by the government and that duty
performed until the ensuing March, when a large portion of the volunteer
force were called out, and a provisional battalion formed at Brockville,
under command of Col. Crawford, Lieut. Cole assuming command of the
Brockville Rifle Company, with which he remained on duty until the next
November, part of the time at Brockville and part at Cornwall. Again in
1870, as major of the 41st battalion, he was on duty at Cornwall during
the Fenian excitement. On June 28, 1871, he was appointed to the command
of the 41st battalion; on June 28, 1898, he resigned, having held the
command for 27 years, and was a member of the active force for 43 years.
In 1913 the Militia Department honored him with the full rank of
Colonel. Col. Cole occupied various positions of trust and importance in
the gift of his fellow-citizens. He was a member of the Town Council of
Brockville for fourteen years; a director for many years, and president
of the Johnstown Mutual Fire Insurance Company; a member of the
Independent Order of Oddfellows for many years, filling various offices
in the local lodge and also in the Grand lodge and Grand Encampment. He
was chosen by his brethren to fill the position of Grand Master the year
the Sovereign Grand Lodge met in Toronto, in September, 1880, who were
entertained by their Ontario brethren. He always took an active part in
everything that would advance the interests of his native town. In
connection with the late Allan Turner, he worked for many years to
obtain a system of waterworks for Brockville, and in 1881 they organized
a company, consisting of Allan Turner, John McMullen, Thomas Gilmour,
George A. Dana, and Wilmot H. Cole, to construct waterworks; and as a
result of the efforts of these gentlemen, Brockville has now a most
excellent system of water supply for all purposes. Colonel Cole was
elected a member of the Legislature of the Province of Ontario for the
Brockville riding, in the Liberal interest, at the general elections in
1875, and was a warm supporter of the Mowat Government. He received the
appointment of Registrar for the County of Leeds in February, 1882. He
was president of the Brockville Loan and Savings Company. Col. Cole was
a member of the Methodist Church, and for over fifty years a trustee of
the Wall Street Church in Brockville, and was looked upon by his fellow
church members as ready to assist in carrying forward all enterprises
for the benefit of the church. Col. Cole married Jane Adelaide, youngest
daughter of the late Abram Philips, of New York. Their family consisted
of four children, two sons and two daughters. The sons, following the
traditions of the family, entered the volunteer force very early. The
elder, Eugene Maurice Cole, was bugler in the Brockville Rifle Company
in 1866, and did duty with that company whenever on service; he
subsequently became lieutenant, after which he resigned, having removed
from Brockville. The youngest son, Capt. George Marshall Cole, was
captain of No. 4 company, 41st battalion. The latest enterprise which
Col. Cole had been connected with and will eventually benefit his native
town more than all the others, was the Brockville, Westport and Sault
Ste. Marie Railway. The idea of a railway from Brockville to Westport
had been entertained, and a charter was procured, but nothing further
was done, and after a time the charter expired. Subsequently, Eugene M.
Cole, who was in business in New York City, and enjoyed commercial
relations with gentlemen interested in building railways and other
public works, conceived the idea that a line of railway from Brockville
to Sault Ste. Marie would prove an advantageous route in many ways, and
at the same time benefit his native town. After much labor in gathering
statistical information, he laid the whole matter before his father, who
had it brought before the leading men of the County of Leeds, and the
proposition made that if the municipalities would bear the expense of
preliminary survey and obtain the charter, and grant aid by way of bonus
to the extent of $125,000, Eugene M. Cole would work up the scheme and
obtain the capital and contractors to build at least the first section
of the road to Westport. This was agreed to, the last bonus by-law being
passed on July 15, 1885, and work on the construction of the railway
commenced on January 13, 1886. Although ably assisted by many persons in
the County of Leeds in connection with the enterprise, the credit of the
inception of the scheme, and the labor in working it up materially and
financially, belong to Eugene M. Cole. Colonel Cole died December 13,
1915, in his eighty-second year, being pre-deceased by his wife by about
two months.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Scott, James Guthrie=, the prominent railway manager of Quebec City,
was born in that city on February 13, 1847, the son of Hugh Erskine
Scott. His mother’s maiden name was Margaret Chillas. The family of the
Scotts has filled an important place in the community since the days of
Mr. Scott’s grandfather, who came from Scotland. Mr. Henry S. Scott,
hardware merchant, was his uncle, and Mr. William C. Scott and Mr.
Charles Scott, his brothers, all of whom took an active interest in the
progress of the city, as has their distinguished relative. The latter
received his early education at the Quebec High School. In his
seventeenth year he had his first start in business in the offices of
the Montmorency Lumber Mills, where he eventually became head of one of
the departments. In 1879, he entered the service of the Quebec and Lake
St. John Railway, becoming, in time, its general manager and assuming
the onerous task of having that line completed as far as Chicoutimi and
extended, under the name of the Great Northern, to Hawkesbury, Ont.,
across the Ottawa, a distance in all of five hundred miles. But for Mr.
Scott’s supervisory tact and engineering skill, Quebec would hardly have
become the important railway terminal that it now is, not only of the
Canadian Northern System, but of the National Transcontinental. During
the earlier operations of the Quebec and Lake St. John Railway, Mr.
Scott and his Board of Directors organized a system of assisted
colonization that peopled the parishes all along their line, as many as
from ten to twelve thousand families being induced to take up homesteads
in the districts opened up for settlement. For twenty-five years Mr.
Scott was _facile princeps_ in these beneficent operations; and it was
only when the Canadian Northern Railway Company took over the properties
supervised by him in 1908, that he decided to retire from office to take
up other work involving the commercial advancement of his native city.
In 1916 he was elected President of the Quebec Board of Trade, after
many years of active service as one of its members, and is also
President of the British Columbia Skeena Coal Company. For many years he
has been a member of the Quebec Geographical Society and other
associations; and his contemporaries can look back with satisfaction at
the civic progress he awakened as a railway projector and business man,
and the manufacturing centres he succeeded in locating from the time he
undertook to complete the Lake St. John Railway. In June, 1908, upon his
retirement from the management of the railway, he was given a banquet by
the citizens of Quebec at the Chateau Frontenac, in recognition of the
enterprising and successful work he had done while completing extensions
north and west from the city, and at the same time was presented with
testimonials of value. And in addition to the story of his life as a
railway manager and projector, Mr. Scott has to his credit twelve years’
service in the Militia, having been called out to frustrate the advance
of the enemy in certain border raids near Windsor, Ontario, in 1865, as
well as to protect Canada from the Fenian Raids, during the four years
succeeding that date. In 1873 he married Miss Sophy Mary Jackson; and in
1901 was married, for a second time, to Miss Cordelia Mary Jackson,
daughter of Dr. Alfred Jackson, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, Laval
University. By his first marriage he has had two sons and a daughter,
and by his second, one son and one daughter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bender, Prosper, M.D.=, and Litterateur (Quebec City), was born in
Quebec on July 30, 1844. He was the son of L. P. Bender, Advocate, his
mother’s maiden name having been Miss Jane McMillan. His school
education began at the Quebec Seminary and was continued at Laval
University, where he went through a successful course in _belles
lettres_ and collateral studies. Thereafter he entered McGill
University, where in 1864 he took his degree of M.D. On the following
year he entered upon his career as a medical man in his native city,
where, in 1868, he married Miss Amelia Scott, daughter of A. S. Scott.
At the time of his graduation, the Civil War between the Northern and
Southern States of the American Republic was nearing its climax, and in
the excitement of events an opportunity offered itself to the young
student to mature his skill in surgery and the healing art on the
battlefield. He was given employment in the army in North Virginia,
which was then under the command of General Ulysses Grant. As an
assistant surgeon he remained with that army up to the time of General
Lee’s surrender, his faithfulness and skill bringing him to the notice
of his medical associates and eventually to the notice of the General in
person. After the war, Dr. Bender proceeded to New York to gain further
professional experience in the hospitals, before entering upon the first
period of his residence in Quebec as a medical practitioner. During that
period he came into touch with several of the rising public men of the
town, who made a kind of literary rendezvous of his residence, much as
years afterwards the Circle de Dix used to hold their seances out at
Spencer Wood, under the hospital auspices of Sir Adolphe Chapleau. The
social gatherings at Dr. Bender’s had no doubt the effect of turning the
attention of the successful physician to literary work, leading him to
publish two volumes, respectfully titled, “Literary Sheaves,” and “Old
and New Canada.” In 1884 he removed to Boston, where he practised as a
homeopathist, and won a reputation among the literary men of that city,
as a contributor to the magazines and reviews. Within the last ten years
preceding his death in 1917, he had his residence again in Quebec.
During these years he published in amplified form a series of sketches
about the friends of his earlier comradeship. These sketches embodied
the characteristics of the brilliant literary guests who had once met
round his table, and were read with the greatest of interest by the
public as they appeared from time to time, as an illustration of the
author’s geniality of spirit and literary acumen. Altogether, Dr.
Prosper Bender’s professional and literary career stood as a blend of
duly recognized medical skill and critical literary insight, holding
always the confidence of his patients and being widely esteemed for his
bonhomie and intellectuality as a writer of books worth reading.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Girard, Joseph= (St. Gideon, Que.), son of Patrice Girard and Marie
Tremblay, his wife, both French-Canadians. Born at St. Urbain, County of
Charlevoix, Aug. 2, 1854. Educated at the Seminary of Quebec. Came to
Lake of St. John in 1880 as a settler, cleared his land and lived on it
all the time, and has been one of the most progressive and influential
farmers of the district. Was President of the Dairy Society of Quebec
Province and President of the School Commission. On April 5, 1875, Mr.
Girard was married to Emma Cote, daughter of Vitol and Ursule Cote, and
is the father of the following children: Meridee, Philippe, Tanevide and
Marie Louise. First elected to the Quebec Legislative Assembly for Lake
St. John District at the general elections of 1892 and re-elected in
those of 1897. In 1900 he was elected to the House of Commons at the
general elections, for Chicoutimi and Saguenay, which includes the local
riding of Lake St. John; he was re-elected for the House of Commons in
the general elections of 1904, 1908 and 1911. Mr. Girard is a member of
the following societies: Dairy Society of Quebec, Agricultural Society
of Lake St. John and Farmers’ Club of St. Gideon; he is also a member of
the Automobile Club of Chicoutimi. In religion Mr. Girard is a Roman
Catholic and in politics is an Independent Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dawson, Arthur Osborne= (Montreal, Que.), was born at New Borden, N.B.,
March 28, 1864, son of Richard Dawson and Mary Lockhart, his father
being a farmer and a grindstone manufacturer. Rev. G. F. Dawson, M.A.,
St. John, N.B., and W. J. G. Dawson, M.D., Eldridge, Cal., U.S.A., are
brothers, and Rev. James Henderson, D.D., pastor of the Timothy Eaton
Memorial Church, Toronto, is father-in-law of Mr. Dawson, who was
educated at Campbellton, N.B., and Montreal. Married, June 30, Mary A.
Le Rossignol, step-daughter of Rev. Dr. Henderson of Toronto, mentioned
above. Five children are the fruit of the union, viz., Ruth, Howard,
Katharine, Isabel and Olive. Mr. Dawson is a Methodist in religion, a
Conservative, a member of the Montreal Club and a Justice of the Peace
for the District of Montreal and connected with the following large
business enterprises, Vice-President and Managing Director Canadian
Cottons, Limited; President Belding, Paul, Corticelli, Limited;
Vice-President D. Morrice Co., Limited; President Inter-provincial
British Company of Canada, Limited, Toronto; Vice-President Gowland
Optical Company, Limited, Montreal. Recreations, fishing, tennis and
boating.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Douglas, James= (Hepworth, Ontario), son of James Douglas, Roxborough,
Scotland, and Isabella Dixon, Lauderdale, Scotland, was born in the
township of Brant, Bruce County, in August, 1858. Here he spent his
early days, receiving his education in the public schools. For a time he
followed farming as an occupation. However, he was inclined towards
mercantile pursuits and gave up the farm to become a general merchant at
Dobbington, in the township of Elderslie. The lumbering business
attracted his attention and he gave up the store for that occupation,
which was extensively carried on in those early days in Bruce. In 1902
he moved to the village of Hepworth, where he became Vice-President of
the Hepworth Manufacturing Co., and also manager. Here he has resided
ever since, successfully conducting the business he is connected with.
Beside this he is interested in a number of other enterprises, being a
director of the Canada Beds Co., of Chesley, and a shareholder in the
Vincent Steel Process Co., of Detroit. He has always had a love for
municipal life, and for eight years has served the village of Hepworth
as reeve in a most competent manner. As a member of the County Council
he has served on most of the prominent committees, but the Educational
Committee has always been his favorite. Being a self-educated man, he
strove hard for the vast fund of knowledge he has acquired. This has
made him a warm friend toward all branches of education, and he is ever
ready to forward its best interests. His ripe business judgment has ever
been recognized by his colleagues in the County Council. He is a man of
genial disposition and well liked by all. He is a member of Burns Lodge,
No. 436, A.F. & A.M., Hepworth. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and in
politics he is a Liberal. He was twice married, his first wife being
Francis Bradley, daughter of John Bradley, of Greenock township.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cross, Charles Wilson= (Edmonton, Alta.), Attorney-General for the
Province of Alberta, was born in Madoc, Ont., November 30, 1872, the son
of the late Thomas and Marie Cross. He was educated at Upper Canada
College, Toronto University and Osgoode Hall, graduating in 1895 as
B.A., and the following year as LL.B. He married Annie Louisa, daughter
of Frederick and Isabella Lynde, in 1900, by whom he has three
children—Thomas, Helen and Margaret. Becoming a barrister in 1898, he
has since practised his profession at Edmonton, and is a member of the
firm of Short, Cross, Maclean, Ap’John & Laidlaw; his present office as
Attorney-General of the province he has held since 1905, sitting as
member for Edmonton and Edson in the Legislature. While at college he
was a famous lacrosse player and is Vice-President of the Canadian
Amateur Athletic Union for Alberta. He was a member of the Ottawa and
Quebec Interprovincial Conferences in 1906, is a Liberal in politics and
a Presbyterian in religion.




[Illustration: HON. ARTHUR L. SIFTON
 Ottawa]




=Pardee, Frederick Forsyth, K.C., M.P.= (Sarnia, Ont.), son of the late
Hon. Timothy Blair Pardee and Emma K. Pardee, _née_ Forsyth, was born at
Sarnia, Ontario, on December 29, 1867, and was educated at the Sarnia
School and at Upper Canada College. He subsequently entered the study of
Law and graduated at Osgoode Hall, being called to the Bar in 1890. He
was created a King’s Counsel in 1908, and became head of the law firm of
Pardee, Burnham & Gurd. In his student days and in the earlier years of
his professional career he took a keen interest in various athletics and
was a cricket player of note. He married, on December 31, 1892, Mary E.
Johnston, daughter of Hugh Johnston, and to them was born one daughter,
Pauline L. Early in life Mr. Pardee began to interest himself in public
problems and public affairs, and in 1898, when but 31 years of age, he
was chosen as Liberal candidate for the provincial riding of West
Lambton, being elected to the Legislature of Ontario the same year. He
sat in the Provincial House until 1902, when he was defeated by Hon. W.
J. Hanna, who subsequently became Provincial Secretary in the first
cabinet of Sir James Whitney. In the Dominion by-election of November
22, 1905, made necessary by the death of Dr. Johnston, the sitting
member, Mr. Pardee was chosen by the electors of West Lambton to
represent them in the Dominion House of Commons. He was re-elected at
the general elections of 1908 and 1911. In November, 1909, on the
nomination of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, then Prime Minister of Canada, he was
unanimously chosen as Chief Government Whip, and still retains the
important position of Chief Liberal Whip to the present time (1917). In
the Dominion Parliament, as well as throughout the country, Mr. Pardee’s
public work soon won him a position of usefulness and responsibility. He
is a forceful and effective public speaker, and few public men are so
universally popular and so highly esteemed. During his parliamentary
career he has presided over, and served upon, many of the most important
legislative committees of the House of Commons and Senate. In 1910 he
was chosen by Sir Wilfrid Laurier to accompany him on his memorable tour
through the Canadian West, making the first visit with the then Prime
Minister to the new Pacific port of Prince Rupert. When, in 1911, the
Administration of Sir Wilfrid Laurier was defeated at the polls upon the
issue of reciprocal trade in natural products with the United States,
and the Liberal party passed into Opposition, Mr. Pardee continued as
Chief Whip and had a large share in the arduous parliamentary and
organization work which ensued. Following the outbreak of the great war
it was he who defined in Parliament, amid hearty approval from both
sides of the House, the patriotic obligations which devolved upon
Government and Opposition. He devoted his time and energy, both in the
House and out of it, to patriotic endeavor, addressing recruiting
rallies and contributing to the various national efforts of service and
sacrifice. He moved in Parliament for the appointment of a special
committee to consider national steps to recompense and aid returning
wounded and maimed soldiers and was named by the House as a member of
that committee. In 1918 he resigned the post of Liberal Whip and
supported Sir Robert Borden on the question of Conscription, but
declined a portfolio in the Union Government. In the general elections
of that year he was again re-elected for West Lambton by a handsome
majority. Mr. Pardee is strongly democratic in spirit, and during the
parliamentary session of 1913-14, made a vigorous plea to the House
against the indiscriminate bestowal of titles in Canada, and issued a
warning against the danger of creating a pseudo-aristocracy in this
young Dominion. In religion he is an Anglican and is a member of St.
George’s Church, Sarnia.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hinds, Leonard D’Arcy Bernard=, Judgment Clerk of the Supreme Court of
Judicature for Ontario, born Oct. 19, 1868, at Barrie, Ontario. Educated
at Barrie Collegiate Institute, St. Michael’s College, Toronto, and
Osgoode Hall Law School, of Toronto. Past President of the Toronto
Liberal-Conservative Club. Secretary of the Toronto Branch of the United
Irish League. Appointed to present office by the Whitney Government in
1905. Son of the late Bernard Hinds of Barrie, a native of Omagh, County
of Tyrone, Ireland (whose father, Bernard Hinds, Irish “Aidhne,”
pronounced Aion, anglicized the name to Hinds, and settled with a large
family in Vespra Township, Simcoe County, in the year 1842), and Anna
Leonard, formerly a teacher in the French settlement public school at
Penetanguishene. Married Pauline Matson, the daughter of R. H. Matson,
founder of the National Life Insurance Co. of Canada. Holds commission
as Captain and Paymaster in the 110th Irish Regiment, Toronto, which
Regiment he was authorized to establish in 1914, by Sir Sam Hughes, then
Minister of Militia. Captain Hinds largely helped to establish the 208th
Canadian Irish Bn. C.E.F., in which he was also appointed Paymaster with
the rank of Captain. He was forced to withdraw from the 208th, on
account of an injury which he received at Camp Borden. He has one son,
Paul I. Bernard, who is on active service as an officer in the British
Expeditionary Force. Captain Hinds is an ardent student of Gaelic
Literature, Language and Art, and possesses one of the best Erse
Libraries in Canada. He is a Catholic in religion. Address: Osgoode
Hall, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Clute, Arthur Roger= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Belleville, Ont., on
August 24, 1874. He attended the Belleville Collegiate Institute, from
which he matriculated with honors in 1892, and thereupon entered the
University of Toronto, from which he graduated as Bachelor of Arts in
1896, with first-class honors, in the Department of Political Science
and History, having been awarded during his course one of the Alexander
Mackenzie Scholarships in that department. In 1901 he received from his
Alma Mater the Degree of LL.B. He was articled as a student at law to
his father, the Honorable Justice Clute, in 1896; and studied law at the
Law School at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, where he obtained first-class
honors and was awarded a scholarship in each year of his course,
together with medal upon his call to the Ontario Bar in June, 1899.
Since that time Mr. Clute has practised his profession in the city of
Toronto, and has acted for several years as examiner at the University
of Toronto, and at the Law School, and is now also a Lecturer at the
University of Toronto. In politics he is a Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Goodeve, Hon. Arthur Samuel= (Ottawa), Dominion Railway Commissioner,
English and Canadian origin, son of Arthur Henry and Caroline Goodeve,
born at Guelph, Ont., Dec. 15, 1860, where he received his education at
the Public Schools and Collegiate Institute. A graduate of the Ontario
College of Pharmacy. Mayor of Rossland, B.C., 1889-1900. Appointed
Provincial Secretary in the first Conservative Government in British
Columbia, June, 1903, the McBride Administration; resigned portfolio,
returned for Kootenay District, in the House of Commons, general
elections 1908, appointed a member of Timber and Forestry Commission,
B.C., 1909-10, a Conservative Whip, House of Commons, 1910; resigned
seat on being appointed a Dominion Railway Commissioner. Married, April,
1884, Ellen Elizabeth Spence, daughter of James Spence, Toronto; father
of four boys and two girls. Member of following clubs: Rideau, Ottawa,
and Rossland, B.C.; and the Masonic order, Blue, Chapter and Commandery.
A Presbyterian in religion. Before accepting his present office, Hon.
Mr. Goodeve was recognized as a formidable campaigner and painstaking
representative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Guilbault, Joseph Pierre Octave, B.A., LL.D.= (Joliette), Notary, was
born Sept. 3, 1870, at St. Paul de Joliette, Province of Quebec, son of
Joseph Guilbault and Adelaide Renaud, French-Canadians; educated at
L’Assomption College, P.Q., and Laval University, Montreal. Married,
Sept. 20, 1898, Clementine, daughter of Urgel Richard, of St. Jacques de
L’Achigan, has one son, Fernand, and one daughter, Germaine. For ten
years Secretary-Treasurer of Commissioners for Schools in Joliette,
where he practices his profession of a Notary. Elected to the House of
Commons for the constituency of Joliette in 1911. A Liberal-Conservative
in politics. Mr. Guilbault has not been defeated—sickness prevented him
from being a candidate in the election of 1917. In religion Mr.
Guilbault is a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bronson, Henry Franklin= (Ottawa, Ont.), the one man, it has been said,
who understood the feasibility of converting the large lakes and furious
foaming falls of the Ottawa River into a channel for the driving of
saw-logs, was born in the town of Moreau, Saratoga County, New York
State, on February 24, 1817. His parents were Alvah Bronson and Sarah
Tinker. Mr. Bronson is of mixed Scottish and Welsh descent, and the
family, which is now scattered through most of the Northern States, at
an early period settled in New England. Members of this enterprising and
clever family were the Hon. Greene C. Bronson, of the New York bench,
and the Rev. Asa Bronson, who was for many years pastor of the First
Baptist Church, at Fall River, Massachusetts. The first of the family to
find his way to Canada was the subject of our sketch, and shortly after
he came here he led off in the lumber business. H. F. Bronson spent his
youthful days at Queensbury, Warren County, New York, in the family of
the late J. J. Harris, and he concluded his education at the Poultney
Academy, of Vermont. “Young Bronson,” says a reliable authority, “became
an apt scholar in agricultural sciences, but soon showed a preference
for woodland foraging, pre-destined, as he was, to become a great
marauder of pine forests.” In 1840, Mr. Harris, already alluded to,
purchased extensive pine tracts, erecting mills on one of the upper
Hudson lakes. He formed a partnership with his young and trusted friend,
Mr. Bronson, “whose assets consisted of a sound constitution, a resolute
will, unbending integrity, skill with the hand, and a mind to work.” The
partnership continued for twenty-two years, and during the last ten
years of the association, the greater portion of the business
responsibility fell upon our subject, owing to the failure of Mr.
Harris’ health. It soon became plain that the pine was rapidly
disappearing from the upper Hudson; therefore, in 1848, Mr. Bronson
passed over to Canada, proceeding along the Ottawa Valley till the
thunder of the Chaudiere Falls burst upon his ears. At once he was
satisfied that here was an excellent place to begin lumber operations;
for the timber seemed inexhaustible, and the water power magnificent. He
returned home, but in 1852 he persuaded Mr. Harris to accompany him to
the Ottawa Valley. When they reached again the region of kingly pines
and booming waterfalls, they were everywhere met with testimony from
river experts, saying that the Ottawa was not suitable for the safe
driving of saw logs, but Mr. Bronson recommended to his partner the
purchase of hydraulic lots at the Chaudiere Falls, then held by the
Crown. At the sale of the lots, made by Mr. Horace Merrill, general
superintendent of the Ottawa River works, a purchase was made, and here,
under the personal supervision of Mr. Bronson, their mills were built
within sound of the thunder of the falls. The mills having been erected,
Mr. Bronson removed his family to Ottawa, and there they were
established permanently. The relation of Mr. Bronson to the sawn lumber
trade of the Dominion of Canada will be better understood when it is
learned that his was the first movement in the Ottawa District for the
manufacture of sawn lumber for the United States market. The original
mill embodied all the modern improvements of the times, including iron
gates of novel model, a contrivance planned by Mr. Bronson himself, and
afterwards used in most of the gang saw mills on the Ottawa River.
Several other gentlemen, stimulated by the enterprise and success of Mr.
Bronson and his partner, likewise set out for Ottawa; and, after a time,
chiefly owing to the persistency of Mr. Bronson, a series of costly
river improvements were constructed, which made the driving of logs upon
the Ottawa a matter of greater convenience than upon many a smaller
stream, which has no large lakes to act as a reservoir for checking the
fury of the spring freshets. In 1864, Mr. Harris retired from the
business, Mr. Bronson still continuing the extensive manufacture of sawn
lumber, and owing to his splendid abilities as a manager, his operations
not alone maintained their ground, but gradually increased. The present
firm at Ottawa is known as The Bronson Company. Mr. Bronson married, on
November 5, 1840, Editha E. Pierce, of Bolton, N.Y., and had four
children. Gertrude, the only daughter, is the wife of Levi Crannell. The
sons are Erskine Henry, Frank P., and Walter G. The family are members
of the Presbyterian Church. Mr. Bronson, like another great prince of
business men, Sir Hugh Allan, did not care for political life, and held
himself aloof from parties, but he was connected with several benevolent
institutions and business enterprises. In 1889, death called this
pioneer Canadian lumberman and high-principled citizen. His private and
social relations had won for him everywhere good will and highest
regard. Men had learned to esteem the man because of his tested and
sterling worth. In the commerce of Canada Mr. Bronson’s name will go
down in history as the first lumberman in the Ottawa Valley to
manufacture sawn lumber for the American market, and as a pioneer in the
development of the resources of that section of Canada to the point
where its principal city was deemed worthy of being named as the Capital
City of the Dominion. Business courage and keenness of perception were
required to accomplish these ends, but in more ways than one Mr. Bronson
had shown himself to be a man of practical vision and rare foresight. To
men like the late Henry Franklin Bronson, Canada and in particular the
business life of the Capital, must ever remain in debt.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lemieux, Auguste, K.C., F.R.C.I., LL.B.= Few barristers in Ottawa are
better known or more popular than the subject of this sketch, who
occupies offices at No. 30 Rideau Street. Mr. Lemieux was born in
Montreal, February 20, 1874. His father, H. A. Lemieux, was Inspector of
Customs for the Province of Quebec until 1911. Some of his elder
brothers are Hon. Rodolphe Lemieux, K.C., P.C., M.P.,
ex-Postmaster-General and Minister of Marine and Fisheries in the
Laurier Cabinet; Dr. L. J. Lemieux, Sheriff of Montreal, and Chairman of
the Board of Censors of the Province of Quebec, and Dr. Gustave Lemieux,
M.L.A., for Gaspé, P.Q. Mr. Auguste Lemieux received his education at
L’Assomption College and St. Mary’s College (Jesuits), Montreal,
graduated from Laval University with honors and was conferred the degree
of Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) in 1898. He was called to the Quebec Bar in
the same year and to the Ontario Bar four years later. In 1908, at the
early age of 34, he was created K.C., and practised, successfully, his
profession in Montreal from 1898 until 1902, when he located in Ottawa,
and has since established a wide and ever increasing clientele in that
city. His brilliant defence saved Laderoute from the gallows in the
Bryson murder trial of 1906, and Blondin (charged with murdering Dr.
Empey) at L’Orignal, in 1910. He was Councillor of the Ontario Bar
Association from 1910 to 1913; President of L’Institut Canadien
Français, of Ottawa, 1903 to 1905; President of La Société du Monument
National, Ottawa, 1909 to 1910; President of the Belcourt (Liberal) Club
for several years; Vice-President of the Ottawa Reform Association, 1904
to 1906; President of Le Club Littéraire Canadien Français, Ottawa, 1911
to 1918. He is a member of the Y.M.C.A., and also a member of the
Ontario Club of Toronto. Mr. Lemieux has been frequently mentioned as
candidate for Parliament. He is the author of the work on the Quebec Law
of Landlord and Tenant and writes frequently for the French and English
Press. In April, 1914, the French Government, in recognition of Mr.
Lemieux’s proficiency in French literature, conferred on him the
decoration of “Officier d’Académie” (Academic Palms), through Monsieur
Réné Viviani, then Minister of Public Education of France. He was also
elected, in 1913, Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute of London,
England, for life. Mr. Lemieux is an eloquent platform speaker and has
frequently rendered services to his party. He married Esther Barbeau,
daughter of the late Henry Barbeau, General Manager of the City and
District Savings Bank and Assistant Receiver-General, Montreal, in
October, 1899, and has one son and two daughters. He resides at 16
Somerset Street West.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lawlor, H. W.= (Hawkesbury, Ont.), was born at Hawkesbury, September
12, 1863, of Irish and American parentage. The son of Richard Lawlor, of
Hawkesbury, for many years Coroner of this district, and grandson of
William Lawlor, for over forty years manager for Hamilton Bros., and
Sarah Hersey, daughter of Z. S. M. Hersey, a New England pioneer, who
settled in Hawkesbury shortly after the British-American War of 1812,
and who at the time of his death was the town’s most prominent citizen;
he was educated in the Provincial Schools and graduated from Osgoode
Hall in law in 1890. In 1896, was appointed agent for the Justice
Department in his district, and has conducted some important litigation
on behalf of the Crown, the most prominent being the Exchequer Court
Case of Stewart vs. King, in which the late B. B. Osler made his last
public appearance. He has been Police Magistrate of Hawkesbury for over
eighteen years and has never had a conviction appealed or quashed. Has
been Local Solicitor for the Canadian Northern Railway since the date of
its construction; is Town Solicitor and also Solicitor for the several
banking institutions. Has never entered Municipal politics, but has sat
on the Board of Education; was first President of Hawkesbury Board of
Trade. Is a Presbyterian and a Liberal-Unionist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McNeillie, James Richardson=, Clerk and Treasurer, County of Victoria,
Lindsay, Ont., was born in the Parish of Johnstone, Dumfries-shire,
Scotland, July 18, 1846, and came to Canada with his parents, Rachel
Kerr and James Richardson McNeillie, public school teacher, in 1853, who
settled in the County of Durham, where he was educated in the Public
School. He spent eleven years, from 1861 to 1872, in the village of
Omemee, where he was associated in the drug business and in municipal
work with Mr. Thomas Matchett, who was the first member of the
Legislative Assembly for South Victoria after Confederation. From 1872
to 1875 he was engaged in the business department of the Montreal
Telegraph Company at Toronto, but returned to the County of Victoria on
the invitation of the Hon. S. C. Wood, to become his assistant in the
office of Clerk and Treasurer. When the latter became Provincial
Secretary, Mr. McNeillie retained the same position under Mr. Matchett
from 1875, until his own appointment as Clerk and Treasurer of the
County, in 1900. When the Ross Memorial Hospital was founded by the late
James Ross, of Montreal, in 1902, he was appointed a Governor under the
Act of Incorporation, and is Secretary-Treasurer of the Trust. He is
also a member of the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian
Church, and was Chairman of the Board of Education of the Town of
Lindsay for nine years, following on nineteen years’ service as member.
Always taking an active interest in movements for the betterment of the
criminal and mentally enfeebled classes of the Province, he was
President of the Canadian Conference of Charities and Correction for the
year 1909. In politics he is a Conservative, and in religion a
Presbyterian. He married Esther (deceased), daughter of William Thorton,
of Emily, January, 1872; and Loretta, daughter of Ralph Gardiner, of
Morpeth, 1882. He has three sons, James Kerr, Ralph Gardiner and George
Gardiner, and one daughter, Alice Gardiner. J. K. McNeillie has been
successively, Divisional Superintendent of the Canadian Pacific Ry.,
General Superintendent of the Canadian Government Railways, and now
Superintendent of the Susquehanna Division of the Delaware and Hudson
Railway. R. G. McNeillie is Assistant General Passenger Agent of the
Canadian Pacific Ry. at Winnipeg, Man., and G. G. McNeillie is a member
of the Albert Kerr Company, Limited, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chadwick, Edward Marion, K.C.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born at Cravendale,
Township of Ancaster, Ont., Sept. 22, 1840, and is the third son of the
late John Craven Chadwick, Guelph, Ont. He received a thorough
scholastic training. The bend of his mind being in the direction of the
law, he pursued his studies therefor, and was called to the Bar and
associated himself with the late W. H. Beatty, and has been a partner in
the firms successively formed by him in which many prominent members of
the legal profession have been partners, during a period of more than
fifty years, the firms being recognized as among the most important
engaged in their profession in Ontario. While perhaps it is unnecessary
to say anything here as to Mr. Chadwick’s ability as an author, we
cannot refrain from noting the publication of a work entitled “Ontarian
Families” (1894), being the genealogies of United Empire Loyalist and
other pioneer families of Upper Canada; he has also been a writer for
magazines on heraldic subjects, in which he is reputed to be the leading
authority on this side of the Atlantic. Mr. Chadwick was for a number of
years an officer in the Queen’s Own Rifles, retiring in 1882, with the
rank of Major. For the last forty years Mr. Chadwick has been identified
with church work, being an indefatigable worker, and he at present holds
the important office of Treasurer of St. Alban’s Cathedral.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hackett, Edward= (Orangeville, Ont.), was born at Ballinasloe, County
Galway, Ireland, son of the late William and Mary Hackett. He was
educated at Ranelagh School, Athlone, and at Santry School, Dublin,
graduating from the Royal University in the Irish Capital in 1905, with
the degree of B.A., and is recognized as being one of the prominent
educationalists of the Province of Ontario. Mr. Hackett came to Canada
in 1908, and before leaving Ireland, was Senior Mathematical Master in
the Blue Coat School, Dublin, an institution which was established by
Charles the Second. He attended the Faculty of Toronto University, and
taught mathematics in the Galt Collegiate Institute for the year
1909-10, also at Meaford High School for four years (1911-15), and
succeeded as principal the late Alexander Steele, who had been the head
of the Orangeville High School for upwards of thirty years, the present
staff consisting of five teachers and the splendid standing and prestige
of the school being maintained under his principalship. In 1914,
Principal Hackett married Winnifred, the daughter of Dr. J. G. Clarke,
of Meaford. He is a member of the Canadian Club of Orangeville, and
Chairman of the Public Library Board, and is a member of the Masonic,
Oddfellows and Orange Orders. He is an adherent of the Church of
England, and a Liberal-Conservative in politics. Recognizing the
usefulness of the Cadet movement he has taken the course prescribed for
instructors and the Orangeville High School Cadets have attained much
efficiency under his direction. Principal Hackett is a man in the prime
of life, well informed on all matters of national importance, and gives
generously of his time and talents in the promotion of the best
interests of the community, in which he occupies so important a
position. His chief recreation is motoring.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hunter, Lt.-Col. A. T.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born on the 25th of
October, 1869, and after having received a thorough primary and
elementary education at the public and high schools, he entered the
Toronto University where, in 1890, he had the distinction of having the
degree of LL.B. conferred upon him. He was duly admitted to the Bar in
1892 and at once embarked in the active practice of his profession, in
which, he has been very successful. He maintains a handsome suite of
offices at 706 Temple Building, Bay and Richmond Streets, where he
enjoys a large and lucrative practice, his services being constantly
retained by some of the leading firms and corporations of the city and
province. Colonel Hunter is prominently identified with the Masonic
craft, and is an active and influential member of the I.O.F., A.O.U.W.,
and a Past Master of L.O.L. No. 613. As an author Colonel Hunter is well
known, and among the works emanating from his pen may be named “Power of
Sale Under Mortgage,” “Foreclosure Under Mortgage,” and “Real Property
Statutes.” The Colonel, prior to this war, was courageous in pointing
out in speeches and contributions to the “Military Gazette,” absurdities
in our military organization. Colonel Hunter has devoted some time to
politics and was candidate for the riding of West Toronto in the
Dominion House, of the McCarthyites in 1896, and of the Liberals in
1904. In 1914, when war was declared by Germany on England and her
colonies, Colonel Hunter at once responded to the call to duty, laid
aside his business and other connections, and went overseas with the 4th
Battalion C.E.F. On April 23, 1915, he was wounded in the battle of St.
Julien, but returned to duty in time for the battle of Festubert; after
this he was placed on duty in England, and later returned to Canada on
leave of absence; while in Canada he acted as Brigade-Major at Camp
Borden in 1916. He again returned to England on active service, and in
February, 1917, was attached to the Princess Patricias on service in
France and was present with them at Vimy Ridge. He returned to Canada in
November of same year and has been gazetted Lt.-Colonel of the 12th
Regt. York Rangers.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Groves, Abraham, M.D.= (Fergus, Ont.), was born in the town of
Peterboro’, on Sept. 8, 1847. He is a son of Abraham Groves, and
Margaret, daughter of Gideon Gibson, one of the early pioneers of
Canada, who served through the war of 1812-15, and fought at Lundy’s
Lane. Mr. Groves came to this country with his parents from the County
of Wicklow, Ireland, about 1826, and settled in the vicinity of
Peterboro’. In 1856 Mr. Groves removed to the County of Wellington,
taking up his abode in the Township of Garafraxa, where he pursued the
occupation of farmer. During the Mackenzie Rebellion Mr. Groves took
part on the Loyalists’ side. The fruit of the marriage was thirteen
children, the subject of this sketch being the second eldest of the
family. He at first attended the common schools, but afterwards entered
the High School at Fergus. Some time after leaving school he resolved to
study medicine, and in 1868 entered the Toronto School of Medicine,
where he remained until 1871, graduating M.D. in the same year, from the
Toronto University. After graduation he at once went to Fergus and
entered into partnership with the late Dr. Munro, under the firm name of
Munro & Groves, which partnership existed two years. After dissolution
Dr. Groves practised by himself until 1874, when he took into
partnership Dr. John Wishart, now lecturer at the Western University, at
London, Ont., which partnership existed one year, Dr. Wishart then
retiring. However, again in 1879, he took into partnership Dr. Thomas
Chisholm, the association continuing for a year. In 1882 he again took
another partner, Dr. J. F. McMahon, now of Toronto, but this combination
too dissolved in 1883, and since that time Dr. Groves has singly
conducted one of the largest practices in Fergus. In 1869 he graduated
from the old Toronto Military School; in 1882 he was elected to the
Village council of Fergus, and was re-elected for the years of 1883 and
1884. He was elected reeve for 1885, but owing to his position of
surgeon of the county poor house, he could not retain his seat. Dr.
Groves is largely interested in real estate in the village, owning some
of the finest buildings there, among which structures may be mentioned
the Royal Bank building, constructed of brown stone. He is a member of
the Mercer Lodge, A.F. and A.M., No. 347; is surgeon and member of the
Oddfellows’ lodge No. 73, and has held all of the offices in that order.
He is also a member of the Royal Templars, and physician to lodge No.
124. In 1878 Dr. Groves was appointed physician and surgeon to the Grand
Trunk Railway at Fergus, which position he still holds. In 1882 he was
appointed physician and surgeon to the Wellington County House of
Industry, and this office he still likewise retains. In politics he has
held aloof from parties, though sincerely interested in the welfare of
the country. He is a member of the Church of England, and has been
churchwarden for twelve years of St. James’ Church, Fergus. He married
in 1874, Jennie, daughter of the late William Gibbon, of Elora, and by
this lady has a family of two children; she died in 1886. On January 29,
1910, he married Ethel May Burke, only daughter of the late D. S. Burke,
Esq., of Fergus. Dr. Groves enjoys the repute of being a very skilful
surgeon, and he was the first to perform in Canada the operation
technically known to the profession as _supra pubic lithotomy_. In
January, 1901, he established, in Fergus, the Royal Alexandra Hospital,
which has already become widely known throughout Western Ontario. He
also installed the Fergus and Elora Electric Light Plant, since taken
over by the Hydro-Electric. In 1911 he was tendered by unanimous vote
the Conservative nomination for the House of Commons for the South
Riding of the County of Wellington, but the pressure of his professional
work prevented his accepting.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Grange, Edward Wilkinson= (Ottawa, Ont.), was born at Napanee, July 4,
1876, a son of Alexander W. Grange and his wife, Annabella Daly;
educated at Napanee Collegiate Institute and Victoria University, taking
an Honor Course in Modern Languages at the latter institution, from
which he graduated with a degree of B.A., in 1899, upon which he took up
journalism as a profession and has since had a very extended experience,
serving first on “The Toronto News” for three years, afterwards on “The
Mail and Empire.” Was in charge of “The Globe’s” Ottawa Bureau and
contributor to editorial columns. During Mr. Grange’s University course
he was editor of the “Acta Victoriana,” in his final year; and President
of Athletic Union and first holder of the college “Athletic Stick”; was
editor of Eastern Press Service, serving all papers in the Maritime
Provinces during Parliamentary sessions, made Honorary Lieutenant in
Canadian Expeditionary Forces and had charge of daily press bulletin
service to troops Overseas; has been Ottawa correspondent of Toronto
“Globe” since 1907, also of “The Chronicle,” Halifax; “Telegraph,” St.
John; “Standard,” London, Eng. Secretary for three years of the
Parliamentary Press Gallery and President, 1912-13. Resigned from
“Globe” staff, November, 1918, to engage in special work for government
branches connected with re-construction problems and also to look after
private business interests. Mr. Grange is a Liberal and was nominated in
April, 1915, as Liberal candidate for the House of Commons for the
riding of Lennox and Addington. Ran as an Independent-Liberal supporting
Military Service Act in General Election of 1917. Belongs to the
following clubs: Rideau Club, Rivermead Golf Club and Rideau Aquatic
Club, Ottawa. He married, in 1915, Marion McDougall, a daughter of the
late John Lorne McDougall, C.M.G., Auditor-General of Canada, and has
one son, Edward Alexander McDougall, born June 26, 1917.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ferguson, Hon. William Nassau= (Toronto, Ont.), Judge of the Supreme
Court of Ontario, Court of Appeals Division, was born in Cookstown,
Ont., in 1870, the son of Isaac and Emily (Gowan) Ferguson, and received
his education at Upper Canada College and Osgoode Hall, graduating from
the latter institution in 1894. He is a brother of Mrs. Arthur Murphy of
Edmonton—better known by her pen name of “Janey Canuck”—and of Thomas
R. Ferguson, K.C., of Toronto and Winnipeg. He is also a nephew of the
late Lieutenant-Colonel T. R. Ferguson, M.P. for South Simcoe, and a
grandson of the late Lieutenant-Colonel Ogle R. Gowan, M.P. for Leeds
and Grenville, who founded the Orange Order in Canada; also a cousin of
the late Hon. Justice Ferguson of the Supreme Court of Ontario. The
present Mr. Justice Ferguson became King’s Counsel in 1908, was elected
a Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada in 1916, and received his
present appointment in the same year. He has always been prominent in
outdoor sports, having been captain of Upper Canada College and Osgoode
Hall Rugby teams, President of the Ontario Rugby Union and a Director of
both the Toronto Baseball and Lacrosse Clubs. Judge Ferguson is a member
of the following clubs: Albany, Toronto, National, R.C.Y.C., Ontario
Jockey and Toronto Hunt, and also of the Masonic and Orange Orders. He
is a Trustee of the Hospital for Sick Children and a member of the
Executive of the Toronto and York Patriotic Fund, an Anglican in
religion and a Conservative in politics. His recreations are golf,
fishing and motoring. “A lawyer in love with law and enamored of common
sense, the Ontario Judiciary will be strengthened by his ability and
vigor.”—Toronto “Telegram,” December 9, 1916.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Burpee, Lawrence Johnston= (Ottawa, Ont.), the son of Lewis Johnston
Burpee and Alice DeMill Burpee, was born at Halifax, N.S., March 5,
1873, and educated at public and private schools. In 1899 he married
Maud Hanington, daughter of the late Rev. Canon Hanington, of Ottawa,
and has five children—Ruth, Lawrence, Margaret, Edward and Arthur. He
is Secretary of the International Joint Commission and has acted as
private secretary to three successive Ministers of Justice in the
Dominion Government, and for several years was Librarian of the Ottawa
Public Library; is the author of several publications, namely: “Canadian
Life in Town and Country” (1905); “The Search for the Western Sea”
(1908); “Flowers from a Canadian Garden” (1909); “Fragments of
Haliburton” (1909); “By Canadian Streams” (1909); “Songs of French
Canada” (1909); “A Little Book of Canadian Essays” (1909); “A Century of
Canadian Sonnets” (1910); “Canadian Eloquence” (1910); “Dictionary of
Canadian History” (1911); “Scouts of Empire” (1912); “Canadian Humor”
(1911), “Among the Canadian Alps” (1913); “Sandford Fleming, Empire
Builder” (1915); “Pathfinders of the Great Plains” (1915); “Soldier’s
Dictionary” (1916); and has in press at the present time, “Journals of
La Vérendrye” (Champlain Society), and “Fur Traders of the West” (Oxford
Press). He has also contributed to Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia
Americana, Canada and its Provinces, Royal Society Transactions, British
Association, etc.; is a member of the Royal Society of Canada, Royal
Geographical Society, Société Archæologique de France, American Library
Institute, Ontario Historical Society, American Library Association,
Champlain Society, Nova Scotia Historical Society, Historical Society of
the Mississippi Valley, Bibliographical Society of America. He is a
member of the Church of England, Conservative in politics, and Captain
in the Governor-General’s Foot Guards, Ottawa, and the 2nd Depot
Battalion, E.O.R. Mr. Burpee is a member of the Royal Ottawa Golf Club,
and also takes a deep interest in chess.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Boyer, Louis= (Westmount, P.Q.), the son of a merchant, L. Alphonse
Boyer, M.P., and Alphonsine Meilluer, and relation of Hon. Arthur Boyer
and Hon. George Simard; was born in Montreal, Que., January 23, 1872,
educated at the Normal School, Montreal College and McGill University;
graduated from Laval and McGill with the degrees of B.A., B.C.L., K.C.;
was formerly attorney for the city of Westmount and the town of
Cartierville. Is a member of the Roman Catholic Church, and on November
3, 1898, married Marie Sophie Alice Mathieu, the daughter of Aimé
Mathieu, of Montreal, her father being a merchant of that city. They
have ten children, Jeanne, Marthe, Claire, Simone, Marcelle, Pauline,
Madeleine, Thérèse, Lucienne and Cécile. Mr. Boyer is a member of the
following clubs: namely, University, Montreal Reform, Shawinigan Fish
and Game and the St. George Snow Shoe Club; is a Liberal in politics and
is well known as a prominent speaker and is in great demand at political
campaigns. He is a Director of the Franco-American Chemical Co., also of
the Canadian Inspections and Testing Laboratories, Ltd.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Edwards, John Wesley, B.A., M.D., C.M., M.P.=, son of George Edwards of
the County of Norfolk, England, and Elizabeth Jane Lyon, of the County
of Frontenac, Ont., the latter being of U.E. Loyalist stock and among
the first settlers in Frontenac. Born in the County of Frontenac May 25,
1865, and educated at the Sydenham High School, Ottawa, Normal School
and Queen’s University, Kingston; graduated from the latter in Arts and
Medicine in the year 1900. Married August 12, 1890, to Hester Jane
Purdy, daughter of Robert G. Purdy, and is the father of the following
children: Edna, John Worden, Sadie, Evelyn, and Elizabeth. Before
graduating in medicine the subject of this sketch taught school for
several years, and was County Clerk of Frontenac from 1899 to 1909, and
Gaol Surgeon of the County Gaol at Kingston from 1907 to 1909. First
elected to the House of Commons for Frontenac County in the general
elections of 1908 by a majority of 421, re-elected at the general
election of 1911 by a majority of 851, and again returned in the war
time election of 1917 by a majority of nearly 2,000. Doctor Edwards is
regarded as one of the best informed and energetic of the Conservative
members of the House of Commons, and was selected as one of the
Liberal-Conservative whips for Ontario in the Session of 1911 and 1912.
He is a member of the Executive of the Canadian Order of Chosen Friends,
and for the past three-and-a-half years has been the Executive Head of
that Order. He is a prominent Orangeman, being Deputy Grand Master for
Ontario East. In religion he is a Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Beith, Hon. Robert= (Bowmanville, Ont.), was born on May 17, 1843, of
Scotch parentage, and is the son of Alexander Beith and Catharine
McTaggart, of Argyllshire, Scotland, who migrated to Bowmanville many
years ago. He was educated at the public and private schools of that
town and later took a commercial course at Day’s College, Toronto. After
receiving his education he started business life as a farmer, later
becoming one of the largest stock breeders in Ontario, and has imported
much of the finest breeding stock in the country during the past
thirty-five years. As a citizen and public man he is held in the highest
esteem, and has received the highest honors to be had from his home town
and surrounding localities. Having ambitions other than business, he
drifted into public life, and received the nomination as the Liberal
candidate for the House of Commons for West Durham in 1891 and was
elected; was re-elected in 1896, and defeated in 1900. In the
by-election of 1902 he was again elected, and retained his seat up to
1904, when he voluntarily retired. West Durham has been the scene of
many hard fought political battles, and at times was contested by men
high up in the ranks of both political parties, brought in from outside
places, among whom were the late Hon. Edward Blake and Mr. George Tate
Blackstock, one of the most learned legal lights in Canada. It has
always been conceded that Robert Beith was the one man who could win
West Durham for the Liberal Party. On January 15, 1907, he was summoned
to the Senate by Sir Wilfrid Laurier, and is recognized as an able
Senator. He is a bachelor, and in religion a Presbyterian. On all
occasions, during the world-wide war, he was ready to help Canada do her
share, and contributed in many ways that will never be known to the
public at large, in helping the Motherland and her Allies to keep flying
the flags that stand for freedom against Prussianism.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dymond, Allan Malcolm= (Toronto, Ont.) was born at Brixton, Surrey,
England, September 25, 1864, came to Canada with his parents in 1869 and
received his education at Upper Canada College. He studied law in the
office of Blake, Kerr, Boyd & Cassels, and subsequently with the Hon. A.
S. Hardy, and Henderson & Small, and was called to the Bar in 1885. He
practised law in Toronto until 1889, when he entered the service of the
province as Law Secretary to the Attorney-General; was appointed Law
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly in 1890. In November, 1890, he married
Emma Stanton Mellish, Mus. Bac., eldest daughter of the late Rev. H. F.
Mellish, Rector of Caledonia, Haldimand County, Ontario. Was a member of
and acted as Secretary to the Commission for the Revision of the
Statutes in 1897, and the Commission (1906-1914) which prepared the
Revised Statutes of Ontario, 1914. Was appointed King’s Counsel by the
Ontario Government in 1902. He is a specialist in the construction of
Statutes and Parliamentary draughtsmanship, and has been concerned in
the preparation or revision of most of the important legislation of the
province since his appointment. Is a member of the Church of England—a
liberal High Churchman.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Coyne, James Henry, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.C.= (St. Thomas, Ont.), was born
at St. Thomas, Ont., October 3, 1849. James H. Coyne is the second son
of William and Christina Coyne, and was educated at the common school in
his native town, until he was eleven years old, when he passed into the
Grammar School, then under the charge of the late Mr. (Rev.) Nelson
Burns, M.A. At fourteen years of age, he matriculated in the University
of Toronto, carrying off the first general proficiency scholarship, and
first-class honors in classics, mathematics, French, etc. Owing to his
extreme youth, he did not enter University College until 1867. He
devoted himself chiefly to classics and modern languages, and, after
gaining numerous scholarships and prizes at the University and college
during his undergraduate course, graduated in 1870, carrying off the
Prince of Wales’ prize for general proficiency, the gold medal in
moderns, a silver medal in classics, the French essay prize, and
first-class honors in history and ethnology. In 1884 he was elected by
his fellow-graduates a member of the Senate of the University, a
position he still holds. After graduating, the subject of this sketch
entered the law office of the late Colin Macdougall, Q.C., at St.
Thomas; interrupted his law studies for a year to take charge of the
Cornwall High School, where he was headmaster during the year 1871;
returned then to Mr. Macdougall’s office for a year, and then removed to
Toronto, where he served for two years in the office of Bethune &
Hoyles. He was admitted to the bar in Michaelmas term, 1874, passing
first without an oral, both as barrister and as attorney; and at once
entered into partnership with his former principal, Mr. Macdougall, at
St. Thomas. The law firm of Macdougall & Coyne existed until 1880, when
it was dissolved. Shortly afterwards, Mr. Coyne entered into partnership
with J. Mann, under the firm name of Coyne & Mann. The partnership
continued until Mr. Coyne’s appointment in Dec., 1888, as Registrar for
the County of Elgin. During the Fenian excitement of 1866, Mr. Coyne
joined the St. Thomas Rifles, and served during three campaigns in that
year: First at London, during March, when some thousands of regulars and
volunteers were brigaded there; then at Port Stanley and Sarnia, in
June; and finally in camp at Thorold in August, where he acted as
quartermaster-sergeant to the Provisional Battalion of volunteers, who
were then brigaded with regulars and other volunteers under Wolseley. He
holds the Fenian Raid medal. The following year he joined the famous
University company of the Queen’s Own Rifles, of which he remained a
member until his graduation, with the degree of B.A., June, 1870. He
received the degree of M.A. (with honors) Toronto University, 1905, and
the degree of LL.D. (honorary) from Queen’s University, Kingston, 1909.
He was a member of the great Reform Convention, at Toronto, in 1883, and
was selected to speak to one of the resolutions passed by the
convention. He also attended the Young Liberal Convention of 1885, as a
delegate. In 1876, owing to a serious illness, he was obliged to give up
work for a year and a half. Eleven months of this vacation were devoted
to a visit to Europe, including England, Scotland, Ireland, Belgium, the
Rhine, Switzerland, France and Italy. On Nov. 21, 1877, Mr. Coyne
married Matilda, third daughter of the late John George Bowes, for
several years Mayor, and M.P.P. for the city of Toronto, and is the
father of four sons and two daughters, viz., James Bowes, Annie
Christine Elliott, John George Bowes, Margaret Adelaide, Henry Everyll
Bowes, and William Gordon Bowes. A member of the following clubs and
societies, viz.: Golf and Country Club, St. Thomas, President Elgin
Historical and Scientific Institute, which he organized in 1891;
President The Veterans’ Association, St. Thomas; The University of
Toronto Alumni Association of the County of Elgin; Honorary President
The St. Thomas Philharmonic Society; Vice-President and Ex-officio
Councillor The Ontario Historical Society; Member of the Council of the
Champlain Society since organization, member of the executive Committee
of the Board of Management of Alma College, St. Thomas; member of the
American Historical Association, and of the National Geographic Society,
member of the Société du Parler Français du Canada, member Methodist
Historical Society; Canadian Folk-lore Society, St. Thomas Horticultural
Society, Corresponding member Buffalo Historical Society, member
Canadian Defence League and the Canadian National Peace Committee; also
of Committee of Memorial to Heroes of 1812-14 Association; Chairman of
the Soldiers’ Aid Commission and member of Council of Serbian Committee
for the County of Elgin and City of St. Thomas. Has held the following
offices besides those mentioned above: Member of Executive Committee of
the University of Toronto; President of The Children’s Aid Society of
the County of Elgin on its organization; President (1882) of the East
Elgin Reform Association; President (1883) of St. Andrew’s Society;
President (1905-8) of the Handel Society; President (1909-10) of the St.
Thomas Operatic Society; Chairman for many years of the Executive
Committee of Board of Management Alma College. He was one of the first
vice-presidents of the University of Toronto Alumni Association (general
organization) and first honorary president of the St. Thomas Liberal
Club. In 1886 he contested West Elgin at the Provincial general
elections, but was defeated by A. B. Ingram, by 43 votes. In 1888,
appointed by the government of Sir Oliver Mowat, Registrar of Elgin, and
in 1892, at the request of the County Council, Local Master of Titles
for the County of Elgin and the city of St. Thomas, on the introduction
of the Torrens System of land registration. In 1897 was elected
President of the Pioneer and Historical Association of the Province of
Ontario, founded by the late Rev. Dr. Henry Scadding, and at once
proceeded to organize it upon a wider basis of membership and with a
much wider scope, under the name of The Ontario Historical Society
(incorporated in 1899 by special Act of the Ontario Legislature). The
presidency of the new society was held by him until 1902, when he was
succeeded by the late C. C. James. Under the auspices of the Society was
held, in 1899, the great Historical Exhibition at Victoria College,
Toronto. In 1906 was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada. He
was President of Section II (English Literature and History) in
1910-1911. In 1892 was member of Central Committee for the celebration
of the Centennial of Upper Canada. Dr. Coyne is a gentleman of
indefatigable energy, ripe scholarship, and possessed of a fine style
and his literary investigations have been of great public value.
Notwithstanding large professional duties, he has delivered many notable
addresses and is the author of several interesting publications, among
which may be mentioned, “The Southwold Earthwork and The Country of the
Neutrals” (1893); “The Country of the Neutrals from Champlain to Talbot”
(1895); “Presidential Addresses to The Ontario Historical Society”
(1898-1902); “First Steps in the Discovery and Exploration of Ontario”
(1899); “A Century of Achievement” (1899) reprinted with some changes
and additions in Methodist Magazine (1901); “Exploration of the Great
Lakes (1669-1670), by Dollier de Casson and de Bréhant de Galinée,
Galinée’s narrative and map with an English version, including all the
map legends” (1903); “Richard Maurice Bucke,” a sketch (1906); “The
Talbot Papers with Preface, Introduction and Annotations” (1909);
“Pathfinders, of the Great Lakes” (1912); “The Indian Occupation of
Southern Ontario” (1916). In religion Dr. Coyne is a Methodist, and
finds recreation in golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Breithaupt, Louis J.= (Kitchener, Ont.), Leather Manufacturer, is
President of the Breithaupt Leather Company, Limited, with tanneries at
Kitchener, Penetanguishene and Woodstock, and Secretary of the Hastings
Tanning Company, Limited, Hastings, Ont. For years Mr. Breithaupt was a
member of the Berlin—now Kitchener—City Council as Councillor, Deputy
Reeve, Reeve and Mayor, which last office he held for two years. He was
also a member of the Waterloo County Council; Warden of the County in
1898, and a member of the Provincial Legislature of Ontario from 1900 to
1902. His fellow-citizens, in fact, have honored this representative
Canadian with practically every office in their gift, he having also
been Chairman of the Schools and Park Boards, and at various times
President of what was then the Berlin Board of Trade. He has taken an
active interest in the work of the local Canadian Patriotic Fund, of
which he was Vice-President for two and a half years, and afterward
became President. Mr. Breithaupt was on the first board of the
Kitchener-Waterloo Hospital and has been a Director of the Economical
Fire Insurance Company of Kitchener for many years, and also a Director
and member of the Executive Board of the Mutual Life Assurance Company
of Canada, whose head office is at Waterloo, Ont. Louis Breithaupt is
the eldest son of Louis and Catharine (Hailer) Breithaupt, his
grandfather having come to Waterloo County in 1831, where he was one of
the earliest manufacturers and built the fifth or sixth house in the
embryo city of Berlin. At the time of his demise in 1880, after an
active life, Mr. Louis Breithaupt, Senior, was its Mayor. The subject of
this sketch was born at Buffalo, N.Y., March 3, 1855, and was educated
in the Public and Grammar Schools of Berlin (now Kitchener), and in
Toronto. He married Emma Alvarene, second daughter of the late Benjamin
Devitt, J.P., ex-Mayor of Waterloo, by whom he has eight children,
Louise Evelyn, Emma Lilian, Martha Edna, Rose Melvina, Louis Orville,
William Walter, Catharine Olive and Paul Theodore. Among his clubs are
the Grand River, Country and Golf, and Kitchener Clubs, of Kitchener,
and the Ontario, of Toronto. He is a member of the Evangelical
Association in religion, and an Independent Liberal in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Best, John= (Shelburne, Ont.), was born in Australia in 1861, of Irish
parentage. His father, John Best, was a farmer, and his mother was
Elizabeth Rolland. The subject of this sketch received his education in
the public school at Whitfield, in the County of Dufferin, and for many
years has been prominent in the municipal life of his township and
county. For 14 years he was a member of the County Council, and for 7
years President of The Dufferin Fire Insurance Company. In 1909 he was
selected as successor to the late Dr. L. John Barr, M.P., as the
Liberal-Conservative candidate for Dufferin in the House of Commons,
being returned by acclamation in 1911. He was again elected on the
Reciprocity issue by the large majority of 1,459. Elected in 1917 by
over 2,600 majority. Mr. Best has proven a most capable and efficient
representative, being thoroughly well versed in all the problems which
especially concern his constituents. A practical farmer, he takes a
lively interest in everything tending to promote the advancement of the
basic interest industry of agriculture. Realizing the importance and
advantage of the governmental scheme of Rural Mail Delivery, and its
necessity and benefit, he advocated its extension and development in his
own riding, where it has now reached the highest degree of efficiency
and service. He is also a liberal supporter of Agricultural Societies.
Mr. Best is well informed on all matters of National importance, and is
a ready and effective speaker. The inclination and ability for public
service is a family characteristic, for two of Mr. Best’s cousins are in
the Imperial Parliament, Mr. James Best, M.P., and Mr. Thomas Best,
M.P., who represents an Irish constituency. In 1887 Mr. Best married
Charlotte, only daughter of Mr. Thomas Thompson, of Thornbury, and has
one son John Chester. The member for Dufferin is prominent in the Orange
Order, being Past County Master. In religion he is a member of the
Church of England. Recreations: Motoring and fishing.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bowell, Sir Mackenzie= (Belleville, Ont.). A name universally known in
Canada is that of the late Hon. Sir Mackenzie Bowell, K.C.M.G.,
ex-Premier of the Dominion and ex-Leader of the Conservative Party in
the Senate. He was born on December 27th, 1823, at Rickinghall, Suffolk,
England, the son of the late John Bowell, a carpenter and builder. He
came to Canada with his parents, ten years later, the family locating at
Belleville, Ont., then Upper Canada, which has ever since remained his
home, and where he was shortly afterwards apprenticed to learn the trade
of a printer in the office of the Belleville “Intelligencer,” a
newspaper of which in after years he became editor and proprietor. As a
young man, Sir Mackenzie became prominent in public affairs. He became
an Ensign in the Belleville Rifle Company, which he assisted in
organizing in 1857, and was one of the corps of observation on service
in Western Ontario during the American Civil War. During the Fenian
Raids of 1866 he was on service at Prescott. In 1874 he retired from the
service with the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel of the 49th Battalion. He
also became prominent in the Orange Order and rose to the position of
Grand Master and Sovereign of the Order for British North America and
President of the Tri-annual Council of the Orangemen of the World. He
also took an interest in educational matters and served as Chairman of
the Public and Grammar School Boards, as Vice-President of the
Agricultural and Arts Association of Ontario, and as President of the
Ontario Press Association. A Conservative by conviction, he was a
candidate in North Hastings for the Canadian Assembly, in 1863. He was
defeated. In 1867, he was elected to the House of Commons for the same
constituency and held the seat continuously for twenty-five years, until
his elevation to the Senate in 1892. He was a member of the select
committee of Parliament to inquire into the troubles in the North-West
Territories in 1869-70. When the rebel leader, Louis Riel, was elected
to the House of Commons, shortly afterwards, the subject of this sketch
moved his expulsion as a traitor to the Crown. After the Conservative
victory of 1878, he entered Sir John A. Macdonald’s Cabinet as Minister
of Customs, and held that portfolio for thirteen years. In that capacity
it devolved upon him to carry out the new tariff system known as the
National Policy. On the death of Sir John A. Macdonald, he became
Minister of Militia in Sir John Abbott’s Cabinet, and on the demise of
the latter, Minister of Trade and Commerce in Sir John Thompson’s
Ministry. After the latter’s tragic death at Windsor Castle, England, he
was called on in December, 1894, to form a Cabinet, which he succeeded
in doing, taking the portfolio of President of the Council, and on
January 1, 1895, was made Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished
Order of St. Michael and St. George. When the Manitoba School question
arose, he was a strong advocate of justice to the minority, and after
some differences with his colleagues, he resigned the Premiership on
April 27, 1896. He was succeeded by Sir Charles Tupper, who paid him the
compliment of adopting his policy. In 1893, during his incumbency as
Minister of Trade and Commerce, he went to Australia to promote
inter-Imperial trade and the laying of an all-British Pacific cable
between Canada and that continent. Early in 1896 he went to England to
urge forward the Canadian-Australia or “all-red” cable, now an
accomplished fact, and sat in the third congress on the subject which
met in London, England. In 1896 he resumed the active control of the
“Belleville Intelligencer,” which he had relinquished when he entered
Sir John A. Macdonald’s Cabinet in 1878. In Belleville he was regarded
as the “grand old man,” and no Canadian boasted a wider circle of
friends in the country at large. The amiability of his nature, his large
intellectual capacity and his ability as a public speaker, marked him
for distinction. In religion he was a Methodist, and was married in
December, 1847, to Harriet Louisa, eldest daughter of the late Jacob G.
Moore, of Belleville. His helpmate died in 1884, and he followed her to
the grave in 1918. Of nine children born to them, five survive.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Langley, James P.= (Toronto), was born in the Provincial Capital on
June 15, 1864, and educated in Toronto, graduating from the Model School
in 1877. Son of Aylmer Langley and Alice (Thornber), his father being a
native of Ireland and his mother born in New York State. The subject of
this sketch early developed a marked ability as an expert accountant and
was one of the early members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants
of Ontario, an institution which has done much to stimulate the study of
higher accounting and to keep pace with the commercial and municipal
necessities of the day, and is a Fellow of the Institute so founded. Mr.
Langley is recognized as a man with a large and intimate knowledge of
industrial and financial enterprises, and his services are in constant
requisition by such institutions throughout the Dominion. He is retained
annually as the auditor of many leading business concerns, and is
trustee of large estates, his extended experience making his advice
particularly dependable. Mr. Langley married Carrie, daughter of Nathan
Brower, of New Jersey, U.S., and has one son, Clarence Aylmer. He is a
member of the Masonic order and of the Granite and Albany Clubs,
Toronto. He is also a Justice of the Peace; a member of the Church of
England. Politically he is a Liberal-Conservative. Recreations, motoring
and golf. Mr. Langley is one of the best known business men in the
province and enjoys the confidence of the mercantile community in a
marked degree.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chamberlain, Theodore F., M.D.=, only son of Asher A. and Eliza Ann
Chamberlain. Born at Harlem, County of South Leeds, Ontario, July 6,
1838. His family came from Birmingham, England, and were in politics,
Cobdenites. The family crest bears the motto “Sapiens et Fidus.” His
father was born in Vermont, U.S., Feb. 12, 1810, and came to Upper
Canada in 1815, locating in the County of South Leeds. After attending
school at Potsdam, N.Y., he entered the Medical College at Fairfield,
N.Y., after which he returned to Harlem, South Leeds, and began the
practice of medicine, which profession he followed with more than common
success, until his death at Athens, on February 20, 1883. He was Past
Master of Harmony Masonic Lodge, Leeds, one of the oldest, if not the
oldest, Masonic lodge in Upper Canada. He was Major in the Eighth
Battalion, Leeds Militia, was a staunch temperance man, a member of the
Methodist Church, and always took an active part in politics, from the
troublous times of the Rebellion of 1836-7 down to the time of his
death. At the time of the Beverly Election Riots in South Leeds, he
nearly lost his life at the hands of the Tory Party under the leadership
of Ogle R. Gowan’s Orangemen. He was one of the deputation from Upper
Canada who went to the rescue of Lord Elgin at the time of the burning
of the Parliament Buildings in Montreal in 1849. His connection with the
Masonic lodge has already been noticed; this lodge he resuscitated at
Farmersville, in 1859, under the name of “Rising Sun Lodge,” and was for
several years its Master; was a Justice of the Peace, Postmaster at
Harlem, and held other positions of trust. Dr. Chamberlain’s mother was
Eliza Ann Toffey, and was born at Quaker Hill, N.Y., Oct. 15, 1803, and
died at Athens, formerly Farmersville, on March 20, 1894. The
grandparents on both sides lived to very advanced years. The doctor has
one sister, born at Harlem, August 2, 1836, and now living (1913) in
Toronto. She is the widow of the late J. C. Miller, ex-M.P.P. for Parry
Sound and Muskoka District, and owner of the Parry Sound Lumber Co. The
early education of the subject of this sketch was gained from parental
instruction at night around the old home fireside, and at the Township
School. He attended the Grammar School at Perth for some months in 1851,
and then served some two years as clerk in the general mercantile
establishment of Henry Laishley, at Elgin, where he gained the business
training and experience that stood him so well in later life. In 1851 he
served as Lieutenant, under Capt. Wm. J. Smith, and Col. Young, in the
8th Battalion of Leeds Militia. Later he took up the study of dentistry
in the office of F. D. Laughlin, Ottawa. After practising his profession
for some time, he went, in the fall of 1857, to New York City, but
later, yielding to solicitations of his father, he returned to his home
in Athens, to take up medicine. He matriculated at Queen’s College,
Kingston, in 1859, and passed the final examination in March, 1862,
receiving the degree of Doctor of Medicine and Surgery, and his license
to practice in Canada, from the hands of Governor-General Monk. On the
13th of April following, Dr. Chamberlain located at Morrisburg, County
of Dundas, on the St. Lawrence River, and during the succeeding years
built up a large and lucrative practice. In 1859 he was requested by the
government of Sir Oliver Mowat to take the Inspectorship of Public
Institutions of Ontario. The history of the doctor during these years is
the history of a busy life. Besides following his profession, he served
as Reeve of his municipality, member of the Counties’ Council, and
Warden of the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry, Justice
of the Peace, Health Officer, member of the High and Public Board of
Education, Director of the Agricultural Association, and Director of the
Parry Sound Lumber Company. Inspector of schools for County of Dundas.
At the time of the Fenian Raid, he was member of a strong company of
volunteers under Captain I. N. Rose, Superintendent of the Williamsburg
Canals, and with other members of the company was out night and day on
guard at the locks, and in the village, as an attack was daily expected
to be made by General O’Neal. On the 1st of July, the General with 1,600
men appeared on the bank of the river opposite Morrisburg. The
Government of Sir John A. Macdonald, realizing the seriousness of the
situation, and desirous of keeping informed of O’Neal’s movements,
appointed a man to keep in touch with O’Neal’s forces, but this man
failing to accept, Dr. Chamberlain, a strong personal, but not a
political, friend of Sir John’s, was detailed for this duty. He accepted
the appointment, and taking his horses and buggy, and accompanied by a
young man named Leslie Weaver, set out to follow the Fenian force, and
to report as fully as possible their movements and designs. Crossing the
river to Waddington, N.Y., on Capt. Murphy’s Ferry, on July 9, he found
that the Fenians had moved, and he followed them to Malone, about 50
miles distant, over-taking them about dark. Staying over night and
having obtained all information possible, he left the next morning for
Plattsburgh, which place he made that evening. After a wearisome and
anxious night, he left Plattsburgh for Whitehall, at the foot of Lake
Champlain, arriving there the next morning, and at Saratoga in the
evening. He continued the journey to Troy and Albany, and returned
thence to Ogdensburg, Prescott, and home to Morrisburg. The result of
this close espionage, and prompt reports by the scouts, and the careful
guarding of the river, was that the invaders were compelled to abandon
their design of crossing the river, and to turn their faces to the west.
The doctor’s services on this occasion were most effective and valuable,
yet he never applied for nor received land grant, or medal, nor refund
of his expenditure. In 1879, the doctor, as Warden, was appointed by the
Counties’ Council, then in session, to go as their representative to the
eastern boundary of the province, to meet their Excellencies, the
Governor-General, the Marquis of Lorne, and the Princess Louise, and
welcome them to Ontario. Later in the year he presented to their
Excellencies at Government House, Ottawa, an address on behalf of the
inhabitants of the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry.
The doctor has always been an ardent politician, an indefatigable
worker, and a vigorous but generous opponent. He was the candidate of
the Reform Party for the Legislative Assembly for the county in 1879,
and was defeated by 81 votes. In 1882, he was again the party candidate,
this time for the House of Commons, and again defeated by 79 votes.
Nothing discouraged, he again came before the Electors, in 1886, for the
Assembly, and was elected by 25 majority. He was defeated next election
by 28 votes, and again in 1904, was defeated for the Commons. In
conjunction with his brother-in-law, Mr. W. G. Parish, of Athens, he
established in the seventies, the first three cheese factories in
Eastern Ontario. He carried on an extensive drug business in Morrisburg,
from 1886 to 1873, when he sold it to Messrs. Carman and Brown. In 1871,
he received the degree of L.R.C.P.S. from Queen’s College, Kingston, as
well as that of F.B.S. During his practice in Morrisburg he had as
students, Messrs. Hart, McLean, Howes, Musgrove, Lane, Shibbley,
Beckstead and McKay, all of whom became successful practitioners. He was
always a strong advocate of temperance, and a member of the Methodist
Church. He became a member, under dispensation of the Grand Master, of
Rising Sun Masonic Lodge, Athens, in 1857, and joined Excelsior Lodge,
Morrisburg, No. 142, G.R.C., in 1862, and is yet an honorary life
member, having filled every office in the gift of the lodge, and having
received various decorations and gold medals. In 1867 he became a member
of the Grenville Royal Arch Chapter, No. 23, at Prescott. In 1869-70 he
was elected by the Grand Lodge, District-Deputy Grand Master for St.
Lawrence District. In 1885 he received the 95 degrees in the Supreme
Rite of Memphis, known as the Sovereign Sanctuary Degrees. In 1873 the
doctor explored the country east and north of Lake Superior to the
height of land, examining for timber and minerals. In 1878 he explored
the country along the shores of Georgian Bay, the “Soo,” and to the head
of Lake Nipissing. In 1883 he visited part of the southern, middle and
western States, including California, Colorado, Nevada, Utah, New Mexico
and Mexico. In 1889, leaving Montreal, he travelled through the
North-Western Territories, and Victoria, Vancouver, Puget Sound, and
Washington Territory. From 1889 to 1904, he acted as one of the
Provincial Inspectors of Asylums, Prisons, Gaols and Hospitals, serving
in that capacity until 1904, when he resigned, owing to ill health. In
1906 he was appointed by the Dominion Government, under the Public
Health Department, Inspector of all the doctors employed on Public
Works, from the Red River to the Pacific Ocean. In pursuance of the
duties of this position, he had to travel distances of from 1,000 to
1,500 miles at a trip, ford rivers, make his own trail over prairies,
sleep in a tent wherever night overtook him, in that great lone land. In
the winter of 1907, he sent in his resignation, and in the spring of
1908, inspected and estimated the timber on the Dokis Indian Reserve,
Lake Nipissing. The pine timber on this Reserve was sold by the
Government at Ottawa in June, and the doctor bought one of the limits,
and in the fall had buildings, appliances, and materials complete for
lumbering operations. During the winter he took out, and in the spring
sent, 2,300 pieces of board timber, for the English market, by way of
Lake Nipissing to Callender, thence by rail to Kingston, and rafting it
thence to Quebec. He closed up this deal, and in 1910 went to
California, visiting by the way, the principal cities in the West.
During the past 30 years, he has bought and sold large quantities of
pine timber in Ontario, and prospected for and located mines in the
Rainy River and Lake-of-the-Woods Districts, and explored almost every
part of Northern Ontario mining and timber lands. Dr. Chamberlain
married, in 1862, Annetta, third daughter of Arza Parish, Esq.,
merchant, Athens. He has one son, W. P., born at Morrisburg on May 19,
1863, and one daughter, also born at Morrisburg, March 8, 1871. The Dr.
and Mrs. Chamberlain celebrated their golden wedding on July 3, 1912.
They had resided in Toronto since 1890, but the lure of his profession
became too strong, and so the doctor has improved and embellished his
beautiful residence in Morrisburg, fitted it up with all the latest
devices and scientific appliances, and is conducting most successfully a
Sanatorium for the relief and cure of suffering humanity.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chapleau, Major Samuel Edmour St. Onge=, ex-clerk of the Senate, clerk
of the Parliaments and master in chancery, was born at Syracuse, New
York, in 1839. He is the second son of the late Pierre Chapleau, of
Terrebonne, Quebec, and was educated at Terrebonne College. In 1860 he
went to the United States, and at the outbreak of the Civil War, in
1861, entered the regular army of that country and received in
succession, promotion to the ranks of second lieutenant, first
lieutenant and Captain of the 16th Regiment of Infantry. He also
received the rank of brevet-Captain for gallant and meritorious service
at the battle of Murfreesboro, Tennessee, and that of Major for gallant
service during the Atlanta campaign and at the battle of Jonesboro,
Georgia. He was at the battle of Shiloh, at the Siege of Corinth, and at
the battles of Chickamauga and Chattanooga. He was sent to Memphis in
1866 during the riots in that city, and in 1868 was in command of the
troops at Augusta, Georgia, during the riots which took place between
the whites and the colored people on the occasion of the first election
of President Grant. He retired from the United States Army, January 1,
1871, and September 15, 1873, entered the Civil Service of Canada. He
successively held the appointments of Secretary Department of Public
Works, Sheriff of the North-West Territories, and Clerk of the Crown in
Chancery. On January 27, 1900, he was appointed Clerk of the Senate and
held that position until he retired, in the early part of 1917. In view
of his long and faithful service in the Senate, Major Chapleau was
appointed an honorary officer of that house and is allowed entree and
seat at the table on the occasions of ceremony. He married Caroline K.,
third daughter of the late Lieut.-Col. G. W. Patten, of the United
States Army. Major Chapleau declined the honor of C.M.G. tendered to him
in 1914.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Aikenhead, Thomas E.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born at Toronto, September
14, 1859, and received his education in that city. In 1873 he entered
his business career with his father’s firm, which was originally
established in the year 1830, and conducted for many years by his late
father, Mr. James Aikenhead and Mr. A. T. Crombie, under the name of
Aikenhead & Crombie. To-day this firm has some 100 employees, and the
subject of this sketch is President and General Manager, under the firm
name of Aikenhead Hardware, Limited, with extensive premises on
Temperance Street. During the earlier days of Canada there were but few
hardware houses of such importance, and Mr. Aikenhead set to work to
build up a business to suit the rapid development of the country and has
to-day made a reputation for himself as a leader in his own particular
branch. Besides his business connections he is an ardent worker in
church circles and a regular attendant of the Timothy Eaton Memorial
Church. He is a member of the Ontario Club, Toronto Bowling Club, Board
of Trade and the Ontario Motor League, taking an active interest in the
good roads campaign of 1910. He is also a director of the Tisdale Iron
Stable Fittings Co. In looking over the extensive buildings erected in
Toronto, one can only imagine the important part Mr. Aikenhead has
played from a business standpoint, and he can truly be classed as one of
the builders of Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacDonald, Neil S., B.A., D.Paed.= (Toronto, Ont.), Public School
Inspector, is the son of the late John F. MacDonald and Mrs. MacDonald,
formerly of Darlington, now of Toronto. Born in Bowmanville, Durham
County, Ont., on January 28, 1872, he received his early education in
Clarke Union Public School and Bowmanville High School. At the end of
six months in the latter school, he obtained a Third Class Teacher’s
Certificate, and at the next Departmental Examination he obtained a
Second Class Certificate and spent several years teaching in the rural
schools of the Townships of Cartwright, Darlington and Hope. Feeling
that he had learned all he could in these schools, he returned to
Bowmanville High School to prepare for honor matriculation into Toronto
University, and at his matriculation made a splendid record, receiving
honors in Mathematics, Science, English, History and Geography. He did
not enter the University, however, but took a year’s course in practical
teaching in the Ontario Normal College at Hamilton, after which he was
engaged as Principal in Richmond Hill Public School, where he stayed for
one year, going from there to Toronto to accept the office of
Vice-Principal of Ryerson School, which he held for six years, receiving
while there training in the method of city schools under Principal
McAllister. Then he was promoted to the Principalship of Duke Street
Public School and after three years there was once more promoted, to be
Principal of Cottingham Street Public School. He spent one year here,
when he was promoted to Bolton Avenue School. Mr. MacDonald held a high
ideal of success ever before his mind and backed it up with praiseworthy
perseverance, and he owes his marked success in life to the
stick-to-it-iveness which is one of his special characteristics. In 1910
he graduated from Queen’s University with the degree of B.A., very much
to his credit, for he obtained this degree by private study while
filling the position of Principal in a city school. Mr. MacDonald
married Christina Lamb, the daughter of William Lamb, and has one son,
Donald, born on August 29, 1913. Upon the retirement of Mr. R. W. Doan,
in June, 1914, Mr. MacDonald became Principal of Dufferin School,
Toronto, and it has been said of him, “His educational attainments,
energy and enthusiasm mark him as a man well qualified to fill the
highest position a School Board may offer.” Besides managing the regular
school work, he took an active interest in the school sports and cadet
drill, and his scholars always obtained good standing in these. After
three years as Principal of Dufferin School, Mr. MacDonald was
transferred, in September, 1917, to Ryerson School, as Principal in
succession to the late W. E. Groves. Ryerson School is the school for
practice teaching in connection with the Faculty of Education. As
Principal he was chief critic teacher and supervisor of critic teachers.
In February, 1918, the Toronto Board of Education appointed him Public
School Inspector in District Five, a position left vacant by the death
of Inspector W. F. Chapman, B.A. He is a Presbyterian in religion,
belonging to St. John’s Presbyterian Church, where he is also
Superintendent of the Sabbath School; a Conservative in politics and a
member of St. Andrew’s Masonic Society, St. Patrick’s Royal Arch Masons
and Cyrene Preceptory. In the spring of 1918 the degree of Doctor of
Pedagogy was conferred upon Mr. MacDonald, and in partial fulfilment for
the degree he submitted a thesis on “Open Air Schools,” which he has
recently published.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McCullough, Charles Robert= (Hamilton, Ont.), was born in Bowmanville,
Ont., Feb. 18, 1865, educated at Private, Public and High Schools,
Bowmanville, and special schools in Belleville and Toronto. Married in
1897 to Eola Luxton, second daughter of George and Harriet Luxton, of
Hamilton. Children: Evan (deceased), Luxton and Kathleen. A member of
the Canadian Club of Hamilton, and the Hamilton Club, a Fellow of the
Royal Colonial Institute; Honorary President Assn. of Canadian Clubs,
teacher mercantile subjects, 1885-1903, founded Federated Business
Colleges, founded Business Educators’ Assn. of Canada, first President
of the latter; founder Canadian Club Movement in Hamilton, December 6,
1892; President Hamilton Canadian Club, 1895 and 1910; together with
John Cousins founded the General Council of Canadian Clubs and
Societies, Niagara Falls, N.Y., July, 1905; is President of the Ontario
Engraving Co., and Hamilton Conservatory of Music; one of the Founders
and first Governors Art Gallery of Hamilton; represented Collegiate
Institute on the Board of Education for three years; member of the
Canadian Manufacturers Assn., ex-Chairman Industrial Committee thereof;
Vice-President and Chairman of Executive Committee Win-the-War league of
Ontario, and President Win-the-War League of Hamilton; President Union
School Club of Bowmanville; gazetted Capt. 91st Regt., Canadian
Highlanders, 1907, and Lieut.-Colonel, 1916, organized the first
recruiting league in Hamilton, 1915, has done a great deal to promote
recruiting throughout the Province, at various points, especially in
connection with the Canadian Club of Hamilton and the Recruiting
Committee of the Citizens’ Service League in affiliation therewith.
Lieut.-Col. McCullough projected Semi-Centennial Celebration of Canada
for 1917 as far back as 1910. He believes that a mutual respect for, and
confidence in each other, should be entertained by the great English and
French-speaking peoples constituting the Canadian nation. Lieut.-Col.
McCullough has addressed various Canadian Clubs throughout the Dominion
and has done excellent work in inculcating a robust Canadian sentiment.
F. D. Monk, K.C., M.P., said a few years ago: “In initiating the
Canadian Club movement, Mr. McCullough has done a better work than any
politician since Confederation.” Lieut.-Col. McCullough’s recreations
are, skating, golfing, canoeing. In religion he is a member of the
Church of England and of the Church of the Ascension of Hamilton.
Colonel McCullough was an active, early promoter of a Union,
non-partizan Government. Made three public speaking tours of District of
Columbia, Virginia, West Virginia and Maryland, 1917-1918, as guest of
the American Red Cross.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Beach, Mahlon F.=, Manufacturer (Iroquois, Ont.), who died January 4,
1917, at the ripe age of more than eighty-three years, was one of the
most remarkable self-made men in Eastern Canada and belonged to a family
which can boast one of the most striking genealogical records in the
Dominion. The family record shows his lineage back to John Beach, one of
three pilgrim brothers who migrated from England to New Haven Colony,
Conn., early in the Seventeenth Century, the two other pilgrim brothers
being Richard and Thomas. Richard first appears in the New Haven Colony
in 1638, and was a man of some note in his day. Thomas first appears in
the records in 1646, and settled in Milford, Connecticut. John is first
mentioned in the New Haven Colony records, January 4, 1643. Four years
later he bought “an house lott” there and in 1650 married Mary ——.
Next we find him at Stratford, Connecticut, where he acquired land in
1660 and was chosen “Town Crier” in the following years, being allowed
fourpence “for everything he should crye and every time he cryed.” He
signed the Articles of Agreement for the Wallingford Plantation in 1670,
and was granted a “house lott” there in 1671. He appears fourth in a
list of six persons of “Hiest Rank,” July 29, 1672, and in 1675 was one
of a committee to establish a Church, dying between the years 1678 and
1680, the ancestor of a large number of Beaches, scattered over United
States, Canada and South America. Mahlon Ford Beach, the subject of this
sketch, was born November 10, 1833, in Oxford Township, Grenville
County, Province of Ontario, where his father, Mahlon Beach, son of
David Beach, arriving from New Jersey, was one of the first settlers.
His Mother, Mercy May, born in New York State, May 12, 1798, was a
daughter of Lyman Clothier, who migrated to the vicinity and built the
first mills in what is now known as the Village of Kemptville. Married
Louise C. Wickmire, of Augusta Township, Grenville County, in 1865, and
leaves a family of ten boys, all of whom are living, born as follows:
Charles A., of Cornwall, 1866; Fred. W., of Morrisburg, 1868; Dr. Anson
W., of Toronto, and Benson C., of Ottawa (twins), 1870; Mahlon W., of
Kingston, 1872; Howard B., of Iroquois, 1873; D. Easton, of Ottawa, and
G. Weston, of Winchester (twins), 1875; J. Russell, of Ottawa, 1878; and
Olin A., of Ottawa, 1882. One daughter, born in 1877, died in infancy.
Mrs. Beach died in 1907, aged seventy-one years and eleven months, and
Mr. Beach married Mrs. Hannah M. Barber, of Winnipeg, in 1912, by whom
he is survived. Although controlling probably a quarter of a million
dollars at his death, Mr. Beach started life like thousands of other
poor boys, with only his native industry, wit and enterprise to raise
him above his restricted circumstances and give his talents a larger
field of activity. He was a born captain of industry and remarkable in
many ways, exciting a big influence not only in his community, but
throughout the county. Possessed of a strong personality, an untiring
energy, quick perception and bold and fearless in his business
enterprises, he left his stamp on the community in which he lived and
his name will always be connected with the village and township of
Winchester. This place was hardly a settlement when Mr. Beach first came
there, and when he erected his first mill it was the beginning of a new
life in the community, as previously the nearest mill was at Iroquois.
He was educated at the common schools of his native place and set out to
carve his own fortune early in life. He first worked at the millwright
business, and in 1856 went to the Township of Winchester, Dundas County,
where he built a small saw mill, later adding other machinery and
buildings, such as planing mills, sash and door, and flour mills. During
the years 1861-1864 he engaged in square timber operations, taking the
timber to Quebec. In the spring of 1883 he bought a water privilege on
the St. Lawrence Canal, at Iroquois, and moved there in June of the same
year, where he commenced a roller flour mill, which was put in operation
in the fall of 1884. At Mr. Beach’s place in Winchester, where the old
business is still continued, he saw grow up what is now a flourishing
village. Between the years 1861-1878 Mr. Beach was connected directly
and indirectly with the general store business and has always been
successful in his undertakings. In 1884 his mills at Winchester were
destroyed by fire, and a number of other valuable buildings, also a
quantity of sawn lumber, flour and wheat to the amount of about $75,000,
were all swept away without any insurance to cover the loss. This
naturally crippled him financially, but nothing daunted, he commenced
again, rebuilding the mills in a much better manner than before and
adding a furniture factory to them, thus showing that the spirit of the
man was bigger than any adversity and that he did not know the meaning
of failure. He met every obstacle with indomitable faith in himself as
the biggest asset of human enterprise, which, more than any other, was a
characteristic of Mr. Beach. He had absolute faith in his own judgment
and with great capacity and resource he soon recovered his losses. He
was President of the Beach Foundry Co., Ltd., of Ottawa, and also with
his son Charles A., established the Beach Furniture Factory, at
Cornwall. In 1909 he completed a water power development in Iroquois,
one of the latest and most improved hydro-electric power plants in
America. In order to carry out this undertaking, he was obliged to
resort to the European markets for the electrical apparatus. The
generators came from Sweden, where they were designed and made
especially for the conditions met with in development. It might truly be
said that this was the pioneer plant in Canada for the vertical type,
direct connected to wheel, operating under a low head of water. This
fact was attested to by many eminent engineers from all over the
American continent, who inspected the plant after its completion. In
1910, with his two sons, Benson C. and Charles A., he was interested in
the development of a 4,000 h.p. Hydro-Electric Power Plant at Hound
Chute, on the Montreal River, furnishing the first electrical energy
used in the Cobalt District. Associated with the late Hon. Andrew
Broder, M.P., he secured in 1882, a charter for the Montreal and Central
Canada Railroad. With the charter they interviewed Sir Wm. Van Horne, of
the C.P.R. Asked what they wanted for their charter and expense of
promoting, the reply was “We want a railroad.” The C.P.R. took over the
charter, the line was built and now forms part of the main line between
Toronto and Montreal. Mr. Beach was one of the foremost men interested
in the erection of the present magnificent Methodist Church at
Winchester. His public career has been confined to municipal affairs. He
was warden of the United Counties of Stormont, Dundas and Glengarry for
the year 1873. In politics he was a Liberal, and in religion a
broad-minded adherent of the Methodist Church, and opposed to
ostentation. Even passing his eighty-third birthday, Mr. Beach exhibited
remarkable vitality of mind and body, being still actively engaged in
his several interests, but on January 4, 1917, he suddenly passed away,
the direct cause being due to acute congestion of the kidneys,
complicated with pneumonia. His useful and successful life will long be
remembered with respect.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Macdonald, John= (Toronto, Ont.), the present head of the great
wholesale dry goods firm of John Macdonald & Co., of Toronto, is still a
young man. He bears the name of his father, the founder of the business,
and was born on the 4th of November, 1863, at the old family homestead,
Oaklands, a beautiful villa on the hills overlooking the city of
Toronto. He was educated at Upper Canada College, which boasts the names
of a very large number of distinguished families on its rolls, and while
still a lad entered (1880) the great dry goods establishment which then
bore his father’s name and was founded by him in 1849. Under his
distinguished father’s guidance he received a sound business training,
and was thus, on the death of the latter, able to undertake the great
responsibility devolving upon him. The firm was made a Joint Stock
Company, of which he was appointed President in 1906. He is a Director
of the following: Bank of Toronto, Confederation Life Association,
Toronto Hotel Co., Ltd., Guarantee Company of North America, Millers and
Manufacturers Insurance Co., Humane Society, Hospital for Incurables,
Academy of Music. Honorary Governor Toronto General Hospital; member
Toronto Board of Trade; Chairman Bureau Municipal Research; Trustee and
Official, Yonge St. Methodist Church; Vice-Chairman, Financial
Committee; member Defence League. The late Hon. John Macdonald sat in
the Senate of Canada for several years, and was a most distinguished
figure in religious and philanthropic work. The subject of this sketch
is a man of varied interests and wide social popularity, while retaining
the sound business energy characteristic of his family. In the affairs
of his alma mater, Upper Canada College, he has taken a deep interest,
and was one of those public-spirited graduates who took an active part
in the work of reorganization which a few years ago put it on a sound
basis and largely increased its usefulness. He is also a member of the
Methodist Communion, in which his father was so long an eminent figure,
and has interested himself in the affairs of Yonge Street Methodist
Church, of which he is a Trustee. He holds the office of Justice of the
Peace, but fortunately is not compelled to frequently exercise his
function as a magistrate. Among the commercial organizations with which
he is identified, may be mentioned the Toronto Board of Trade, in which
he is prominent in the dry goods section. His is also one of the
best-known names on the roll of the Commercial Travellers’ Association,
one of the most powerful organizations in Canada. He is also a member of
the British Empire League, the object of which is to further the
progress of an enlightened Imperialism in Canada; of the well-known
benevolent society, the Ancient Order of United Workmen; of the
Caledonian Society, to which he belongs by virtue of his Scottish
descent; and is a member, also, by virtue of the family traditions, of
the York pioneers; a member also of the Methodist Union College Heights
Association, Upper Canada College Old Boys’ Association, St. Andrew’s
Society, and the Canadian Institute. Clubs: York, National, British
Empire. Like all men of active mind, Mr. Macdonald has a hobby, and in
his case the hobby is horseflesh. His beautiful home at Oaklands always
boasts some fine animals in its stables, and he has earnestly devoted
himself to the improvement of Canadian stock. He was one of the original
promoters and is a Director of the Annual Horse Show at Toronto, and is
also an active member of the Horse Breeders’ Association, and of the
Hackney Horse Association. It will thus be seen that Mr. Macdonald is a
man of catholic tastes and wide energies. He resides at 116 Farnham
Avenue, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Longley, Hon. J. W.= (Halifax, N.S.), Judge of the Supreme Court of
Nova Scotia. One of the best-known men in Canadian public life, and a
gentleman who combines literary graces with a practical public spirit,
is Hon. James Wilberforce Longley, late Attorney-General and
Commissioner of Crown Lands for the Province of Nova Scotia. Hon. Mr.
Longley was born at Paradise, Annapolis County, Nova Scotia, on January
4, 1849, the son of Israel Longley and Frances Manning. Like so many
noted Nova Scotians, he is a descendant of an old New England family,
and his grandfather, William Longley, came to Nova Scotia from
Massachusetts in 1760, and settled at Belleisle, in Annapolis County.
The subject of this sketch attended school first at Paradise and later
received his education in the higher branches at Acadia University,
Wolfville, N.S., where he received the B.A. degree in 1871; M.A., 1875;
D.C.L., 1897; Hon. LL.D. St. Francis Xavier College, Antigonish, N.S.,
1905. He began the study of law in the office of Hiram Blanchard, K.C.,
of Halifax, and completed his course with the legal firm of Johnston &
Bligh; read law with Bethune & Hoyles, Toronto, and W. A. Johnson,
Halifax, N.S.; he also attended for a term at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and
was called to the Nova Scotia Bar at Halifax in 1875, where he
immediately began the practice of his profession; two years as Bligh &
Longley; four years with Mr. Motton, and as McCoy & Longley. He quickly
made a reputation by his ability, and in 1883 was appointed by the
Provincial Government as one of the commission for the revision and
consolidation of the Statutes. Journalism had always attracted Mr.
Longley, and while a law student he had become identified with the
“Acadian Recorder,” of Halifax, as its chief editorial writer.
Subsequently he joined the staff of the “Halifax Morning Chronicle,” and
for some time filled the responsible post of managing editor. Mr.
Longley’s literary and clear attractive style has borne fruit in
contributions to many of the leading reviews and periodicals of England
and the United States. In 1898, “Love,” a religious and philosophical
essay appeared in book form and has passed through several editions. He
has also written “Socialism, Its Truths and Errors”; “The Greatest
Drama”; “A Material Age”; “Canada and Imperial Federation”; “Religion in
the 19th Century”; “Makers of Canada” (Series); “The Political History
of Canada” (four volumes complete); “Life of Joseph Howe,” and “Life of
Sir Charles Tupper.” He was President of the Nova Scotia Historical
Society and a member of the Royal Society of Canada. Coincident with his
legal and literary activities, Hon. Mr. Longley has taken an active part
in politics. He was for some years President of the Young Men’s Liberal
Club of Halifax, and entered public life in 1882 as member of the Nova
Scotia Legislature for Annapolis County, which constituency he
represented until 1905. Two years later Hon. W. S. Fielding, in forming
his Government, invited Mr. Longley to enter it, and in July, 1884, he
was sworn in as a Minister without Portfolio. In 1886 he was appointed
Attorney-General. In 1896 he resigned to enter a contest for Federal
honors in the House of Commons. Being defeated, his old constituents in
Annapolis at once re-elected him by acclamation. At the request of the
Premier, Hon. Mr. Murray, he resumed the duties of Attorney General for
Nova Scotia, which position he held for over nineteen years. In his
public capacity, he was a member of the famous inter-Provincial
Conference at Quebec in 1887, and was one of the prominent figures in
the historic convention of the Reform Party in 1893, when the platform
of the then Opposition was struck. As a legislator he has initiated many
useful provincial measures, embracing important changes in the criminal
procedure, the abolition of imprisonment for debt, consolidation of
County Court Procedure and the incorporation of towns. He is a director
of the British Empire Financial Corporation, and is a great social
favorite in most of the cities of Canada. Has been a Fellow of the Royal
Society of Canada and was elected Honorary President. On September 4,
1877, he married Annie Brown, daughter of Mr. Newton Brown (deceased,
October, 1899); secondly, Lois Fletcher, daughter of George Fletcher,
Yorkshire, Eng., April, 1901, and has five sons and one daughter. He is
a member of the Halifax and Saraquay Clubs; a director of the Home Life
Association, and received his present appointment in 1905; also a member
of A.F. & A.M. He was created K.C. by Lord Stanley (afterwards Earl of
Derby) in 1890.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Morgan, Colin Daniel= (Montreal, Que.), Merchant, is the son of William
Morgan and Jane Brown; was born at West Linton, Scotland, in 1846, and
educated at Edinburgh, Scotland. He married Martha Gold, the daughter of
Hon. Theodore S. Gold, an agriculturist, of West Cornwall, Conn., and
has four children, Theodore, Marjorie, Henry and Alice. He is a member
of the Presbyterian Church, and takes his recreation motoring, etc.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Antliff, Rev. James Cooper, M.A., D.D.=, 41 St. Mark Street, Montreal.
Born February 1, 1844, at Huddersfield, Yorkshire, England. Son of Rev.
Wm. Antliff, D.D., and Barbara Cooper. Educated at Haslingden Wesleyan
School and Edinburgh University from which he graduated with the degree
of M.A., 1873, B.D. in 1874. Left England for Canada by appointment of
Primitive Methodist Conference, 1878. Professor in Wesleyan Theological
College, Montreal, for nine years. Received degree of D.D. Victoria
University, 1887. Member of First Œcumenical Conference. President of
Montreal Conference, 1891. Secretary of First General Conference of
Methodist Church. Canadian delegate to Wesleyan Methodist Conference,
1907. Was editor of Christian Journal for three years; and is the author
of several illuminating magazine articles on various subjects. Married
first, Fanny Holden, daughter of John Holden Esq., of Dalbury Lees,
Derby, England; second, Jane Elizabeth Gooderham, daughter of the Rev.
Ezekiel Gooderham of York Mills, Ont., has one surviving son, born the
22nd of March, 1869. Rev. Dr. Antliff has traveled extensively and is a
man of ripe scholarship.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Arrell, Harrison= (Caledonia, Ont.), was born at the Township of
Onondaga, Brant County, November 14, 1874, son of Samuel Arrell, farmer.
Educated at Caledonia High School and after matriculating, studied law
in the office of Mr. Justice Teetzel, Hamilton, and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto, and was called to the bar in 1898. Married, in 1907, to Eva,
daughter of H. B. Sawle, of Caledonia, and is the father of two
children: Alec. and Hugh. Is a member of the Masonic Order, and in
religion is an Anglican. Politically, he is a Conservative. Was
appointed Crown Attorney and Clerk of the Peace for the County of
Haldimand, in June, 1915.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Musson, Charles Joseph= (Toronto, Ont.), Publisher, is the President of
The Musson Book Co., Ltd., and Vice-President of Hodder & Stoughton,
Ltd. He is the son of Elizabeth and the late Capt. Thomas Musson,
general merchant and postmaster, Islington, Ont., where he was born on
September 15, 1869, receiving his education at Islington Public School,
Streetsville High School and Parkdale Collegiate Institute, Toronto. Mr.
Musson married Jennie Bird, daughter of the late Wm. Williams, farmer,
Bowmanville, Ont., and has two children, Ralph Thomas Musson,
Lieutenant, Royal Garrison Artillery, and Glena Elizabeth Musson. He is
a life member of the Historical Landmark Society of Canada, and of
Harmony Lodge A.F. & A.M. Scottish Rite, a 32nd Degree Mason, a Workman,
and Past Grand Master Canadian Order of Oddfellows. In politics Mr.
Musson is a Conservative, and in religion a member of the Church of
England.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Massey, C. D.= (Toronto, Ont.). The name of Massey is known throughout
the length and breadth of Canada, not only on account of the vastness of
the business interests associated with that name, but because of the
great philanthropies with which it is also synonymous. As the surviving
head of the family that has built up Canada’s greatest individual
industrial enterprise, the figure of Mr. Chester Daniel Massey, the
subject of this sketch, is doubly fraught with interest. He is the son
of the late Hart A. Massey, who was the son and successor in business of
Daniel Massey, the founder of the great establishment for the
manufacture of agricultural implements now known as the Massey-Harris
Company, Limited, and has been associated with that business, of which
he is now the Honorary President, since boyhood. Both the brothers who
had also been identified with the growth and management of the
enterprise, Charles A. Massey and Walter E. H. Massey, have also passed
away. But Mr. Chester D. Massey is splendidly carrying out the
traditions of the family. He was born on June 17, 1850, in Haldimand
Township, in the County of Northumberland, Ontario, and received his
education at the Public Schools of the province. While still a boy he
entered the business establishment of his father, then centred at
Newcastle, Ontario. Literally speaking, he has grown up with the
business, which in turn has grown up with the country (coincident with
the vast expansion of agricultural enterprise in Canada). In 1879 the
headquarters of the Massey firm were removed to Toronto, where Mr.
Massey has resided since the year 1882. In 1884 his eldest brother,
Charles A. Massey, died, and the duties devolving on him became the
heavier. The period that has elapsed since then has been one of immense
expansion, which the firm attained by a judicious policy of amalgamation
and by extending its agencies not only from the Atlantic to the Pacific,
but beyond the seven seas in all the corners of the earth. As has been
intimated, commercial interests do not by any means absorb the entire
attention of Mr. Massey. He is largely interested in all religious and
philanthropic movements. He is a member of the Methodist Church, to
which he is greatly attached, and his voice is at all times valued in
its councils. He is a Governor of the University of Toronto; a Regent of
Victoria University, and a Trustee of the Metropolitan Church and the
Methodist Deaconess Home and Training School, all of Toronto. He is also
a Trustee of Massey Music Hall, one of the finest buildings that
unselfish citizenship ever gave to a community. As chief executor of his
father’s estate, he necessarily takes a deep interest in the valuable
works of philanthropy which have been carried out under the provisions
of the will. On March 17, 1886, Mr. Massey was married at Erie, Pa., to
Miss Anna D. Vincent (deceased, London, England, November 11, 1903), and
secondly to Miss Margaret Phelps, of Gloversville, N.Y., Jan. 3, 1907;
has two sons by first wife, Charles Vincent and Raymond Hart Massey.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Smith, William, M.P.=, for South Ontario (Columbus, Ont.), was born in
the Township of East Whitby, November 16, 1847, is the son of William
Smith and Elizabeth Laing, his wife, natives of Morayshire, Scotland. He
was educated at the public school, Columbus, and Upper Canada College,
Toronto. He was Paymaster of the 34th Battalion for a number of years.
He has been a Trustee of Columbus Public School for over 21 years. Was
President of the South Ontario Agricultural Society in 1881. Was Deputy
Reeve for the Township of East Whitby from 1878 to 1882, and Reeve from
1883 to 1887. Was Vice-president and President of the Clydesdale
Association of Canada for a number of years. Is President of the Record
Board since 1912. Is President of the Maple Leaf Farmers’ Mutual Fire
Company, and has been since its incorporation in 1896. Is a Director of
the Dominion Shorthorn Association. He has always taken an active
interest in municipal and political affairs: Contested South Ontario,
1882, 1887, 1891, 1892, 1896, 1900 and 1911; successful in 1887, 1892
and 1911. In politics he is a Conservative and in religion a
Presbyterian. He was married, May 25, 1880, to Helen Burns, daughter of
the late James Burns, of the Township of East Whitby. Three children:
Bessie, Robert B., and Wm. Bruce. Robert B. is senior Major of the
116th, now in England, and went over with the first contingent in 1914.
Mr. Smith is a farmer, and takes a great interest in Clydesdale horses,
Shorthorn cattle and Cotswold sheep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mikel, William Charles, K.C., B.C.L.= (Belleville), was born in
Belleville, Ont., the son of W. V. and Matilda (Wilson) Mikel, a
descendant U.E.L. family. His great-grandfather fought on the side of
Great Britain in the American Revolution, after which he came to Canada
and was granted 300 acres of land in Ameliasburg Township, Prince Edward
County. Again he fought on the side of the Government forces in
Rebellion of 1837. The subject of this sketch was educated at Belleville
High School and the Ontario Business College, Albert College (honors),
and Trinity University (B.C.L., 1897). Practises law at Belleville; has
been Crown Prosecutor at Ottawa, Toronto and other places throughout the
province. Appeared before Legislature and Parliament in several
important matters, and acted as one of the Counsel for the depositors of
the Farmers Bank of Canada, when the Government and House of Commons
approved of payment of over one million dollars to depositors. Served as
Alderman, Auditor and City Solicitor of the Corporation of the city of
Belleville; created King’s Counsel, 1908. One of the founders of the
Ontario Bar Association and President 1911-12; President
Liberal-Conservative Auxiliary, Belleville; President Ontario Municipal
Association, 1907-08. Grand Master A.O.U.W., 1914-15-16; President
Canadian Fraternal Association, 1918-19; P.M. Moira Lodge, No. 11, A.F.
& A.M., 1st P. Moira Chapter, No. 7, G.R.C.; member King Baldwin
Preceptory; member L.O.L. No. 274, and Royal Black Knights of Ireland.
Member of Albany Club, Toronto; a Presbyterian in religion. Formerly
Captain 15th Batt. A.L.I., volunteered, 1915, for service in the Great
War, but was rejected. Offered to organize and take command of a
battalion, not accepted. Secretary Speakers’ Patriotic League at
Belleville; assisted in recruiting several military organizations for
service overseas; member of Council of the Win-the-War League, and was
one of the Committee of the League which presented to Sir Robert Borden,
August, 1917, the resolutions of the League supporting Union Government,
conscription and other patriotic measures. Strong supporter of the Union
Government, and assisted many of the Union Government candidates in the
election of December, 1917. Married Miss Lillian Ewen, daughter of T. E.
Ewen, M.A., veteran of the Fenian Raid; has one daughter, Miss Audrey
Mikel. On July 25 and 26, 1918, he presided over a meeting at Belleville
called by him, as President of the Canadian Fraternal Association,
comprised of delegates from a number of Canadian Fraternal Societies
representing Protestants and Roman Catholics, both English and French
speaking, for the purpose of promoting a better understanding between
the English and French speaking Canadians; and again at Ottawa on
November 28, 1918, he presided over a similar meeting called by him. His
brother, R. Y. Mikel, served in France with the American Flying Corps in
the Great War, so that the great-grandsons of the men who fought against
the American army in the Revolutionary war, served in that army, showing
how closely the people of the British Empire and of the United States
have been brought together by this war.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robb, Thomas= (Westmount, Que.), Manager and Secretary of the Shipping
Federation of Canada, is Managing Director of the Marconi Wireless
Telegraph Co., and a Director of George Davie & Sons, Limited. He has
been employed as Acting Staff Embarkation Officer, with the rank of
Major, under Generals McDonald and Biggar, and has also rendered
valuable services to the Marine and Naval Departments in connection with
the war. Royal Commissioner on Pilotage, 1911; Chairman of Royal
Commission on Pilotage, 1918, arising out of Halifax disaster.
Commissioner on Traffic Regulations dealing with explosives, and also
Royal Commissioner on Commission appointed to investigate labor unrest
in Shipbuilding industry in Province of Quebec. He was a member of the
delegation sent to Washington, D.C., in opposition to the proposed Long
Sault Development, and has been called to that city on several
occasions, notably in connection with the revision of the American
Seamen’s Act. He is a member of the American Geographical Society, and
has delivered an address on “Navigation—Ancient and Modern” before the
Nomad’s Club, which was subsequently published in pamphlet form, also
other addresses on Marine subjects. Mr. Robb’s chosen recreations are
golf and fishing. He is a Justice of the Peace, a Mason, and a member of
the Canadian Club and Canada Club, both of Montreal. Mr. Robb was born
in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1863, where he received his education at
McLaren Academy. Thomas Robb is the son of Ann Thomson and Thomas Robb,
an able writer. He married Elizabeth Andrew, daughter of James McLaren,
merchant, of Stirling, Scotland, in 1890, by whom he has three daughters
and one son, Elizabeth, Mabel, Chrissie, Robert.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=White, Arthur V.=, Consulting Engineer, Toronto, Ontario, was born in
Woodstock, Ontario, August 21, 1871. His father was the late James
White, Esq., a prominent merchant, well known throughout South-western
Ontario, and for more than twenty-five years Clerk of the County of
Oxford, in which office he succeeded his father, who was one of the
early Scotch pioneers of Woodstock. His mother was Dorothy Jessie
McLeod, eldest daughter of W. C. McLeod, Esq., one of the most
widely-known merchants and financiers of pioneer days in Ontario. Mr.
White’s early education was carried on in the Woodstock Public and High
Schools, after which he entered the University of Toronto, where he
graduated from the School of Practical Science with high standing in
1892. He later obtained from the University of Toronto the degree of
M.E. (mechanical engineer), being the first graduate of that institution
to receive this degree. After graduating, Mr. White followed his
profession in connection with manufacturing establishments in Canada and
the United States, and for some years was Chief Draughtsman for the
Canadian General Electric Company, at Peterboro. Subsequently, he was
Lecturer in Mechanical Drawing and Machine Design at the Toronto
Technical School. He spent about five years in London, England, as
engineering expert to Messrs. Brown Brothers, for whom he executed
important commissions on the Continent, as well as in the United States,
travelling extensively in connection therewith. August 28, 1901, Mr.
White married Aidine Squire, eldest daughter of Hon. Watson C. Squire,
LL.D., of Seattle, Wash., ex-United States Senator from that State, and
formerly Governor of Washington Territory, and Ida Remington, eldest
daughter of Philo Remington, Esq., the noted manufacturer of firearms.
Mr. White has three children—James Arthur, Remington, and Caroline
Lathrop. Returning to take up his residence in Canada in 1902, Mr. White
continued his professional work. In 1905, representing the noted
engineers, Messrs. Ross & Holgate, Mr. White personally canvassed
leading manufacturers in South-western Ontario respecting power
requirements and collected much of the field data basic to the
recommendations of the Ontario Power Commission, the precursor of the
present Hydro-Electric Power Commission of Ontario. Later he worked
chiefly upon constructional engineering and devoted considerable time to
designing in connection with Harbor Works for the Department of Public
Works, Canada. In 1910, he was engaged by the Commission of
Conservation, Ottawa, with which he still remains as Consulting
Engineer. He has reported for this Commission upon the Water Powers of
the Provinces of Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Ontario and British
Columbia; also upon the St. Lawrence Long Sault Rapids, the Chicago
Drainage Canal, Niagara Power and other matters. In 1911, he was
appointed Consulting Engineer representing Canada to the International
Joint Commission, under the Boundary Waters Treaty, to report jointly
with the consulting engineer from the United States upon the official
reference relating to the levels of the Lake of the Woods, including the
control and utilization of its waters and those tributary thereto. The
Report upon this subject was completed in 1917 and is a comprehensive
work to which the engineering press has referred as reflecting great
credit on its authors. Mr. White has written extensively upon
engineering subjects, but his principal efforts have been devoted to his
various reports for the Federal Government. He is regarded as a high
authority on many questions connected with International waters, and has
made a special study of Niagara power and the exportation of electric
energy with its relationship to coal supply. To the important subject of
Canada’s fuel problem, Mr. White has, for many years, devoted special
attention. Since as early as 1910, he has contributed valuable articles
to such periodicals as the “University Magazine,” the “Monetary Times,”
and prominent engineering and technical journals, as well as to the
daily press, urging that this subject be viewed and dealt with in its
broad national aspect, and that Canada take immediate steps to secure
the greatest possible independence with respect to her fuel supply. Mr.
White possesses a very comprehensive collection of rare books dealing
with the early History of Astronomy. He is opposed to the views of
modern _theoretical_ astronomy as represented by the Copernican System,
and an article from his pen in the University Monthly, in 1909, entitled
“The Shape of the Earth,” has excited considerable comment. In religion
Mr. White is a Protestant. He is non-sectarian, but of strong Christian
belief and is a staunch supporter of the Scriptures. In politics, as in
religion, he is independent.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Beaumont, Ernest Joseph= (Kitchener, Ont.), Local Registrar of the
Supreme Court, is the son of Joseph Wilson Beaumont, D.D., and Louisa
Beaumont. He was born at Mirfield, Yorkshire, England, February 28,
1855, and received his early education at “The Grammar School,”
Sheffield, Eng. Coming to Canada as a young man, Mr. Beaumont practised
law in Galt, Ont., for twenty-seven years, and served as Town Solicitor
of that place for eighteen years. He was also a member of the Public
School Board for 4 years, and late Major of the 29th Waterloo Battalion,
retiring with rank in 1888. He received his present appointment as local
Registrar of the Supreme Court of Ontario in January, 1908, is a Roman
Catholic in religion and a member of the Canadian Order of Foresters.
Ernest J. Beaumont married Helen McNab, daughter of Benjamin Wood of
Ingersoll, Ont., and had one son, George Joseph Beaumont, Lieutenant in
the 11th (S.) Battalion, East Lancashire Regiment, B.E.F., France, who
died of wounds in France on January 24, 1917.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackintosh, Charles Herbert= (Ottawa, Ont.), was born in London,
Ontario, in 1843; a son of the late Captain William Mackintosh, county
engineer of Middlesex, Ontario, and Leonora Sophia, daughter of Colonel
Dickenson of Jamaica, West Indies. Captain Mackintosh came to Canada as
an attaché of the ordnance branch of the British Army. Mr. Mackintosh
has led an unusually active life, succeeding in making his way, unaided,
to positions of honor and influence. He was educated at the Galt Grammar
School (Tassie’s), and Caradoc Academy (Middlesex Co.), two well-known
institutions at that time. When the Prince of Wales (afterwards King
Edward VII) visited Canada in 1860, an ode of welcome from the pen of
Mr. Mackintosh, then a youth of seventeen, was presented to His Royal
Highness. Two years later, under the title of “Fat Contributor,” he
wrote for the London “Free Press,” a series of articles,
characteristically entitled “Hurry-Graphs.” These attracted wide
attention, and the entrance of the young writer into journalism was a
foregone conclusion. He relinquished the study of law, and became,
first, reporter, and soon afterwards city editor of the “Free Press.”
Believing that the early history of pioneer life in Upper Canada should
be heard from the lips of those who had passed through the ordeal, Mr.
Mackintosh organized a Committee, the result being a Pioneer Banquet, at
which 400 old settlers from local and distant points were in attendance.
Col. J. B. Askin, one of the early pioneers acted as chairman, Mr.
Mackintosh, as the youngest Canadian, acting as Secretary. Subsequent to
this, he assisted in promoting the Western Fair, which to-day has
expanded to noticeable proportions. His journalistic career was marked
by rapid progress. In 1864 he was city editor of the Hamilton “Times.” A
year later he founded the “Dispatch,” of Strathroy, which he conducted
until 1873. In 1868 he married Gertrude Cooke, daughter of T. Cooke,
J.P., of Strathroy. In 1871 he founded the Parkhill “Gazette,” which he
controlled for some time, while still managing the “Dispatch.” In the
same year, he unsuccessfully contested North Middlesex as Conservative
candidate for the local legislature. In 1871 he visited Chicago during
the fire, and wrote a description of the terrible event; 60,000 copies
being sold in two weeks. He was also elected a member of the town
council of Strathroy, in which capacity he exhibited talents, which
afterwards showed to better advantage in a wider sphere. Believing in
himself, as all men do who come to the front in human affairs, he
proceeded to prepare for a higher sphere in public life which he was
destined to fill. Deciding that the protection system which had long
been established in the United States, deserved consideration in Canada,
he accepted the position of managing editor of the Chicago “Journal of
Commerce.” While resident in the western metropolis, he studied
carefully the protection system, as well as other issues in the United
States. He also wrote a graphic account of the United States’ “panic of
1873.” Returning to Canada, at the request of Sir John A. Macdonald the
day after his government was defeated in 1873, he declined an editorial
position on the “Mail”; sold out his interest in the Strathroy
“Dispatch,” and went to Ottawa, being appointed editor of the Ottawa
“Citizen,” the Conservative journal of the capital. He at once attracted
attention, not only because of the vigorous management and writing of
the “Citizen,” but because of knowledge of public questions. At the
celebration of the O’Connell Centennial, he wrote a poem which won the
gold and silver medal over many others submitted. He was an ardent
protectionist long before the Conservative party accepted that system as
a plank in their platform, and must be counted as one of the leaders in
that economic movement. In 1877, the late John Riordon, of St.
Catharines, urged Mr. Mackintosh to co-operate with him in reorganizing
the “Mail,” but the offer was again declined. His active interest in
public affairs, combined with an unusual share of those qualities which
make men popular with their fellows, caused him to be nominated for the
Mayoralty of Ottawa in 1879, the result of the election being his return
by a large majority. He promoted the first Dominion Exhibition, which
was opened by the then Governor-General, Lord Lorne—afterwards Duke of
Argyle. In the two succeeding years he was re-elected, and though
unseated on a technicality after the third contest, was a fourth time
favored with the support of the people. As Mayor of the Capital of
Canada, he inaugurated many reforms, which proved of great benefit to
the city. When retiring from the Mayoralty, the city presented him with
an address; also, citizens generally passed resolutions and presented an
illuminated address. In the General Election of 1882 he was one of the
Conservative candidates in Ottawa for the House of Commons, and was
elected senior member by a sweeping majority. During his term in
Parliament, he made several speeches which were notable for keen common
sense. He spoke but seldom; when he did he always secured an attentive
hearing. He became President of the Ottawa and Gatineau Valley Railroad,
now a part of the Canadian Pacific, and was also a Director of the
Canada Atlantic Railroad, now a part of the Grand Trunk System. Mr.
Mackintosh resigned his seat for Ottawa in July, 1886, but at the
request of friends agreed to hold it until the dissolution, which he
did. The Capital of Canada is no bed of roses for any active or generous
man, and thus the senior member found it, hence his positive objection
to being again a candidate at that time. In the General Election of
1887, Mr. Mackintosh, by the unanimous wish of the Conservative party,
contested Russell against Mr. W. C. Edwards, the largest lumber
manufacturer, and most popular Liberal in the County, and was defeated
by a narrow majority, owing mainly to the feeling against the Government
among the French-Canadians, aroused by the execution of Riel. He polled
2,146 votes, or between 400 and 500 more than were ever given to a
Conservative candidate in that county. The Home Rule and Riel cries
concentrated at least 1,600 votes solidly against any Conservative
nominee, the Constituency being largely Catholic. It should be said,
however, that Mr. Mackintosh was an ardent advocate of and believer in
Ireland’s right to control her own local affairs. But he had voted in
favor of Orange incorporation, publicly declaring that such would, in
the end, ameliorate the bitterness between Protestants and Catholics.
Mr. Edwards upon a protest was unseated for Russell, and a score of his
supporters reported for corruption. The Conservative party let the
matter drop; another election took place with the same result, Mr.
Edwards (now Senator) being returned. In 1888 Mr. Mackintosh declined to
accept nomination for the Mayoralty, and also to be a candidate for the
County of Carleton. In 1890, upon the death of the sitting member, Mr.
Perley, a requisition was presented, signed by prominent Liberals and
Conservatives, asking Mr. Mackintosh to be a candidate. There were four
candidates in the field, but he was elected by over 1,000 majority, and
was again returned at the General Election of 1891. During this time he
became interested in the “Lake Manitoba Railway and Canal Company,”
which subsequently was merged with the Canadian Northern
Transcontinental Line. His leader, Sir John A. Macdonald, died in June,
1891, and until Sir John Thompson became Premier, Mr. Mackintosh took
little interest in political affairs, disposing of his newspaper the
Ottawa “Citizen.” In October, 1893, he was appointed Lieutenant-Governor
of the Canadian North-West Territories, then including the Yukon. Before
leaving Ottawa he was presented with a testimonial and address by the
workingmen of Ottawa, the Conservative Association, and a dinner
tendered by the members of the Rideau Club, at which Judges of the
Supreme Court, Sir John Thompson and other Ministers were present.
During his term, he organized a Dominion Territorial Exhibition in 1895,
spoken of as inaugurating a very beneficial settlement in the
North-West. Prize competition entries reached nearly 8,000 in the
various departments. It was opened by Lord Aberdeen, then
Governor-General. On this occasion the city of Regina presented him with
an oil painting of himself and a complimentary address. In January,
1898, Mr. Mackintosh resigned his high position, going to British
Columbia, successfully organizing the British America Mining
Corporation, of which he was Managing Director, until he resigned, about
1900. In 1902, when King George V (then Duke of York) visited Canada,
Mr. Mackintosh, upon behalf of the Miners of British Columbia, presented
him with unique gold specimens extracted from the western mines. Mr.
Mackintosh remained in the western province for several years, engaging
in literary work. In 1908 he was awarded the 1st prize for an essay on
“British Columbia—Its Resources.” He was for some time in Toronto,
where (in 1910) he wrote a series of articles for the “Mail and Empire,”
forecasting Germany as the storm centre of a coming war. In 1911, when
the Reciprocity issue was before the electors, he wrote a series of
articles against the proposition, visiting nearly every constituency in
Ontario, publishing a signed telegram in the “Montreal Star,” the day
before the election, forecasting the defeat of the Laurier Government
and allowing them not more than fourteen seats in Ontario. When his
party returned to power, he accepted a position as Inspector of Customs,
and has also written many articles on the European War, which broke out
in August, 1914. In May, 1917, a pamphlet written by Mr. Mackintosh,
dealing with the Home Rule issue and entitled “Are Ireland’s Problems on
the Eve of Solution?” attracted much attention, being quoted from at the
Irish Conference by several delegates. Mr. Mackintosh spends much of his
time in British Columbia where he is Chairman of the Halcyon Springs
Company, and is greatly interested in the development of that province’s
mining resources.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Meek, Edward= (Toronto, Ont.), Barrister, was born in the village of
Port Stanley, Ontario, on December 27, 1844. His father, James Meek,
came to Canada at the early age of three years with his parents, in
1818, from Ballymena, North of Ireland. They settled in the same year in
Talbot District, and took up a tract of land near Port Stanley, being
among the earliest pioneers of that part of the country. At the time of
Edward’s birth his father was a carpenter and builder, but afterwards
became a partner in a foundry which was carried on successfully for a
number of years; but a disastrous fire destroyed the whole of the
extensive establishment, and he returned to his farm, on which he
remained till his death. Edward received his early education at the Port
Stanley school, and afterwards at the Grammar School, St. Thomas. After
leaving school, at the age of seventeen, he was granted a certificate to
teach, which occupation he followed for three years. He then accepted a
position as bookkeeper in a grain warehouse, at which he continued for a
short time only; but thinking a short journey among strangers would
improve his prospects, he went to Boston and engaged with a publishing
house of a prominent firm there. After a short sojourn he returned to
London, Ontario, and there commenced the study of law. In 1873 he
removed to Toronto, where he continued his studies and finished his law
course in the office of Harrison, Osler and Moss, three gentlemen who
afterwards became distinguished judges. He was called to the Bar of
Ontario in the spring of 1874, and he then formed a partnership with the
Hon. John O’Donohoe, which continued for four years, when it was
dissolved. He then opened an office of his own until he formed a
partnership with the late William Norris, of Woodstock, which lasted
till Mr. Norris returned to Woodstock. In 1877 he commenced to take an
active part in the politics of the country, and especially in the
promotion of the National Policy; in fact, he was one of the originators
of the word, and travelled over Ontario assisting in the formation of
political organizations to enable the National Policy party to carry
their new platform to a successful issue. He continued from that time to
take an active part as one of the political writers and speakers on the
platform until the winter of 1884, when he and a number of other
politicians conceived the idea of forming a coalition government for the
Province of Ontario, their object being to do away with partyism in the
local legislature. Others were brought into the scheme who were
impatient of the slow method of bringing about the change by argument,
and thought that a sufficient number of the members of the Legislature
could be secured by offers and promises to at once defeat the Mowat
Government, when the coalition could be immediately formed during the
spring session of 1884. The plans were disapproved of by the originators
of the idea, but the hot heads could not be kept under control, and the
public know the result of the unfortunate conspiracy case which sprung
from it, involving those more actively concerned in the long and tedious
investigation and prosecution before a Royal Commission and in the
criminal courts. The Royal Commission brought in a divided report, which
the House never acted upon. The verdict of the jury in the criminal
court, in the trial of May, 1885, acquitted the accused. Since that time
Mr. Meek has devoted himself strictly to the practice of his profession
in Toronto, and the promotion and formation of joint stock and other
companies. Mr. Meek was joined in marriage, on June 30, 1873, to Anna
Margaret McBride, daughter of Samuel McBride, of London, Ontario, by
which union they have issue two sons and one daughter. Mr. Meek and
family are members of the Church of England. Since the publication of
the preceding matter in the second edition of “Representative
Canadians,” about thirty years ago, Mr. Meek has continued to practise
law in all its branches in the city of Toronto, and is considered a
well-read lawyer, a sound legal adviser, and a successful practitioner.
While carrying on his legal practice, during the past twenty-five years,
he has written many thousands of “Legal Opinions,” published weekly in
the Saturday edition of the “Mail & Empire” newspaper. These concise and
clearly expressed statements of the law have been widely read, and
highly appreciated by many thousands of readers of that journal, and
have been copied in other newspapers. Mr. Meek has also written and
published pamphlets; and essays on Legal and Constitutional questions in
reviews and magazines which have been favorably criticized and commented
upon—notably two essays comparing our Canadian System of Federalism
with the American System of Federalism, entitled, “Some Observations on
the Constitution of the Dominion of Canada,” published in the American
Law Review of 1895, 1896; “The Legal and Constitutional Aspects of the
Manitoba School Questions,” published in the “Canadian Magazine” and in
pamphlet form in 1895; “Political Lessons from the Time of Cicero,”
“Representative Government and Federalism,” the “Plebiscite”—an answer
to an Essay published by the late Sir Geo. W. Ross—and other Essays,
all to be found in the “Canadian Magazine” between 1898 and 1904;
“Sunday Laws,” published in the “Canadian Law Review” in 1904; “The
Mistakes made by the Framers of the Constitution of the United States of
America,” and “Government and Political and Municipal Corporations,”
etc., published later. In 1913 Mr. Meek published a book of 600 pages,
entitled, “Business and Law,” which has had a wide circulation. Mr. Meek
was created a Q.C. in 1896, but for political reasons the patent was
never issued. He was, however, made a K.C. by the Ontario Government in
1908. He has recently published a few short poems which have been much
admired. Now 72, he is in robust health, and his writings are as clear
and concise, and his forensic abilities as convincing as 30 years ago,
with the added copiousness and accuracy acquired by long years of
experience. His eldest son, Mr. Charles S. Meek, is managing director of
the British Pacific Engineering & Construction Company, of Vancouver,
where he resides with his family, consisting of a wife and two
daughters. His second son, Mr. E. J. Meek, is the chief accountant of
the Canadian Bank of Commerce, and resides in Toronto with wife and two
children—a son and daughter. Mr. Meek lives at 177 Jamieson Ave., with
his wife and unmarried daughter, Miss Gertrude Meek.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Harris, Reginald V.= (Halifax, N.S.), Barrister-at-Law, son of Rev.
Canon V. E. Harris, Secretary, Diocesan Synod of Nova Scotia. Honorable
W. B. Troop, M.L.A., in Holmes-Thompson Government of Nova Scotia
(1878-82) grandfather; Honorable Chief Justice Harris, of Nova Scotia,
uncle; was born March 21, 1881, at Londonderry, N.S.; educated at
Amherst Public Schools; Trinity College School, Port Hope, Ont., and the
University of Trinity College, Toronto, from which latter institution he
graduated with the degree of B.A., 1902 (honors); and also received the
degree of M.A., Toronto University (1910), and a similar degree from
King’s University (1911). Barrister and Solicitor, Bars of Manitoba
(1906) and Nova Scotia (1905). Member of Henry, Rogers, Harris &
Stewart, Barristers, Halifax, since 1908. Mr. Harris is the author of
the following publications: “The Governance of Empire” (1910);
“Organization of a Legal Business” (1909); and is a frequent contributor
to the press and magazines on Educational, Municipal and Imperial
subjects. Mr. Harris has taken a large interest in the municipal affairs
of the city of Halifax, of which he was Alderman (1911-13), and
Controller (1913-15). He was also Vice-President of the Union of
Canadian municipalities (1912-13); Vice-President, Union of Nova Scotia
municipalities (1913-15); Commissioner of Schools, Halifax (1911-14);
Chairman, School Board, Halifax (1913-14). Appointed Lieutenant 246th
Overseas Battalion Canadian Expeditionary Forces, September, 1916.
Captain and District Casualty Officer, Military District No. 6, June,
1917; District Military Representative (M.S.A.), October, 1917; Chief
Public Representative, N.S. (M.S.A.), February to October, 1918. Is
Governor and Treasurer of King’s College, Windsor, N.S.; member of
Diocesan, Provincial and General Synods of Church of England in Canada;
member and Secretary Board of Management, King’s College School,
Windsor, N.S.; member of Council, Halifax Board of Trade (1911-14);
President Commercial Club, Halifax (1914-15); member of the City Club,
Halifax, and also a member and Secretary (N.S.) of the Royal Colonial
Institute. Chairman Halifax Centre St. John Ambulance Association;
District Superintendent St. John Ambulance Brigade; Esquire, Order of
Hospital of St. John, December, 1917. In religion, a member of the
Church of England, and in politics a Conservative. Mr. Harris married,
June 4, 1907, Ethel W., daughter of Edmund G. Smith, merchant, of
Halifax, and has two sons, R. Gordon Harris and Arthur St. G. Harris.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sutherland, Donald= (Ingersoll, Ont.), son of Robert Sutherland and
Elizabeth Hutchison, both born in the County of Oxford, of Scotch
parentage; born in West Zorra, Oxford County, April 8, 1863. Educated in
the local county schools. Married, April 22, 1896, to Minnie Pearl
Hossack. First elected to the council of North Oxford Township in 1896.
Reeve during 1897 and 1898; County Commissioner for the Town of
Ingersoll, North and West Oxford, 1901-2. Elected to represent South
Oxford in the Ontario Legislature at the general elections held on May
29, 1902. Election unsuccessfully protested, re-elected at the general
election, January 25, 1905. Seconded the address in reply to speech from
the throne at the session of 1907. Defeated by a small majority at the
general election, June 8, 1908. A candidate at the general election for
the House of Commons on October 26 of the same year, and again defeated
by a small majority. Appointed director of Colonization and Immigration
for the Province of Ontario by the Whitney Government, March 10, 1909,
when an active campaign was entered upon in Great Britain by provincial
officers to promote immigration to the Province, and the system of
advancing assisted passage to farm laborers and domestic servants was
adopted. Resigned as Director of Colonization, August 8, 1911, to become
a candidate for the House of Commons at the general elections held on
Sept. 21, 1911, in response to a unanimous nomination tendered him by
the Liberal-Conservative Association of the Riding, when he was elected
over the late representative, and re-elected at the general elections
held in December, 1917. Moved the address in reply to the speech from
the throne at the special war session of August, 1914. Mr. Sutherland is
a practical farmer, and extremely popular with all classes. He was the
first Conservative elected to represent the riding in the Legislature,
and also in the House of Commons. He is the father of seven children,
viz.: Robert Bruce, William Evans, Donald Baikie, James Burleigh, John
Angus, Jean Elizabeth and Olive Helen. The eldest, Robert Bruce,
enlisted at 17 years of age and went overseas with the 1st Canadian
Contingent, served at the front in France and Belgium, 1915-16,
qualified as pilot in the Royal Air Force and served in Egypt and
Palestine under Generals Murray and Allenby during 1917-18 until the end
of the war; promoted to a Captaincy and Flight Commander, and awarded
the Distinguished Flying Cross for conspicuous gallantry. William Evan
also enlisted at 18 years, and was a member of the R.A.F. at close of
war. Mr. Sutherland is a Presbyterian and a member of the Masonic Order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McInenly, William=, Electrical Contractor, was born at Sillery, Quebec,
January 20, 1874. He was educated at the Quebec Commercial Academy from
which he graduated in 1888. From 1889 to 1910 he was engaged in the
lumber business in Quebec, and in 1911 started in the electrical
machinery business in Ottawa, and at once became General-Manager of the
“Mac Electric Company,” whose works and offices are at 52 Queen Street,
Ottawa. While the company has never undertaken the wiring of residences,
ordinary apartment houses, or accepted any like contracts, it repairs
anything electrical from an electric iron to a 500 horse-power electric
motor. Among the principal electrical contracts accepted by the firm and
carried out to completion are the New Ottawa Gas Company plant, the
Ottawa Electric Company’s new plant on Middle Street, and the Ottawa Car
Manufacturing Company plant on Albert Street. Every kind of electrical
machinery is built by the company—motors, dynamos, generators, etc. Mr.
McInenly is the son of the late James McInenly, lumber merchant, and
Ellen M. Paul. On June 19, 1901, he married Miss Norah Ahearn, the
daughter of the late Maurice Ahearn, who became distinguished as an
artist, and a brother of Thomas Ahearn, president of the Ottawa Electric
Railway Company, etc. He has four sons, James, Maurice, Bertram and
Thomas. He is Chairman of the Electrical Dealers and Contractors
Association of Ottawa, is a director of Weir & Company, Limited, Ottawa,
manufacturers of aerated waters; a director and secretary-treasurer of
the Simmons Printing Company, of Ottawa, and of the Ottawa Electrotype
foundry. He is connected with the following clubs: The Canadian,
Laurentian, Rideau Curling and Golf, and the Peckanoc Fish and Game. His
principal recreations are fishing and curling. In religion he is a Roman
Catholic. In politics, Independent. His residence is 439 Elgin Street,
Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Belcourt, Hon. Napoleon Antoine=, Senator (Ottawa). Parents, Ferdinand
Napoleon Belcourt and Marie-Anna Clair; profession, barrister-at-law.
Was born at Toronto, September 15, 1860. Educated at St. Joseph’s
Seminary, Three Rivers, in arts and Laval University in law. Graduated
at Laval in Law, Master of Laws, _cum summa dignitate_ 1882. Admitted to
the Quebec Bar, July, 1882; Ontario Bar, September, 1884. Member of Law
Faculty, Ottawa University, since 1891. An LL.D. of Ottawa University
(1895); also LL.D. of Laval University. Crown Attorney for Carleton
County, June, 1894, to May, 1896. Resigned to become candidate for House
of Commons. K.C. in Ontario and Quebec Provinces. Founder and First
President of the Club National d’Ottawa, retaining that office for ten
years consecutively. Former Vice-President of Ontario Liberal
Association; first elected to House of Commons at general election,
1896; re-elected 1900, and general election 1904, his majority being
nearly 2,000. Elected Speaker of the House of Commons, March 12, 1904,
and sworn as Privy Councillor, January 11, 1905. Resigned his seat in
House of Commons and appointed to the Senate November, 1907. First
President, Ottawa Hunt Club; member, Rideau Club, Ottawa; Reform Club,
Montreal; Reform Club, Toronto; University Club, Ottawa; President,
Connaught Park Jockey Club of Ottawa also member of Country and other
Clubs. Married (1st) Jan. 29, 1889, to Hectorine, eldest daughter of
Hon. Jos. Shehyn; (2nd) Jan. 9, 1903, to Mary Margaret Haycock, of
Ottawa. Hon. Mr. Belcourt has taken a prominent part since the inception
of the war in promoting recruiting and in the work of the Patriotic
Fund, Red Cross and other kindred war activities. As leader in the
defence of the French language in the schools of Ontario he has on the
platform and in many pamphlets, as well as before the Courts of Canada,
and the Privy Council, earnestly and constantly labored for the
preservation and propagation of the French language in the Dominion and
for the development of a spirit of true national unity.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ball, Emerson Ewart= (Chesterville, Ont.), was born October 31, 1880,
at the Village of Orono, in the County of Durham. Is the son of Edwin
Ball, of Islington, Ont. Educated at Willowdale Public School, Richmond
Hill High School, Toronto Junction High School and Humberside Collegiate
Institute. He then attended Toronto University, graduating in 1906 with
honors in Modern Languages, and is now Principal of Chesterville High
School. Was married, July 22, 1908, to Cora M., daughter of John Harris,
of Whitevale, Ont., and is the father of two children: Dorothy, born
Mar. 2, 1910, and Gordon, born June 2, 1914. In religion Mr. Ball is a
Methodist and a member of Trinity Methodist Church, Chesterville. In
politics he is Independent. Member of Independent Order of Oddfellows,
Chesterville Lodge, No. 288.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Patterson, John Pratt=, President and General Manager of
Norris-Patterson, Limited, Advertising Agency, 10 East Adelaide Street,
Toronto, Ontario, was a Councillor of the Town of North Toronto prior to
its annexation by the city, and is to-day a Justice of the Peace. Mr.
Patterson is a member of the National Club, the Royal Canadian Yacht
Club, the Albany Club, Rotary Club, Board of Trade, Canadian Club and
Empire Club, all of Toronto; in addition to York Lodge, A.F. & A.M., St.
Paul’s Royal Arch Chapter, the Scottish Rite and the Canadian Order of
Foresters. He is an ex-member of the Queen’s Own Rifles, a
Liberal-Conservative in politics and a member of the Church of England
in religion. The subject of this sketch was born in Toronto, August 18,
1874; the son of Thomas and the late Jane Williams Patterson, receiving
his education at Upper Canada College. He married Millie, daughter of
the late Richard Harold, of Palmerston, June 21, 1893, and had one son,
Thomas Harold Patterson, since deceased.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McLean, Major-General Hugh Havelock, K.C., A.D.G., M.P.= (St. John,
N.B.), son of Lauchlin McLean and Sophia Marsh. Born March 22, 1855, at
Fredericton, N.B. Educated at the Grammar School there. Married,
September 2, 1879, to Jennie Porteous. Children: Colonel C. W. Weldon
McLean, D.S.O. (two bars), Commanding Divisional Artillery, 9th Scottish
Division, B.E.F,; W. W. McLean, who served through the war in South
Africa; Jennie Elise Stetson and Major Hugh H. McLean, Jr., C.E.F. Is a
Barrister-at-law, senior member of the firm of Weldon & McLean,
established in 1878. Has a large corporation counsel practice, being
counsel in New Brunswick for Canadian Bankers’ Association, Bank of
Montreal, Canadian Pacific Railway Company and a number of other
companies. Is President and Director of a number of railway and other
companies. He has been actively associated with the Militia for
forty-five years. He was for many years Captain and Adjutant of the 62nd
St. John Fusiliers, and was in command of that Regiment for a long
period. In 1892 he was appointed to the command of the 12th Infantry
Brigade, a post which he retained until January, 1911. He raised in
1911, in New Brunswick, a Regiment of Cavalry of four squadrons (28th
New Brunswick Dragoons), and was gazetted to the command of this
Regiment on March 1, 1911; in 1912, appointed to command of Cavalry
Brigade. In 1878, when war was imminent between England and Russia,
General McLean raised a company of sixty men and offered his own and
their services in case of war. For this offer he received the thanks of
the Imperial Government. In 1885 he was appointed Captain and Adjutant
of the Regiment raised in New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island, for
service in the North-West. In 1890 he went to England in command of the
Bisley Team. In December, 1899, he offered himself and one hundred men
for service in South Africa, the men to be raised at his own expense,
and to consist of guides and trappers. For this he received the thanks
of the General Officer Commanding. In October, 1901, he was appointed to
the command of all the troops in New Brunswick assembled at St. John
during the visit of his Royal Highness the Duke of Cornwall and York. In
the same month he was in command of a brigade at the Royal Review,
Halifax. He was in command of the Maritime Provinces Brigade at the
Tercentenary in Quebec in 1909. He has been President of the Provincial
Rifle Association since 1900, and has taken a very active interest in
rifle shooting. In 1905 he raised the St. Andrew’s Boys’ Brigade. He is
the Vice-President of Canada for the British and Foreign Sailors’
Society; was appointed by Earl Grey, Honorary A.D.C. Commanded the
troops sent from Canada to the Coronation of our present King and Queen.
For this service was promoted to the rank of full Colonel. At the
commencement of the war was appointed to the command of all Overseas
Troops in New Brunswick, and then to command of 7th Overseas Brigade.
Promoted Brig.-General, 1915; promoted Major-General, 1917. Is a member
of the following Clubs: Union Club, Cliff Club, St.John; Mount Royal,
Montreal; Rideau Club, Ottawa. First elected to Parliament, 1908, and
re-elected 1911 and 1917 for the constituency of Royal. A Unionist and a
Presbyterian. Gen. McLean is of Loyalist descent, and is an ardent
Imperialist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Denton, Frank, K.C., D.C.L.=, of English (Yorks) origin, son of the
late William Denton, J.P., and Mary D. (Lucas) his wife, born at
Richmond Hill, York County, Ont., 1858, educated Richmond Hill and
Orangeville High School, Collingwood Collegiate Institute, Toronto
Normal School, Trinity University, B.C.L. 1883, D.C.L. 1893, and Osgoode
Hall, Toronto. Taught two years as English Master in Cobourg Collegiate
Institute (when affiliated with Victoria University). Married 1884,
Elizabeth Clingan, daughter of the late Fleming Clingan, J.P., of
Orangeville. Has six children. Called to the Bar in 1886, he practised
his profession with distinction and specialized as a Corporation and
Commercial lawyer. Took silk in 1899, having for years been head of the
firm of Denton, Dunn & Boultbee (now Denton, Grover & Macdonald). He
acted for some time as City Solicitor of Toronto. He has always taken a
keen interest in public affairs, particularly in education, serving for
several years as President of the Board of Trustees of the Toronto
Collegiate Institutes. Has acted as delegate to the annual and general
conferences of the Methodist Church, of which he is a prominent
supporter. A fluent and eloquent public speaker, he has been a candidate
(Liberal) for the Federal Parliament. He is a member of the Masonic
Order (Past Master), and of the Canadian, National, Ontario and Rosedale
Golf Clubs. Recreations, golfing and curling. Address, 42 Admiral Road,
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chabot, Lt.-Col. John Leo, M.D., C.M., M.A.= (Ottawa, Ont.), born on
February 23, 1869, at Ottawa. Son of P. H. Chabot and Marguerite Ethier.
Ancestors on father’s side were Normans, and one was Admiral, under the
first Napoleon. His maternal grandfather, Ethier, fought under Drs.
Nelson and Papineau in 1837. Educated at a Private Academy, Ottawa
University and McGill University, Montreal, successively, receiving the
Academic degrees of B.A., M.A., and M.D., C.M. Has successfully
practised his profession at Ottawa for a number of years. Is Senior
Surgeon of The Ottawa General Hospital, also Physician and Surgeon to
the University of Ottawa, and has been Police Surgeon of the City since
1900. Has always taken a keen interest in athletics, believing that
clean sports and games make young men more healthy, manly and
self-reliant. The doctor has been an active supporter of the Canadian
Militia, holding the rank of Lt.-Col., R.M.S., and still member of the
5th Princess Louise Guards since beginning of the war; has been acting
as Officer Commanding, Ottawa General Military Base Hospital; is an
ex-President of the Old Chirurgical Society; also of the Ottawa Medical
Society and latterly of the Medico-Chirurgical Society. Was Conservative
Candidate in Ottawa against Sir Wilfrid Laurier in 1898, and reduced the
Liberal majority of 1,800 to 630. First elected to the House of Commons
as one of Ottawa’s representatives at the general elections of 1911, and
again returned in the general elections in December, 1917, as Union
Government supporting Win-the-War candidate, defeating Sir Wilfrid
Laurier by over 5,000. Is interested in several industrial concerns and
commercial enterprises. Married June 25, 1894, to Mary, daughter of the
late Edward Devlin, of Ottawa, who died; married in 1916 Miss Hope
Brunel, daughter of W. H. Brunel, of Ottawa. Dr. Chabot is a member of
several clubs and societies, including Rideau Club, Ottawa Golf Club,
Knights of Columbus, Canadian Club, Royal Arcanium, I.O.F., C.O.F.,
A.O.U.W., L. Institut Canadien, University Club, Fish and Game Club,
Honorary President Capital Lacrosse Club and City Lacrosse League, and
ex-President of C.A.A.A. Dr. Chabot is extremely popular in his native
city and has long occupied a prominent place in the medical, military,
political and athletic life of the Capital.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cole, George M.=, President and Manager of the Plattsburgh Gas and
Electric Company, Plattsburgh, N.Y., U.S.A., was born at Brockville,
Ont., December 31, 1862, his father being W. H. Cole. Receiving his
early education at the Brockville Public and High School, Mr. Cole
migrated to the United States in 1887 where, as a contractor, he was
connected with the construction of several early street railways in that
country; building the first in Columbia, South Carolina; Ansonia,
Connecticut; and Newburgh, New York; in addition to an extension to
existing lines in Brooklyn, New York. Two years later, in 1889, he
purchased the Plattsburgh Gas Works in partnership with a New York
capitalist and became the Manager of the business, which position he
still occupies. So successful was the undertaking that Mr. Cole was
approached by the owners of the Plattsburgh Electric Lighting Plant with
the result that the two works were amalgamated in 1890 and very
considerably enlarged. By this time the old-fashioned horse cars had
become a thing of the past and George Cole obtained a franchise for the
construction of a modern street railway, which he built and managed for
some years in addition to supplying the necessary power for its
operation. This railway was later purchased by the Delaware & Hudson
Railway Co., the present owners. To-day the Gas and Electric Company
controls its particular field in Plattsburgh and vicinity, owning and
operating two water power developments on the Saranac River, which is
the outlet of the Upper and Lower Saranac Lakes, among the largest in
the Adirondacks. Mr. Cole married Emma, daughter of W. H. Chappel, in
1891, by whom he has two sons, Eugene M. and Howard C. He is a member of
the Presbyterian Church and a Republican in politics. Among the
societies of which he is a member are Plattsburgh Lodge 828, A.F. &.
A.M., Plattsburgh Chapter, No. 39, R.A.M., De Soto Cun. No. 49, K.T.,
Plattsburgh and Oriental Temple A.A.O.N.M.S., Troy, N.Y.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Charlton, William Granville=, Editor and Publisher (Aylmer, Ont.), the
son of John R. and Emily J. Charlton, one of six children, one girl and
four boys, all living except one, was born in the Township of South
Dorchester, January 1, 1868; his earlier education took place at the St.
Thomas Collegiate Institute, going from there to the Transylvania
University, Lexington, Ky., and finally to Bethany College, Bethany,
Va., where he graduated in 1893. He married Martha N. Black, the
daughter of Martha M. Wells, widow of the late Noris Black and has one
daughter, Eunice Eva Charlton, born May 13, 1901. Mr. Charlton was
brought up on a farm and has practically devoted his energies to farming
most of his life, and almost by his own efforts secured his education.
He is a member of the Church of Christ, and for twenty-seven years has
preached the Gospel with little intermission due only to illness. He is
a great Bible School worker, and has been preaching and teaching
prohibition for thirty years, and happy to be living to see the fruits
of his labor in that direction. He has been connected with newspaper
work since January 1, 1916, when he became editor and publisher of the
“East Elgin Tribune.” In politics he is a Liberal and in 1913 was chosen
by that party as a candidate for Federal honors to represent East Elgin
at the next Dominion Elections.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ball, Robert James, M.P. for South Grey, Ont.= (Hanover, Ont.), was
born at Allan Park, Township of Bentinck, Ont., on Jan. 15, 1857. Is the
son of James Ball and his wife, Jane, formerly Jane Cain. Lived on his
father’s farm till eighteen years of age. Was educated at Hampden Public
School, Collingwood Collegiate Institute and Ottawa Normal School, from
which latter institution he graduated with a Second-class Teacher’s
Certificate, Grade A. On graduating, he taught school for ten years,
then spent five years as an accountant, three years as a private banker,
and two years in the life insurance business, when he became a furniture
manufacturer, which business he has carried on for twenty-two years. He
is managing director of the Ball Furniture Co., Limited, and also
director in Morlock Bros., upholsterers; he is also President of The
Reliance Investment and Developing Co., Ltd., of Hanover, Ont.
Politically, Mr. Ball has been very active, being three years Municipal
Councillor of the Town of Hanover, two years Commissioner for the County
of Grey, two years Reeve of the town of Hanover, and, in 1908, was
Warden of the County of Grey. In 1908, he was Conservative candidate for
South Grey against H. H. Miller, and was defeated, but reduced Miller’s
majority from 316 to 87. In 1911 he was elected to the House of Commons
over H. H. Miller by a majority of 48. Mr. Ball was married August 11,
1882, to Mary Jane, daughter of Anthony and Mary Leonard, of the
Township of Normanby, and is the father of six children: Milton Leonard,
Austin Elmer, Ethel May, Elma Lilian, Captain Stanley Stafford Ball,
M.D., and Mabel Lottie. He is a member of the Masonic Order and also of
the Independent Order of Foresters. In religion he is a Methodist, and
politically is a Liberal-Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Coombs, Albert Ernest= (St. Catharines, Ont.), son of John and Susan
Coombs. Was born on a farm near Richmond Hill in the County of York,
April 2, 1871. Educated at the public and high school of Richmond Hill
and at Toronto University, from which he received the following degrees:
B.A. with honors in classics, 1892; M.A., 1895, and B.Paed., 1897.
Principal Coombs began his teaching career in 1892 and was principal of
Richmond Hill High School, 1895-99. Principal of Newmarket High School,
1899-1909, when he accepted the position of principal of St. Catharines
Collegiate Institute, which he now holds. He served three years as
examiner at Normal College, and set papers in History of Education and
School Management. Is a Past President of the Classical Association of
Ontario and has frequently acted as Association Examiner. Successively a
director, Horticultural and Agricultural Societies; member Town Council
and chairman Public Library Board, Newmarket. Has had considerable
experience as a lecturer on a variety of subjects. Was formerly in the
Militia and holds a Captaincy in the 19th Lincoln Regiment and served in
that capacity on the Welland Canal Protective Force in 1914. Has always
been opposed to the abolition of written examinations in our educational
system, and is a strong friend of the Boy Scout movement, being Boy
Scout Commissioner of St. Catharines district. Married in 1897, to Miss
Beatrice Elliott, daughter of the late Wm. Elliott, V.S., of Palmerston,
Ont., and is the father of three children: Alice, born 1899; Adele, born
1905; Margaret, born 1908. Is a member of the Canadian Club, St.
Catharines, of which he is a Past President; also is Past Master of the
Maple Leaf Lodge, A.F. & A.M., St. Catharines, and Past Principal of
Mount Moriah Chapter; Member of the I.O.O.F. Principal Coombs was
formerly a long-distance bicycle rider and association football player.
He now takes a lively interest in lawn bowling. In religion he is a
Methodist and a member of St. Paul Street Methodist Church, St.
Catharines. Politically, he may be classed as an Independent-Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Anderson, James T. M., M.A., LL.B., D.Paed.=, Yorkton, Sask. One of the
many graduates of the Ontario “little red school-house” who have
achieved success in their chosen professions is Dr. James Thomas Milton
Anderson, M.A., LL.B., of Yorkton, Saskatchewan. Dr. Anderson, who has
won many scholastic honors, is at present inspector of schools for the
Yorkton district. Dr. Anderson was born at Fairbank, Ontario, July 23,
1878. His parents were Mary and James Anderson and the present inspector
of schools had all the advantages of early life on a farm. One must
consider it an advantage when one remembers the sons of farmers who have
gone to the top in scholastic circles. The subject of this sketch began
his education at Public School, S.S. No. 15, York, and went from there
to West Toronto Collegiate Institute. Going west he won his degree of
Bachelor of Arts at the University of Manitoba in 1911, when he was
Silver Medallist in Classics. He gained his LL.B. at the same university
in 1913, and his M.A. in 1914, completing his preparation for his
present work by graduating as Doctor of Pedagogy in 1917. Dr. Anderson
showed rare power of concentration in study as these three degrees were
obtained extra-murally and he is also a medallist in penmanship and a
clever cartoonist. His life for the last ten years has been devoted to
teaching and working among the foreigners who have come to Canada’s
great “melting pot.” Dr. Anderson is intensely interested in the work of
assimilation which means so much to Canada’s future as a nation. He has
published a number of articles on the subject and a book on the
“Education of the New-Canadian” (J. M. Dent & Sons, Toronto). Dr.
Anderson, whose mother resides in Saltcoats, Sask., was married on July
26, 1911, to Edith, daughter of Mrs. M. Redgwick, Grenfell,
Saskatchewan, and has two children: Byron R., born October 10, 1913, and
Edith Elaine, born March 31, 1917. In religion he is an Anglican, a
member of the Orange Order, and President of the School Inspectors’
Association of Saskatchewan.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Elliott, John Campbell, D.C.L., M.L.A.= Middlesex West (Glencoe, Ont.).
Son of George Campbell (Irish descent), and Jane Elliott (Scotch
descent); both parents were born in Canada. Was born at Ekfrid Township,
Middlesex County, on July 25, 1872; educated at Ekfrid Public School,
Glencoe High School, and Trinity University, B.C.L. 1898, and Toronto
University, D.C.L. 1905. Mr. Elliott’s early days were spent on the farm
where he was born; he took a third-class certificate in 1890;
second-class in 1891, and Matriculation 1892, and was called to the Bar
in 1898, having taken a high standard at the Law School at Osgoode Hall.
First elected to the Ontario Legislature at the general elections in
1908; re-elected 1911-1914. He is a member of the Ontario Club, and the
Masonic Order, of which he was Past District Deputy, Erie District; of
the Sons of Scotland and the I.O.O.F. He is a member of the Baptist
Church, and a Liberal in politics. Mr. Elliott is recognized as a clever
lawyer and an able speaker, and enjoys the confidence and respect of the
members on both sides of the House. He is unmarried.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bronson, Hon. Erskine Henry=, was born at Bolton, Warren County, New
York, September 12, 1844. He is the son of the late Henry Franklin and
Edith (Pierce) Bronson, the one man who, coming to Ottawa, Canada, in
1852, understood the feasibility of converting the large lakes and
furious and foaming falls of the Ottawa River into a channel for the
driving of saw-logs, and erecting mills on its banks, placed in
operation a lumber industry that soon had in its employ hundreds, and
afterwards thousands of employees. Having received a good education at
Sandy Hill, N.Y., and at the Grammar School, Ottawa, when quite a youth,
the Hon. Erskine Henry Bronson, joined his father’s company, The
Bronson-Weston Lumber Company, and in 1867 acquired an interest in the
company. In 1870 he became a member of the Ottawa City Council and
chairman of the Finance Committee, and continued as such until 1878,
when he retired. For fourteen years he was a member of the Ottawa School
Board. He is ex-Trustee of Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario. Unlike
his father, who never interested himself in politics, in 1882 Mr.
Bronson was an unsuccessful candidate to the House of Commons for
Carleton County, Ontario; but in 1886, having had presented to him a
petition signed by thousands of the best and most influential residents
in the Capital urgently soliciting him to become a candidate for the
local Legislature, he consented to run and was elected by a large
majority, and re-elected at every succeeding election until 1898, when
he retired from active political life. In 1890, September 10, four years
after he was first elected, he joined the Mowat Government without
Portfolio and held a similar position when the Hardy Government was
formed. Had he so desired he could probably have remained a member of
the local Legislature even to this date, as few, if any, in Ottawa were
or are more appreciated or ever received more popularity than the same
Hon. Erskine Henry Bronson. The poor of the city, to whom his firm in
winter time never failed to extend the helping hand in furnishing them
with winter fuel and in other ways, could never forget, nor overlook,
his kindly and substantial consideration of their needs and his name
was, and is to-day, cherished in every home. To others, with whom he
came in contact, he was always a valuable friend and counsellor, and his
advice on financial and other matters was eagerly sought and freely
given. On his father’s decease Mr. Bronson succeeded him as President of
the Bronson-Weston Lumber Company, in 1889. He was one of the
inaugurators of the Ottawa Electric Company. Mr. Bronson is President of
the Bronson Company, Water Power and Manufacturers of Ground Wood Pulp,
150 Middle Street, Ottawa; President, Ottawa Improvement Company;
Vice-President, Ottawa Light, Heat & Power Company; President, Ottawa
Power Company, and a director of the Ottawa Electric Company. In 1874
Mr. Bronson married Ella H. Webster, of Norfolk, Va. He has one son and
one daughter. In religion he is a Presbyterian. In politics, a Liberal.
His residence is 75 Bronson Avenue, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bain, John=, Journalist, private secretary, civil servant, promoter,
and now financial broker and departmental agent and customs specialist,
Castle Building, Ottawa, came to Canada in 1888 and engaged in law and
newspaper work. Later he was engaged as expert shorthand writer in the
New York law courts. When the Liberal Party was returned to power in
1896 he was appointed Private Secretary to the Minister of Customs, Hon.
Wm. Patterson, and accompanied the Minister to England in 1902, doing
the secretarial work there connected with the trade questions that were
discussed at the Colonial Conference. His services were also utilized in
connection with the trade negotiations with the French Government at
Paris. He held the position of Assistant Commissioner of Customs of
Canada for five years, and was Secretary of the Tariff Commission of
1906-07. He promoted and organized the Canadian Western Natural Gas,
Light, Heat and Power Company, Calgary. He was appointed Imperial Trade
Correspondent for Ottawa District for the British Board of Trade in
1909. Although one of the old, steadfast and prominent Liberals in the
capital, he joined and became active in the ranks of the Unionist Party
during the general elections in 1917, and, as publicity director,
rendered valuable service to the Unionist cause. His pithy paragraphs
and pointed questions, such as “How would the Kaiser Vote?” which were
printed in the campaign literature and in the press throughout Canada,
attracted widespread attention and were used with telling effect by the
various public speakers during the campaign. Mr. Bain is the son of
Robert and Agnes Bain and was born at Paisley, Scotland, June 8, 1869,
where he received his education. April 5, 1899, he married Maude
Buckley, daughter of P. Buckley, Paris, Ontario, and has two
daughters—Audrey Maie, born 1900, and Alison Muriel, born 1903. In
politics Mr. Bain is a Liberal, in religion a Presbyterian. His
residence is 167 James St. He is a member of the Laurentian Club,
Ottawa, and the Ranchman’s, Calgary.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=De Celles, Alfred Duclos, LL.D., F.R.S.C., C.M.G.=, Chevalier of the
Legion of Honor, General Librarian of Parliament, was born at St.
Laurent, near Montreal, in 1844, and was educated at Laval University,
Quebec, where he graduated in letters. He is the son of Augustin D. De
Celles, a prominent notary, and Agnes Holmes, an American lady. Abbé
John Holmes, a noted preacher in Quebec, related to O. W. Holmes, was
his uncle. In October, 1876, he married Eugenie Dorion, daughter of
Eugene Dorion and Mary Panet, and has one son, Alfred Eugene De Celles.
He is a distinguished Canadian litterateur and publicist. For a time he
was a member of the Board of Civil Service Examiners. In 1867, Mr. De
Celles, on account of ill-health, left the Laval University to take up
the editorial chair of “Le Journal de Quebec” during Mr. Cauchon’s
absence in Europe. On the return of the latter he remained connected
with the paper until 1872, when he entered the “Minerve”, chief
Conservative paper of the province of Quebec, as editor-in-chief. He
remained there until 1880, when he was appointed assistant librarian of
the Parliamentary Library of Ottawa. In 1886, he became joint librarian
with Mr. Martin J. Griffin. For several years after he entered the
Library he had charge of “L’Opinion Publique,” a weekly paper published
in Montreal, chiefly devoted to literature and history. Mr. De Celles,
in 1896, published a History of the United States under the following
title: “Les Etats-Unis, origine—institutions—development.” For this
work he received a prize from the Academie des Sciences Morales et
Politiques of France. A few years later he wrote in English, the Life of
Papineau and Cartier, in “The Makers of Canada.” This work was
subsequently published in French, in an enlarged form, together with a
Life of Cartier, the three volumes forming a political history of
Canada. Reviewing Mr. De Celles’ Papineau, the London “Outlook” (Jan.
13, 1906) summed up this work as follows: “Mr. De Celles has traced this
out through the quarter of a century in which Papineau was the most
brilliant, if not the most wise figure in French-Canadian politics, with
the natural sympathy of a compatriot, though by no means without due
recognition of his hero’s failings. . . . He has given us an admirable
picture of a strange and picturesque career. Everyone has heard of
Papineau, and most Canadians have some idea of his achievements, but
little probably of his personality.” Mr. De Celles has also contributed
to “Canada and Its Provinces,” a synopsis of the History of Quebec under
Confederation and an extensive history of colonization under this title:
“The Habitant”: and an outline of the municipal system in Lower Canada.
He has contributed to The Chronicles of Canada the “Patriotes of 1837,”
a history of the Canadian Rebellion. In 1904, he was named Chevalier de
la Legion d’Honneur, and in 1907 received the title of C.M.G. In 1884,
he was received Member of the Royal Society, and since 1903 he has
occupied the post of President of l’Alliance Française. Mr. De Celles is
in religion a Catholic, and he resides in Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Evanturel, Gustave, M.P.P.= for Prescott Co. (Alfred), was born March
19, 1880, at Ottawa, son of the Hon. Alfred Evanturel and Louisa Lee.
Father was Speaker of the Ontario Legislature from 1898 to 1902 and
Minister in the Ross Government from Nov. 22, 1904, to Jan. 25, 1905.
Educated at Bourget College, Rigaud, and Seminaire de Ste. Therese,
P.Q., and Laval University, from which latter institution he graduated
with the degree of B.L. Married, Sept. 26, 1910, Marie Emelia, daughter
of the late Paul Chevrier, of Vaudreuil. Notary public by profession;
was President of L’Alliance Nationale, a mutual life insurance company
of the Court of Alfred, which is called “Cercle Evanturel.” Mr.
Evanturel has taken an active part in politics since the age of 17
years, especially in the County of Prescott, which his father
represented from 1884 until 1905, being the first French-Canadian to
enter the Ontario Legislature, the first representative of that race to
be Speaker of the Ontario Assembly, and the first French-Canadian to
enter the Ontario Government as Cabinet Minister. The subject of this
sketch was first returned to the Ontario Legislature to represent the
County of Prescott on December 11, 1911, with a majority of 284, and
re-elected on June 29, 1914, over two opponents by an increased majority
of 350, defeating the Conservative candidate by over 1,000. Was Civil
Servant in the Privy Council Department in 1908, and, on his election as
a member for Prescott County, when he succeeded his late father, was the
youngest member of the Assembly. He is an eloquent speaker in both
French and English, and has been a strong supporter of bi-lingualism on
the floor of the Ontario Legislature, being the first member of the
House to open the discussion on the bi-lingual school question during
the Session of the Legislature in the years 1912, 1913, 1914, 1915,
1916. He has all the fire and dash of his race and is extremely popular
on both sides of the House, and throughout Eastern Ontario, where he is
well known.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Fraleck, Edison Baldwin=, was born in the township of Sydney in the
County of Hastings on the 6th day of February, 1841, being descended
from United Empire Loyalist stock. His grandfather, Lewis Fraleck, a
Loyalist, came to Canada; his father, Thomas Tillotson Fraleck, served
on the Loyalist side throughout the whole period of the war 1812-15,
being engaged on the Niagara Peninsula. His maternal grandfather was
Robert Nicholson, a native of Aberdeen, Scotland, and a Major in a
Highland Regiment, served throughout the American Revolutionary War;
came to Canada about 1793. The subject of this sketch was educated at
the Public and High schools and Queen’s University, Kingston, from which
he graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1863, and was called to the Bar
1868. Successfully practised his profession at Belleville for many years
and was appointed Junior Judge for the County of Hastings on December
28, 1881, which office he filled for some thirty-five years, when he
retired. Was revising officer for East and West Hastings, and a Judge of
the Surrogate Court for the County of Hastings for ten years, and a
member of Queen’s University Council for over twenty-five years. Served
as Lieutenant in the 49th Regiment 1868-74, and retired retaining rank.
He was noted as a strong and active writer on all political subjects
before his elevation to the Bench. Being a keen sportsman, taking a
lively interest in hunting, fishing, camping and canoeing, Judge Fraleck
contributed frequently to the “Canadian Magazine,” “Canada Sportsmen,”
“Forest and Stream,” the result of his experience. He has always been an
ardent Imperialist and Protectionist. Judge Fraleck has won distinction
as a ready and fluent speaker, and rendered splendid services as such
during the Confederation campaign and subsequently. Married August 14,
1874, to Jane E., daughter of William Judd, of Stirling, County of
Hastings, and five children were the result of the union: Ernest Leigh
(died 1909), Charles Cecil, Madeliene, Jessie, and Helen. He is a member
of the Masonic Order and Orange Order, and in religion is a
Presbyterian. Politically, the Judge was before his elevation to the
Bench, a member of the Conservative Party.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Davey, James= (Ottawa, Ont). The Ottawa Manager of The Toronto General
Trusts Corporation; has been with the Company since it was first
established by the late J. W. Langmuir, in the spring of 1882, and was
its first accountant. In April, 1917, he celebrated the 35th anniversary
of his connection with the company. In length of service he is the
oldest Canadian trust company officer. He has been manager of the Ottawa
branch of Toronto General Trusts Corporation since 1905. Mr. Davey
arrived in Canada in March, 1882, after having been for nearly ten years
in the accountant’s office of one of the largest newspaper publishing
houses in the West of England. For a period of 15 years he was chief
accountant of The Toronto General Trusts Corporation, afterwards
occupying the position of secretary for several years. Subsequently he
was placed in charge, for a period of three years, of one of the largest
loan company liquidations in Canada. In January, 1902, Mr. Davey was
appointed manager of the newly opened branch of The Toronto General
Trusts Corporation in Winnipeg, and in January, 1905 (shortly after the
Corporation purchased the business of the Ottawa Trust and Deposit
Company), Manager at Ottawa. Mr. Davey was born in Alderney, Channel
Islands, on September 15, 1855, and was educated at the National
Schools, Alderney, and the Grammar School, Lostwithiel, Cornwall,
England. His parents were James Davey and Mary Anne Davey. He married
Caroline Grace Gerrans, daughter of Joseph Gerrans and Mary Gerrans,
Cornwall, England, and is the father of six sons and daughters—Joseph
Frederick, Marion Elizabeth, Herbert Gerrans (now deceased), Thomas
Deslandes, Caroline Grace, Lillian James. Mr. Davey is a member of the
Laurentian Club, Ottawa, is a Methodist in religion, and an Independent
in politics. He resides at 430 Maclaren Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tremeear, William J.= (Pasadena, Cal.), Counsellor-at-Law, a native of
Bowmanville, Ont., received his primary education at the public and high
schools at Oshawa, Ont., and matriculated at Toronto University in the
class of 1881, taking honors in mathematics and modern languages. He
afterwards attended the law school of Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and was
admitted to the Ontario Bar in 1886, and practised in Toronto until
1918, when he removed to Pasadena, Cal., to take up legal literary work.
He is the author of several legal works of recognized authority, amongst
them three editions of an annotated Criminal Code of Canada. He is a
member of the Masonic Order, the Knights of Pythias and the I.O.F.




[Illustration: COL. C.A. HODGETTS, OTTAWA
 R.A. STAPELLS, TORONTO]




=Briggs, William, D.D.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Banbridge, County
Down, Ireland, educated in Liverpool, England, and came to Canada in
1859. He preached successfully in Montreal, London, Cobourg, Belleville
and Toronto. In 1879 he was appointed Book Steward of the Methodist Book
and Publishing House, a position he holds until July, 1919, when, in
conformity with a recent enactment placing an age limit on all Methodist
General Conference officials, he became Book Steward Emeritus. Under his
management great progress has been made, and the Book Room is, without a
doubt, one of the most profitable publishing houses in Canada to-day. It
has grown year after year on a steady basis, and the large number of
employees engaged is an indication that business must be going on
regularly to carry a staff numbering in the hundreds. The mechanical
departments are manned with all the latest devices in machinery and
everything has been so arranged that the largest publication can be
turned out on the very shortest notice. To successfully carry so large
an institution means that great care is exercised by the management.
Among the trade throughout Canada, Dr. Briggs is credited as being one
of the most economic and shrewd managers connected with the business.
The name of William Briggs is a household word throughout the Dominion
and wherever he goes at the week end to supply a pulpit he is always
greeted with large congregations. The degree of D.D. was conferred upon
him by Victoria University. He is a member of the Toronto Board of
Trade.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gibbons, John Joseph=, Advertising Counsel (Toronto, Ont.), has taken a
special interest in Patriotic work in connection with the Great War;
being a member of the Organization of Resources Committee (Ontario), the
Toronto and York County Patriotic Association, the Canadian Red Cross
Society, the Belgian Relief Association, and the Canadian War Contingent
Association. He is Vice-President of the Ontario Motor League; as also a
member of the National Club, the R.C.Y.C. of Toronto; and the Brantford,
Lambton and Caledon Clubs. Mr. Gibbons was born in Boston, Mass., March
15, 1877, and married, May 12, 1909, Helen E., daughter of James G.
Cockshutt, founder of the Cockshutt Plow Co., Brantford, Ont., by whom
he has three children—Kathleen, Mary and John Cockshutt. His recreation
is golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bachand, Leonide Charles, M.D.= (Sherbrooke, Que.), son of the late J.
C. Bachand, N.P. Registrar County of Bagot, Quebec, and nephew of Hon.
P. Bachand, ex-Treasurer Province of Quebec. Was born at St. Pie, P.Q.,
October 6, 1854, educated at St. Hyacinthe and Victoria College,
Montreal; graduated Victoria University, Cobourg, with degree of M.D.,
1878; married, October 6, 1878, to Marie Agnes Georgine, daughter of
late H. O. Camirand, of Sherbrooke, P.Q. Practised his profession at
Coaticook, where he was mayor, President of Board of Trade, Chairman of
School Commissioners, and also editor and co-proprietor of L’Etoile de
l’Est; removed to Sherbrooke, 1899; elected Mayor there, 1908; appointed
Coroner District of St. Francis; President of Medical Board of the
Sherbrooke St. Vincent Hospital; Specialist in eye, ear, nose and
throat. Is father of three sons, viz.: Dr. J. D. Bachand, of St.
Johnsbury, C. E. Bachand, Joint Prothonotary, Sherbrooke, and Leonidas
Bachand, Notary Public, and Secretary Board of Trade, Sherbrooke. Dr.
Bachand is a Roman Catholic in religion, and formerly was a Liberal in
politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Denis, J. Wilfred= (Nicolet, Quebec), son of Drendonne Denis, was born
at St. Cuthbert, Cte. Berthier, January 21, 1871. Educated at the
College of Joliette and Laval University, Montreal, graduating with the
degree of B.A. Mr. Denis is a Notary Public and Registrar and
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court. He has been married twice and is the
father of four children, viz.: Berthe, Germaine, Jeanne and Laure. He is
a Roman Catholic in religion, and politically a Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Eddis, Wilton C.= (Toronto, Ont.), born in London, England, on
September 15, 1855, and educated at Merchant Taylors School, Mr. Eddis
has been a resident of Toronto for many years and is a prominent
Chartered Accountant, holding the degrees of F.S.A.A. and F.C.A. He
married Florence I., daughter of John Wyndham, of Dalwood, New South
Wales, in 1883, and is the father of the following children: John
Wyndham, Charles Sheppard, Dorothy Wyndham, Mrs. Muriel Greenwood, Mrs.
Margaret Green, Mrs. Esther Lane. He is a member of the following clubs:
Albany, Toronto Chess Club, Royal Canadian Yacht Club, also St. George’s
Society and the Board of Trade, Toronto. In religion he is a member of
the Church of England and a Conservative in politics. Mr. Eddis is also
Justice of the Peace. His favorite recreation is chess.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bowes, James Leslie Llewellyn= (Toronto, Ont.), Merchant, was educated
at Oakwood Public School, Lindsay Collegiate Institute, and Toronto
University. After graduating from the latter, he started in the
wholesale produce business in 1902, with the firm of J. A. McLean
Produce Co., Ltd., of which he assumed the management three years later.
More recently he formed the Bowes Co., Ltd., which took over the parent
business as a going concern and in addition to its produce business,
developed the largest baker, confectioners, and ice cream manufacturers
supply business in Canada. Its connections extend from Halifax to
Vancouver, and they are both exporters and importers from all parts of
the world, besides manufacturing many lines supplied to its own trade.
Mr. Bowes was born in Oakwood, Ont., on February 26, 1877, the son of
Margaret Ellen and Thomas Bowes, farmer, live stock dealer and exporter.
He married Gladys Lansdowne, daughter of W. F. Barber, Guelph, Ont.,
September 22, 1908, by whom he has two children, Margaret Frances, born
1909, and Thomas Howard, born 1913. He is a member of the Royal Canadian
Yacht Club, Scarboro Golf and Country Club, Thistle Team Bowling Club,
and Cold Creek Trout Club. In politics he is a Liberal, and in religion
a Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Thomson, Levi= (Wolseley, Sask.), Member of Parliament for Qu’Appelle,
Sask., is the son of John Thomson and Sarah McMillan, formerly of
Scotland. He was born near Hillsburgh, in Erin Township, Ontario,
February 17, 1855, and was educated in common school and Rockwood
Academy. After legal studies in Toronto he emigrated to the North-West
Territories in 1882, and engaged in farming near Wolseley, Sask., where
he now resides. Twelve years later Mr. Thomson commenced the practice of
law at Wolseley and was appointed Crown Prosecutor in 1897, which
position he resigned seven years later, but became Agent of the
Attorney-General of Saskatchewan for Moosomin Judicial District in 1906.
The future legislator was not long in making himself felt in the public
life of his community, being elected a member of the Wolseley Rural
Municipality in 1887, an office which he resigned after three years’
term only to become Councillor of the Town of Wolseley in 1902-3, and
finally Mayor, in 1904. In the same year Levi Thomson was the Liberal
Candidate for the Dominion House in Qu’Appelle constituency, but was
defeated by the narrow margin of 28 votes. Contesting Wolseley
constituency for the Saskatchewan Legislature a year later he was
unsuccessful by the even smaller majority of 20; but finally achieved
his ambition in 1911, being returned to the Federal House for
Qu’Appelle, with a handsome majority. Despite political activities, Mr.
Thomson has always retained his interest in farming and was the first
President of the Wolseley Agricultural Society when it was organized in
1885, retaining office for three years, and also Vice-President of the
Grain Growers’ Association of Saskatchewan in 1907. At present he is
extensively engaged in farming on his own account, specializing in grain
and the raising of Clydesdale and grade horses. In 1884 Mr. Thomson
married Mabel Maud, daughter of the late Hon. W. D. Perley, by whom he
has five children, Harold F., born in 1885; Allen P., in 1888; Edwin E.,
in 1890; Florence M., in 1896, and Arthur M., in 1901. Since 1908 he has
been a member of the Board of Governors of Saskatchewan University, and
he is also a member of the Independent Order of Foresters and the Royal
Templars of Temperance. In religion Mr. Thomson is a Disciple of Christ
or Christian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Brock, Lieut.-Col. Henry=, son of William Rees Brock, M.P., and
Margaret Anna Diamond. He was born at Guelph, Ont., May 14, 1859.
Educated at Upper Canada College and The University of Toronto. B.A.,
B.C.L., D.C.L. Married, June 16, 1891, Anna Maude Cawthra, daughter of
Henry Cawthra, “Yeadon Hall,” Toronto, Barrister-at-Law. One child
living, Mildred Cawthra Brock. Is a Barrister-at-Law and for many years
practised in Toronto as a member of the firm of Cassels, Brock, Kelley &
Falconbridge. Elected a Director of the W. R. Brock Company, Limited, in
1904. Succeeded his father as President in 1918. Director of The Western
and British America Fire Insurance Companies, The British America Coal
Co., and President of The Stanstead Granite Quarries Company, Limited.
Was a Member of the Council of the Toronto Board of Trade for eight
years and President in 1913. On Council of Ontario Associated Boards of
Trade since its foundation in 1911; President of the Canadian Military
Institute, 1916, 1917, 1918. An advisory member of the Council of The
Aviation Club of Canada. In religion he is an Anglican and for many
years has been Churchwarden of St. James’ Cathedral. Lieut.-Col. Henry
Brock has had a long period of service in the Canadian Militia and at
the time of his retirement from the Command of the 10th Royal Grenadiers
to take a Staff appointment as Chief Recruiting Officer in Toronto was
one of the Senior Militia Officers in Canada on Active Service. He
joined the University Company, Queen’s Own Rifles, in July, 1877, and
was appointed a Lieutenant in October, 1882; Captain, November, 1888. He
served as a Lieutenant in the North-West Rebellion, 1885, was mentioned
in despatches for distinguished conduct in the field, and received the
Medal and Clasp. In 1891 he was posted to the Reserve of Officers and in
1897 was appointed to the 10th Royal Grenadiers as Captain, becoming
Brevet Major in 1899, Senior Major in 1907, Brevet Lieut.-Colonel in
1912, and took over the Command of the Regiment in 1913. He volunteered
for active service for the Nile Expedition in 1886, and for South Africa
in 1899. Received Long Service Decoration in 1907. For the late European
Campaign he volunteered for active service “in any position the
authorities thought him fit for.” Appointed Chief Recruiting Officer for
Toronto, July, 1915; Chief Recruiting Officer 2nd Military District,
October, 1915; Director of National Service 2nd Military District,
September 30, 1916. Member of Selective Tribunal under Military Service
Act, October, 1917. Recreations: Reading and, formerly, rifle shooting
and riding, cricket and football. Clubs: The Toronto Club, Toronto Hunt,
University Club, Canadian Military Institute, Toronto; The
Constitutional Club, London, England. Residences: 174 St. George Street,
Toronto, and Park Place, Oakville.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Fraser, George B.=, Dry Goods Merchant (Montreal, Que.), was born at
Strichen, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, September 29, 1854, and was educated
in the Old Deer Parish School. He married Rebecca, daughter of John
Morrison, Montreal, May 11, 1880, their children being Helen Edith and
James Morrison Fraser. As a Director of Greenshields, Ltd., Montreal, he
is actively engaged in the largest and oldest dry goods house in Canada.
He is also a Director of the Bank of Montreal, the Standard Life
Assurance Company and Hudson’s Bay Insurance Company. Mr. Fraser’s
public offices include the following: Member of the Montreal Board of
Trade, President of the Grace Dart Memorial Hospital, Vice-President of
the McKay Institute for the Deaf and Dumb, Life Governor of the Montreal
General Hospital, Member of the Board of Management and Life Governor of
the Western Hospital, Montreal. He is a member of the St. James,
Montreal and Canadian Clubs, Forest and Stream Club, and of St. Andrew’s
Society. Is a Presbyterian in religion and a Liberal in politics. His
chosen recreation is golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Brock, William Rees=, the late, was born on February 14, 1836, in the
Township of Eramosa, near Guelph, Ontario. His father Thomas Rees Brock,
was of an ancient English family who were landed proprietors near
Colchester in the County of Essex. His mother was Eleanor Thompson,
daughter of Thomas Thompson, of Rusheen, Queen’s County, Ireland. The
young couple, aged respectively 17 and 21 years, were married at the
Parish Church in Guelph and after the ceremony rode on horseback to
their new home five miles away in “the wild woods.” After a few years of
life on the farm Mr. Brock was persuaded that a man of his education and
attainments could do better in the town and he removed to Guelph where
he held several appointments as Town Auditor, Secretary of the School
Board, Superintendent of the Government Road and Surrogate Court Clerk.
In the fall of 1850, while out shooting in the woods, he was
accidentally shot and died at his residence, Park Place, a few days
afterwards, aged thirty-eight years, leaving his widow with nine
children surviving. The stone house he built on the York Road is still
standing. The subject of this sketch was the second child and eldest
son. He immediately left the Guelph Grammar School and went into the law
office of the Hon. Ferguson Blair, where he remained about a year,
deciding to enter commercial life, in which he achieved so conspicuous a
success. His first employment was in a general store in Caledonia. About
1854 he located in Toronto, being engaged with Scott & Laidlaw. He
married on the 23rd of September, 1857, Margaret Anna, second daughter
of Captain John Segur Diamond, formerly of Clonenagh, Queen’s County,
Ireland, who came to Canada in 1834, and served through the rebellion of
1837 as Adjutant of the 2nd Gore Regiment. Capt. Diamond was at one time
in the Royal Irish Constabulary and after his arrival in this country
was engaged in business with Colonel Chisholm, of Oakville, and others,
as lumbermen and vessel owners. He had died some nine years previously
to his daughter’s marriage. After his marriage, Mr. Brock went into
business in Guelph, but later sold out and entered the service of
McArthur & Co., of Bowmanville, where he remained about four-and-a-half
years, subsequently went to Ogilvy & Co., Montreal, wholesale merchants,
was English buyer for that firm for some years; was made a partner and
came to Toronto in 1871, and opened Ogilvy & Company’s Toronto branch.
In 1877, in partnership with his brother, J. H. Brock, he started the
business of W. R. Brock & Brother, at the corner of Bay and Wellington
Streets, Toronto. In 1879 a partnership was formed with Messrs. F. Wyld
and H. W. Darling, as Wyld, Brock & Darling. Mr. Darling retired in
1883, and Mr. Wyld in 1887. The firm of W. R. Brock & Company was turned
into a joint stock company in 1897. The Montreal branch was started in
1899, and the branch at Calgary in 1905. Besides being President of the
W. R. Brock Company, Ltd., he was a director of the Dominion Lands
Colonization Co., the British Canadian Loan and Investment Co., Toronto
Electric Light Co., Electrical Development Co., Ontario Accident
Insurance Co., Toronto General Trust Corporation and the Dominion Bank.
He was also President of the British American and Western Assurance
Companies, the Stanstead Granite Quarries Company, London Electric Light
Company, and the Canadian General Electric Company. Mr. Brock was one of
the founders of the “Empire” newspaper, Toronto, and served as President
of the company until its amalgamation with “The Mail” in 1895. For years
he was President of the Toronto Conservative Association and sat in the
House of Commons for Centre Toronto in the Conservative interest from
1900 to 1904. Mr. Brock was also a director and a leading spirit in many
philanthropic organizations. He was a founder and President of the
Toronto Humane Society, a life member of the Council of Trinity
University and of Upper Canada College, and benefactor of both
institutions. He was a member of the congregation of St. James’
Cathedral, and from 1883 to 1890 was a churchwarden. His clubs were:
Toronto Club, York Club, Albany Club, Toronto Hunt Club, Toronto; The
Rideau Club, Ottawa; and St. James’ Club, Montreal. His surviving
children are Lt.-Col. Henry Brock, Lt.-Col. R. A. Brock, Mr. W. L.
Brock, and the Misses Lilian, Gertrude, and Muriel Brock. Mr. Brock died
at his residence, 21 Queen’s Park, Toronto, on November 1, 1917. He was
almost eighty-two years of age, and actively engaged in business up to
within a few days of his death. Although advanced in years Mr. Brock
retained his keen business acumen right through and served to the last
in an advisory capacity to the directors of the W. R. Brock Company. By
virtue of exceptional ability, organizing genius, hard work,
adaptability, generosity and an appreciative attitude toward those in
his employment, he was able to develop one of the outstanding mercantile
houses of the Dominion. He held the esteem of the merchants in
practically all the primary markets of the world. In Canadian industry
he was declared to be an international figure. The memory of William
Rees Brock will long live as a man noted for his commercial integrity,
splendid philanthropy, and public enterprises. He was endowed with a
winning personality, and his influence in public affairs was always for
good. He was a staunch supporter of British Connection, and believed in
promoting closer trade relations between Canada and the Mother Country.
He lived a long, useful, and upright life, an inspiration to others, who
would merit the approval of their fellows, and the close of a career so
full of years and honors was regarded as a public loss.




[Illustration: THE LATE M. F. BEACH]




=Dwyer, William Henry=, President of W. H. Dwyer Co., Ltd., general
grain and produce dealers and exporters, 49 Metcalfe Street, Ottawa, is
one of the capital’s busiest and most active men. His early life was
spent on the farm at Thurso, Que., entered the employ of W. C. Edwards &
Company, Limited, at Rockland, Ont., in 1882, to learn the lumber
business, in whose employ he remained until May, 1890, when he left this
company and removed to Thurso, Que., where he operated, successfully, a
steam ferry and cartage business, which developed in 1902 into a hay and
grain business, in a small way. The growth of this business made it
necessary in 1898 for him to move to Ottawa. The increased business,
occasioned principally by the South African War in 1900 and 1901, made
it necessary to form a limited company, viz., the W. H. Dwyer Co., Ltd.,
which was formed in 1901, and since that time has developed to such an
extent that some years ago offices were opened at Montreal and Fort
William and, in 1917, a subsidiary company was formed in Winnipeg under
the name of McGaw-Dwyer, Limited, to take care of the Western business.
Mr. W. H. Dwyer was born at Bell’s Corners, County of Carleton, Ontario,
May 6, 1861. He is the son of Dennis and Jane (Hall) Dwyer, and was
educated at Thurso, Quebec. In 1885 he married Sara McDonald,
Cumberland, Ontario, and has four daughters. He is President the Dwyer
Elevator Co., President and Managing Director the Slinn-Shouldis Co.,
Ltd., Ottawa; President Forwarders, Ltd., Ottawa; Vice-President the
Saskatchewan Lumber Co., Ottawa; Vice-President Prince Rupert Timber and
Lumber Co., Ottawa; Vice-President and Managing Director Continental Bag
and Paper Co., Ottawa; Vice-President Lawrence Dairy Supply Co., Ottawa;
Vice-President Ottawa Contractors, Ltd., Ottawa; Director McKellar
Townsite, Ltd., Ottawa; Vice-President McGaw-Dwyer Co., Ltd., Winnipeg;
Vice-President J. W. Hennessy, Incorporated, Buffalo, N.Y. For the years
1913-1914 he was President of the Ottawa Board of Trade, and is a life
Governor of the Protestant Hospital. He has supported the Red Cross and
Patriotic causes in many ways during the war. He is a member of the
Laurentian, Canadian and Rivermead Clubs. In politics he is Independent.
In religion a Methodist, and his address is 91 McLaren Street, Ottawa,
Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bristow, Michael George=, son of the late Rev. Ernest Bristow, of St.
Paul’s Cathedral, London, England, arrived in Ottawa in 1893. He was
born at Bath, England, in 1879, where his mother still resides. His
brother, Rev. Walter Bristow, soon after the opening of hostilities in
the Great War brought about by Germany’s treachery, became Chaplain with
the Imperial forces and started for France, while his sister Ethel
offered her services and started to do her share as a nurse in a
Military Hospital in France. In 1892 Mr. Bristow made Ottawa his home
and took a position in the Civil Service. Ambitious, and feeling that
such employment did not offer sufficient possibilities, he resigned and
went into the typewriter business. Success crowned his first efforts and
he built up a large volume of trade. In 1897 Mr. Bristow became the
representative in Ottawa, Ont., of the Underwood Typewriter and dealer
in typewriters’ supplies. He was one of Ottawa’s best-known business
men. Being a lover of music, and possessing a fine voice, soon after his
arrival in Ottawa Mr. Bristow became a member of St. John’s Anglican
Church choir and, later, its president, and always, when solicited,
freely gave his services as a singer for patriotic and charitable
purposes. He was an all-round athlete, and gained fame in cricket and
bowling; was the founder of the Ottawa Cricket Club, and president of
the Bowling Club at Chelsea, Quebec; also president of the Chelsea
Athletic Association. In 1905 he won the Massey-Harris Cup for all
Canada in the National Tennis Competition, in which he represented the
Ottawa Tennis Club. With marked ability as an amateur minstrel he
organized and was head of a local Minstrel troop that has already given
many concerts of exceeding merit. He was president of the Orpheus Glee
Club, and a prominent member of the Masonic Order Sports. Before the
departure of the 207th Battalion for Overseas he arranged a big concert
for its benefit. To other organizations he rendered similar services,
and was elected President of the War Veterans’ Choral Society. In 1897
he married Beatrice Bristow, daughter of Arthur Bristow, who came from
England and joined the Dominion Civil Service. Three children have
blessed the union—Joan, Reggie and Marjorie. Mr. Bristow died on
December 19, 1917.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Braithwaite, Edward Ernest= (London, Ont.), President of Western
University, son of Mark Mell Braithwaite and Elizabeth Eckardt; born at
Unionville, Ont., March 14, 1865. Educated at Markham High School and
Toronto University, McGill University, B.A. (with first class honors in
Philosophy, ’86), Oberlin College, Ohio, (B.D., ’90), University of
Chicago, and Harvard University, where he obtained the degree of M.A.,
1901, and Ph.D., 1904. Married, November 10, 1892, to Ida Minnie Van
Camp, daughter of Rev. Albert and Isabella Van Camp, of Cleveland, Ohio.
Is the father of the following children: Harold Albert, born August 28,
1893; Lloyd Mell, born October 22, 1896; Ernest Scott, born December 8,
1899; Percy Bryant, born March 9, 1905; Carol Isabel, born December 25,
1906. Dr. Braithwaite is a noted educationalist, and has occupied many
important positions in the prominent seats of learning in Canada and the
United States, and has also filled many pastorates, among which may be
mentioned the following: 1890-95, Pastor St. Louis, Mo. (Fountain Park
Congregational Church); 1896-97, Graduate Student University of Chicago
(working mainly with that eminent teacher, the late President Harper in
the Department of Oriental Languages); 1897-1900, Pastor Tabernacle
Church, Yarmouth, N.S., and Chairman of the Congregational Union of the
Maritime Provinces, also Missionary Superintendent for the Provinces of
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick; 1900-1901, began Ph.D. course in the
Graduate Department of Harvard University, and at the end of the first
year was called to Oberlin owing to the illness of Hebrew Professor.
Returned to Harvard University the following year; 1901-02, Acting
Professor of Hebrew and Old Testament Literature, Oberlin College, Ohio;
1902-03, Graduate Student, Harvard University, from which he received
the degree of Ph.D. in 1904 and was appointed Williams Fellow; 1903-08,
Pastor of West Somerville, Mass.; 1908-11, Pastor of Northern Church,
Toronto; 1912-13, Dean of Calgary College, Calgary, Alberta; 1914, was
appointed President of the Western University of London, which position
he now holds. Dr. Braithwaite is a member of the Rotary and Canadian
Clubs, and has been a Liberal in politics although not especially
identified with any parties. He is Chairman of the Military Committee of
the C. O. T. C. of the Western University and takes great interest in
Military matters and all amateur sports. He is also one of the Board of
Directors of the London Chamber of Commerce and several other local
organizations.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bell, John Howatt, M.A., K.C.=, Barrister, Summerside, Prince Edward
Island; was born at Cape Traverse, Prince Edward Island, on the 13th of
December, 1846. His father, Walter Bell, emigrated from Dumfries,
Scotland, in 1820, and settled at Cape Traverse. His mother was
Elizabeth Howatt, daughter of Adam Howatt. Mr. Bell received his
education at the Prince of Wales College, Charlottetown, Prince Edward
Island, and at Albert University, Belleville, Ont., at which latter
institution he took the degrees of B.A. and M.A. He studied law as a
profession with Thomas Ferguson, Q.C., Toronto, and was called to the
bar of Ontario in 1874. He then went to Ottawa, and in partnership with
R. A. Bradley, practised his profession for eight years in that City. In
1882, Mr. Bell removed to Emerson, Manitoba, and was admitted a member
of the bar of Manitoba in 1882, and practised in Emerson for two years.
In 1884 he went to Prince Edward Island, and having passed the necessary
examination, he became a member of the bar of that Island, and has since
resided at Summerside successfully engaged in his profession. For four
years, he represented East Prince in the Federal Parliament, and in
1915, became a candidate for the Fourth District of Prince in the Local
Legislature and being re-elected, was chosen Leader of the Liberal
Opposition. On the 7th of April, 1882, he was married to Helen, daughter
of Cornelius Howatt, of Summerside, Speaker of the House of Assembly of
Prince Edward Island. He is a member of the Presbyterian Church, and a
member of the Masonic Order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gillespie, Professor Peter, M.Sc., C.E.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born at
Grafton, Ont., April 17, 1873, the son of Peter Gillespie, proprietor of
the Vernonville Flour Mills, who died in 1873, and his wife, Eliza
Hossack, a native of Cromarty, Scotland, who still survives. Prof.
Gillespie was educated at the Cobourg Collegiate Institute, the
University of Toronto and at McGill University, Montreal. His academic
connection with the University of Toronto began in 1904, when he became
Demonstrator in Applied Mechanics in the School of Practical Science,
now the Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering. Subsequently he
became Lecturer and, in 1911, Associate Professor in the same
Department, the position which he at present occupies. Since 1908 he has
been a member of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers, now the
Engineering Institute of Canada, is at present a Councillor thereof and
Chairman of the Toronto Branch. During the years of its active
existence, 1908-1912, he was President of the Canadian Cement and
Concrete Association, an organization devoted to the dissemination of
authentic information concerning the uses of Portland Cement in building
construction. To the transactions of the Canadian Society of Civil
Engineers and to the Technical press generally, Mr. Gillespie is an
occasional contributor. In addition to the duties of his academic
position, he devotes a part of his time to the practice of engineering
and as designer or consultant has been identified with engineering
projects in various parts of Canada. He has of late been actively
engaged in the training of returned soldiers for the Invalided Soldiers’
Commission of Canada. In 1910 he married Mary Hope, daughter of Mr. M.
O. Merritt, U.E.L., of Smithville, Ont., a retired farmer whose forbears
came from Fishkill, Duchess County, New York, at the time of the United
Empire Loyalist migration following the close of the American
Revolutionary War. They have two children, Mary Elizabeth and Robert
George. In religion Mr. Gillespie is a Presbyterian and in politics
inclines toward Liberalism. He resides at 358 Davenport Road.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Grange, Edward Alexander Andrew=, Toronto, Principal of Ontario
Veterinary College, 110 University Avenue, Toronto, was born in London,
England, April 9, 1848. His parents were the late Lt.-Col. George John
Grange, Sheriff, County Wellington, and Mary, daughter of Capt. Dawson.
Although born in England, Mr. Grange’s education was obtained entirely
in this country, first by private tuition, then at Dr. Tassie’s School,
Galt, Ontario, and finally at Ontario Veterinary College where he
graduated with the degree of V.S. in 1873, obtaining his M.S. in 1908,
at Michigan Agricultural College. An ardent Imperialist, Mr. Grange was
for many years a staff officer of Wellington Field Battery and Brigade
of Artillery, and is a present member of the Canadian Military
Institute, the Empire Club and the Canadian Club. In his profession he
has always distinguished himself. From 1875 to 1882 he was a lecturer at
Ontario Agricultural College; from 1883 to 1897 he was a professor
Veterinary Science, Michigan Agricultural College; 1897 to 1899 he was
principal Detroit Veterinary College; from 1899 to 1908 he was engaged
in veterinary research work in New York State, and since then has been
principal of Ontario Veterinary College, Toronto. He is a member of
numerous veterinary and other scientific societies, a Fellow of
A.V.M.A., a member of N.Y. Veterinary College Alumni Association, and an
honorary member of Alpha Phi Society of Cornell. An Anglican in
religion, Mr. Grange is married to Bessie, daughter of Lt.-Col. James
Webster, registrar, Wellington County. Their union was blessed with
three children, James Webster (deceased), Flight Commander E. Rochfort,
D.S.C., R.N., holder of Croix de Guerre; and daughter, Maynard.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Morin, Victor, LL.D.= (Montreal, Que.), is the son of Jean Baptiste
Morin, a lumber merchant of St. Hyacinthe, was born at St. Hyacinthe,
Que., August 15, 1865, is a Notary and Professor of Law at Laval
University, was educated at St. Hyacinthe College, Que., and Laval
University, Montreal, graduating 1884, 1888, 1909 with the degrees of
A.B., LL.D.; is the author of several books and articles on historical,
literary, scientific, social and business subjects, and is a member of
the Royal Society of Canada, President of the Société Nationale des
Beaux-Arts, and Vice-President of the Montreal Library Commission,
President-General of the St. Jean Baptiste Society, President of the
Association du Notariat Canadien, President Montreal Historical Society
and Heraldic College, also member of the Antiquarian and Numismatic
Clubs, of which he is vice-president, besides belonging to the Reform
Club, Cercle Universitaire, St. Dennis Club, and several others; his
favorite recreations are the study of books and curios. He is a member
of the Roman Catholic Church and Liberal in politics; Past Supreme Chief
Ranger of the Independent Order of Foresters, and member of many other
fraternal societies. In business circles he is very active, being
President, Vice-President or Director of several business and financial
corporations. On January 12, 1893, he married Fannie Cote, the daughter
of Hon. Daniel Cote, of Biddeford, Maine, and after her death married
Alphonsine Cote, on May 5, 1896, the daughter of Victor Cote, of St.
Hyacinthe, Que.; he is the father of the following children, namely,
Lucien, Reginald, Marc, Andre, Gisele, Claire, Marie, Renee, Roland, Guy
and Roger, besides two deceased.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hastings, David= (Dunnville, Ont.), is the son of John and Mary Jane
Hastings, born in Toronto, Ont., October 3, 1860. He received his
education at the Toronto and Hamilton Public Schools and Hamilton
Collegiate Institute. Mr. Hastings is the editor and publisher of “The
Gazette,” the oldest paper in the County of Haldimand, which was
established in 1852. It is a Conservative journal, published at
Dunnville. In February, 1915, Mr. Hastings was appointed Police
Magistrate for the Town of Dunnville and adjoining townships in
succession to the late Dr. S. W. Brown. He is a member of the
Typographical Union, the Masonic Order, Independent Order of Oddfellows,
Independent Order of Foresters and also of the Orange Order. In religion
Mr. Hastings is a Methodist. He married Rose, daughter of Frederick
Shepheard, of Toronto, and is the father of two children: Frederick
Clarke, born April 21, 1896, and Edward George, born Oct. 22, 1900.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Anderson, Frederic William=, of Kamloops, B.C., eldest son of the late
William Anderson, who was Manager of the J. R. Booth Lumber Company for
a number of years, was born at Ottawa, September 28, 1883. Educated at
the Public Schools and Collegiate Institute, Ottawa, and McGill
University, Montreal, from which latter institution he graduated in 1906
with the degree of Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering. After
spending a number of years on large construction works in different
parts of Canada, Mr. Anderson went to Kamloops, where he actively
engaged in the live stock industry and farming, and brought to bear upon
the existing situation his splendid knowledge as a civil engineer, and
being a keen irrigationist, developed and brought under cultivation
large areas of land. He organized and was President of the Heffley Creek
Water Users’ Association. He was elected at the general elections held
in September, 1914, a member of the Legislative Assembly for the
Province of British Columbia, as a Liberal over the former member, Mr.
J. Pierson Shaw, by a majority of 569; was Deputy Whip, session 1917,
and elected chief Government Whip Session 1918. Mr. Anderson married
Marion Claire, daughter of George E. Carbould, K.C., ex-M.P., New
Westminster, B.C., and is the father of two children, Francis Marion
Carbould and William Patrick. He is a Lieutenant, Canadian Engineers,
C.E.F.; a member of the Presbyterian Church, and of the Kamloops Club,
University Club, Vancouver Kappa Alpha Society, and the Masonic Order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=de Tremaudan, A. H.=, Barrister (Winnipeg, Man.), was born at St.
Chrysostome, Quebec, July 14, 1874. His parents are living at
Montmartre, Sask.; father was a captain in the Franco-Prussian war,
1870, and is a direct descendant of Sire Beaumanoir, by whom he was
related to LaFayette, the great French soldier, famous in American
history. Mr. de Tremaudan was educated at the Clerical College of
Guérande, France, and at Rennes University, France, from which he
graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Letters. He is a gentleman of
fine literary attainments, and has made a special study of all matters
pertaining to the early history of Western Canada, and the Hudson Bay
route. He founded and edited for two years (Dec., 1911, to Dec., 1913)
“The Herald,” published at The Pas, Manitoba, and is chief editor of “La
Libre Parole,” a French Weekly, published at Winnipeg. Mr. de Tremaudan
is the author of numerous magazine articles, and brochures, which have
been favorably received, among which may be noted “The Hudson Bay
Route,” “Pourquoi Nous Parlons Français,” “Les precurseurs.” A number of
addresses are in press under the title of “Le Sang Français.” A
forthcoming work is entitled “The Riel Legend.” On Feb. 18, 1901, Mr. de
Tremaudan married Madeleine, daughter of the late C. H. Bastien, a
stained-glass decorative artist, who painted some of the priceless
windows in the world-famous Cathedral of Rheims, France. His children,
three sons and two daughters, are: Jean (1903), Alain (1905), Gilles
(1909), Andree (1906), and Renee (1910). Mr. de Tremaudan is a Roman
Catholic in religion and a member of “Le Canada” Club of Winnipeg. He is
a Liberal in politics, has travelled extensively, and is widely read and
well informed on all questions of National importance; a man of mature
judgment and ripe experience.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bethune, the Rev. Charles Jas. Stewart, M.A., D.C.L.=, the
distinguished subject of this sketch, was born at West Flamboro’,
Ontario, on August 11, 1838. He is the third son of the Right Rev.
Alexander Neil Bethune second Bishop of Toronto, and Jane Eliza, eldest
daughter of the late Hon. James Crooks. The Bethune family traces its
lineage very far back in Scottish and French historical records. The
first of the name who left Normandy for the British Isles came to
Scotland in the reign of Malcolm the Third, a contemporary of William
the Conqueror, in the eleventh century. The first of the family to come
to Canada was the Rev. John Bethune, a U.E. Loyalist from North
Carolina, and chaplain to a Highland regiment, who settled with his
comrades in the county of Glengarry, Ontario, towards the end of the
18th century. He was the father of the late Bishop of Toronto and Dean
Bethune, of Montreal, and grandfather of the subject of this sketch.
Young Bethune was educated at private schools at Cobourg and Upper
Canada College, Toronto. After leaving the latter institution he entered
Trinity College, Toronto, and graduated therefrom in 1859 with
first-class classical honors and the B.A. degree. He took his M.A. in
1861, and received the honorary degree of D.C.L. from his Alma Mater in
1883, in recognition of his zealous and worthy services at Trinity
College School. He was ordained deacon in 1861 and priest in 1862, by
the late Bishop Strachan of Toronto. He was curate until 1866, with his
father, then Rector of Cobourg, with the exception of a short period
spent in England in 1863-64, when he was curate at Carlton, near Selby,
in Yorkshire. In 1866 he was appointed to the charge of the Credit
Mission in the County of Peel, Ont., where he was instrumental in
building the churches at Dixie and Port Credit. In September, 1870, he
was appointed Head Master of Trinity College School at Port Hope. From a
very small beginning he raised up this school to be one of the most
widely known and successful in the Dominion. He had a staff of eight
assistant masters, about 140 pupils, and large and handsome buildings
with extensive grounds. He resigned the headmastership in 1899, and
removed to London, Ontario, where he remained for seven years. During
the greater part of that period he was curator and librarian of the
Entomological Society of Ontario. He assisted in forming the London
Horticultural Society and was its president for two years. Dr. Bethune
gave much of his attention to scientific pursuits and he is well known
in the United States and Great Britain, as likewise in Canada, as an
entomologist. He was one of the founders of the Entomological Society of
Ontario and its Secretary-Treasurer for seven years. He was president of
the same society from 1870 to 1875, and has continued since to be a
member of its council. He was entomological editor of the “Canada
Farmer” for nine years, and editor of the “Canadian Entomologist” from
its inception in 1868 to 1873, and from 1887 to 1909, when he was
elected editor emeritus. He has written a large number of papers on
Practical and Scientific Entomology in these and other publications, and
contributed repeatedly to the annual report on insects presented to the
Legislature of Ontario. He is a Fellow of the American Association for
the advancement of Science and has attended its meetings at various
places in the United States, is a member of several Canadian scientific
societies and a corresponding member of scientific societies in New
York, Philadelphia, Boston, Buffalo, Davenport, Brooklyn, Halifax, and
other places. He is also a member of the Corporation of the University
of Trinity College. He was Honorary Clerical Secretary of the Synod of
the Diocese of Toronto from 1869 to 1871, and has been repeatedly
elected a representative of the diocese at the meetings of the
Provincial Synod in Montreal. He was a delegate from the diocese of
Toronto to the general synod of the Church of England in Canada at
Winnipeg in 1896, and was appointed clerical secretary of the Lower
House in 1902, holding that position at the meetings in Montreal and
Quebec and resigning at the Ottawa meeting in 1908; elected Fellow of
the Royal Society of Canada in 1892, and became President of Section 4
in the year 1900; was one of the original promoters of the Sisterhood of
St. John the Divine in Toronto and filled the position of Warden for
some years. On the first of June, 1906, he was appointed Professor of
Entomology and Zoology at the Ontario Agricultural College, Guelph,
which position he still holds. He assisted in the formation of the
American Association of Economic Entomologists and of the American
Entomological Society; of the latter he is one of the original Fellows.
He was elected President of the Entomological Society of Ontario for its
Jubilee year, 1913. He is Honorary President of the Wellington Field
Naturalists’ Club, of the Guelph Horticultural Society and of the
Trinity College School Cricket Club. Since going to Guelph he has
published bulletins on insects affecting fruit trees and vegetables of
which several editions have been issued by the Department of Agriculture
of Ontario. He has frequently visited England and travelled in the
United States and Europe. Dr. Bethune has always been a member of the
Church of England and associated with the “High Church” school of
thought. He married on April 21, 1863, Alice, second daughter of
Lieut.-Colonel Forlong, K.H., of Toronto, late of Her Majesty’s 43rd
Regiment of Light Infantry, and his wife, Sophia, daughter of the Hon.
Henry John Boulton, of Holland House, Toronto. Mrs. Bethune died in
July, 1898. Dr. Bethune has four children living. His eldest son, Arthur
M. Bethune, is Manager of the Hamilton Branch of the Dominion Bank, and
Reginald A. Bethune is an officer in the Civil Service at Kamloops, B.C.
The two daughters are unmarried. An earnest and able worker for his
church, a learned and deeply skilled votary in a wide and important
branch of science, it has been given to few men whose names are written
in this volume to accomplish so much and to accomplish it so well.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kyte, George William= (St. Peters, Richmond County, Nova Scotia), son
of John Kyte, native of Templemore, County of Tipperary, Ireland, and
Elizabeth Robertson, English parentage, born July 10, 1864, at St.
Peters. Educated at the public school of St. Peters, and at the
University of St. Francis Xavier, Antigonish, N.S., from which seat of
learning he graduated. Studied law in the office of Colin F. McIsaac
(for several years one of the Transcontinental Railway Commissioners, at
Antigonish, N.S.), and was admitted to the bar Nov. 16, 1891. Married,
July 5, 1893, to Tena, daughter of Valentine and Lydia Chisholm, of
Heatherton, N.S. Appointed Clerk-Assistant of the Legislative Assembly
of Nova Scotia, in Feb., 1892; re-appointed in 1895, 1898 and 1901;
appointed Chief Clerk, Dec. 3, 1903. Resigned this appointment to become
a candidate for the House of Commons for Richmond County at general
election of 1908 and was elected; re-elected at general election in
1911. Created a King’s Counsel by the Government of Nova Scotia, April
16, 1908. Solicitor for the Municipality of Richmond County; school
trustee for nine years, and is a member of the Board of School
Commissioners for the County of Richmond. A Roman Catholic in religion
and a Liberal in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Clark, John Murray, M.A., LL.B., K.C.= (Toronto, Ont.), born at St.
Mary’s, Ont., July 6, 1860, of Scottish descent, his parents being James
and Isabella Clark. Educated at St. Mary’s Collegiate Institute, Toronto
University and Osgoode Hall. His career at the University was
particularly brilliant. He won the prize in Logic awarded by the late
Professor J. P. Young, the Blake Scholarship on Constitutional Law,
Economics and Jurisprudence, the McMurrich Medal in Natural Science and
Gold Medal in Mathematics and Physics, and the prize on Minority
Representation, graduating with the degree of B.A. in 1882, M.A. 1884,
LL.B. 1891, and being called to the Bar in 1886, with honours, and
winning the Law Society’s Gold Medal, since which time he has practised
in Toronto where he is recognized as one of the leaders of the Bar and
is head of the firm of Clark, McPherson, Campbell & Jarvis. Has been
retained as Counsel in a large number of cases of great magnitude and
importance, such as the Quaker Case, Ontario Express Company, Fisheries
Case, and the Ophir case, and has frequently pleaded before the Privy
Council in England. Appointed a K.C. in 1889; in early life was
Mathematical Master of St. Mary’s Collegiate Institute and for several
years Examiner in Physics, Toronto University, of which he was appointed
as Senator in 1892. Is also Vice-President Toronto University Alumni
Association. Formerly President Mathematical and Physics Society and
University College Literary and Scientific Society. Few men in Canada
have exhibited more scholarly attainments than the subject of this
sketch, whose versatility in Science, Literature, as well as original
research has been remarkable, and of great benefit. Notwithstanding the
high place which Mr. Clark occupies in the field of letters and the wide
knowledge he has of science and literature, he is widely known on
account of his great abilities as a lawyer which have placed him in the
front rank of the legal profession in Canada. Many of his cases have
been of first-class importance and some of them of great public
interest. Among the first in which he won a signal victory was that of
Dorland and Jones, the famous Quaker Case from Prince Edward County,
Ontario. The recent decision of the House of Lords, giving the “Wee
Frees” the property of the Free Church of Scotland recalls the Quaker
Case here. Mr. Clark argued before the Supreme Court at Ottawa that the
Church had the right to make changes in its Constitution, even though
that Constitution itself did not specifically authorize it to do so. The
view was adopted by the United Free Church lawyers in Edinburgh in the
case arising from the union of the Free and United Presbyterian Churches
of Scotland, and the Court of Session, the High Court of Justice
sustained that view. The “Wee Free” (as the Free Church minority was
commonly called), appealed to the House of Lords, and contrary to all
expectation, won, and obtained possession of the vast property of the
Church. The situation was so tense that a special Act of Parliament was
passed to adjust conditions. In quite a number of constitutional cases
reaching through the Canadian Courts to the Privy Council, Mr. Clark has
figured, and invariably with success. The same is true regarding
commercial cases and large mining cases in which a long and extended
experience has given him such a mastery as few of his compeers possess.
Quite recently the “Ophir” mining case, which he brought to a successful
conclusion, through a tedious and tortuous course of litigation, ending
in the Privy Council, has excited the attention of the legal profession
and of the public, both because it decided the question of the Indian
title so far as Ontario is concerned, and because a similar situation is
becoming acute in British Columbia. Mr. Clark has made several notable
speeches in England where he is regarded as an accomplished jurist, and
few men are so well versed in the political and constitutional history
of this Dominion or more fully seized of its great resources. The London
“Times” and several other prominent English papers a few years ago
referred in high praise to Mr. Clark’s speech on “Canada and the Navy”
delivered before a notable gathering, including Lord Strathcona the late
High Commissioner for Canada. Mr. Clark is one of the foremost
mathematical authorities in Canada and his work has been commended by so
high an authority as Lord Kelvin, while he is regarded both in this
country and in England as an authority on Constitutional law. He has won
distinction as an author, and has written several standard works and
papers, among which may be mentioned “Law of Mines in Canada,” which was
written in collaboration with the Hon. W. D. McPherson, Provincial
Secretary of Ontario. “Company Law,” “The Ontario Mining Law,”
“International Arbitration,” “Canada’s Future and the Empire,” “History
of the Theory of Energy,” and “The Functions of a great University.” Has
lectured on the “Value of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council,”
“Canada and the Navy,” etc. The work on Mining Law referred to is
recognized as an authority on the subject dealt with, and has been
highly praised by the Harvard Law Review of the Law Magazine of England
as well as by the Canadian Press. The “Mining Journal” stated that “the
book had the impress of clear and legal learning,” and the work has also
been described as a monument of research, care and industry. Recently
Mr. Clark has been elected President of the Royal Canadian Institute,
founded by Sir John Lefroy (whose grandson, Lieut. Lefroy, gallantly
fell on Vimy Ridge). In referring to the new President’s appointment
“The Mail and Empire” said: “Mr. Clark well represents the best that we
have in character, intellect, scholarship and public spirit. A
distinguished graduate of Toronto University, the new President, far
from leaving the avenues of learning, as some do when they graduate, has
ever increased his stores, and has successfully striven not only to
broaden and deepen his knowledge, but to devote it to the service of his
fellow-men, as witness Mr. Clark’s strong and convincing advocacy of the
Canadian Government availing itself of the great scientific attainments
and progressive scholarship of men like Professors Macallum and
McLennan. For many years one of the foremost advocates in Canada of that
great constitutional change in Imperial relations which is to-day being
forged on the anvil of war, Mr. Clark has been a powerful and sagacious
leader in that movement on this side of the water. In the prosecution of
that enterprise he has deservedly won the regard and friendship of some
of the leading scholars and statesmen of our Empire.” The “Globe,” in
the course of a favorable review, said that his Presidential Address on
“The Reign of Law,” “will appeal to thoughtful readers as a scholarly
contribution to a subject which derives fresh interest from the war.”
Mr. Clark has given considerable study to the question of our gold
supply which has proved a potent factor in the financing of the great
war, and will be even a more important factor in the reconstruction
period after the war according to the viewpoint of Mr. Clark, who takes
the position that the increase in the production of gold be encouraged
in every practical way. Politically, Mr. Clark has always been a member
of the Liberal Party, and was formerly President of the Young Men’s
Liberal Club of Toronto, but, in the Federal general elections of 1917
he supported the Union Government. He favors Canada remaining an
integral portion of the British Empire, the utmost practicable extension
of the principle of free trade, and the development of a vigorous
Canadian National Sentiment. Married first Greta Helen Gordon, daughter
of Rev. D. Gordon, and sister of “Ralph Connor,” 1890 (deceased 1894);
second, Annie Macleod Anderson, daughter of late W. N. Anderson,
Toronto, 1899 (deceased, 1910); third, Caroline Chaplin, daughter of
late William Chaplin, St. Catharines; has three daughters, i.e., Mary
Gordon (now Mrs. W. A. Riddell), Margaret Macleod, and Katie H. Burn. Is
a member of the following clubs: Toronto, Ontario, British Empire
(London), Engineers’ Club (Toronto), and belongs to A.F. & A.M.
(Scottish Rite, Zetland). A Presbyterian in religion. Recreation, golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Flint, Thomas Barnard, M.A., LL.B., D.C.L.=, Ottawa, Ont., ex-clerk of
the House of Commons, was born in Yarmouth, Nova Scotia, April 28, 1847,
and was educated at Yarmouth and Mt. Allison University, Sackville, New
Brunswick. He received his B.A. in 1867; his M.A. in 1872; also LL.B. of
Harvard University, 1871. He was called to the Bar in 1872; was
appointed a commissioner of the Supreme and County Courts in 1873; was
Sheriff of Yarmouth County from 1883 to 1887, and Assistant Clerk of the
Nova Scotia House of Assembly from 1887 to 1891. In 1891 he was elected
to the House of Commons and was re-elected at the elections of 1896 and
1900. He was appointed Clerk of the House of Commons, Nov. 11, 1902, and
retired from that position at the beginning of session of 1918, owing to
failing eyesight. In 1903 he received the honorary degree of Doctor of
Civil Law. He edited the 3rd and 4th editions of Bourinot Parliamentary
Procedure. In 1874 he was married to Mary Ella Dane, a daughter of the
late Thomas B. Dane, who for many years was an influential citizen of
Yarmouth. Personally, Dr. Flint, an honorable man, with high ideals of
the amenities of public life, liberally educated, and endowed with
cultivated taste, entirely without prejudice of race or religion, well
posted on public affairs, an efficient, unassuming, practical man,
commanded the respect of Liberals and Conservatives alike, both as a
member of the House of Commons and as clerk. Dr. Flint at one time was
Vice-President of the Dominion Prohibition Alliance, and was one of the
founders, and for many years vice-president of the Yarmouth Building and
Loan Society, a most successful local business. After he was admitted to
the Bar he rapidly became one of its leaders in his district. As a
member of the House of Commons Dr. Flint was Chairman of Standing Orders
from 1898 to 1902. During the Session of 1894-5 he moved resolutions in
the House of Commons in favor of prohibition. In 1907 he was elected
President of the Ottawa Literary and Scientific Society. As a speaker,
Dr. Flint proved to be a leading debater, forceful and pleasing in
manner, ever giving evidence as an authority on every question which he
took up. He is of New England ancestry, and the son of the late John
Flint, ship owner, and Anne (Barnard) Flint. He is an Anglican in
religion and a Liberal in politics. From 1897 to 1899 he was Grand
Master of the Grand Lodge of Masons, of Nova Scotia. Upon his retirement
from the Clerkship of the House of Commons Dr. Flint was by resolution
of the House made an honorary official of the House and granted an
annuity in recognition of his public services. He now resides in
Yarmouth, Nova Scotia.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chrysler, Francis Henry, K.C.= (Ottawa), is a son of the late Gordon
Harvey Chrysler and Jane Chrysler, daughter of Captain James Mackenzie,
R.N., who was on service on Lake Ontario under Commodore James Yee,
R.N., during the war of 1812. He is a grandson of Colonel John Chrysler,
of Chrysler’s Farm, for sixteen years member for Dundas in the
Parliament of U.C. He was born in Kingston, Ont., educated at Bath
Academy and Queen’s University, Kingston. Married in 1876 to Margaret
Isabella, daughter of Donald A. Grant, of Ottawa. He became a barrister
in 1872; K.C., 1890; has practised continuously in Ottawa and is one of
the leaders of the Bar of Canada, and one of the life Benchers of the
Law Society for the Province of Ontario. He is Counsel for many railways
and other corporations. Has declined appointment to the Canadian Bench.
He acted as Counsel for the Dominion Iron and Steel Company in their
action against the Dominion Government to recover bounties for the
manufacture of liquid pig iron; for the Government of Canada in drafting
and settling the contracts and legislation for the construction of the
National Transcontinental Railway; for the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway
Company in drafting and settling their mortgages upon which securities
were issued for the construction of the railway from Winnipeg to Prince
Rupert; for all the railway companies of Canada in framing and settling
The Railway Act of 1903, under which the Railway Commission was
appointed; for various railway companies, principally the Canadian
Pacific Railway, in the general enquiry before the Railway Commission
into railway rates in Canada; for the Dominion Express Company in the
general enquiry into express tolls and contracts; for the Canadian
Pacific Railway Company upon the general enquiry into telegraph tolls
and contracts; for the Special Committee of the House of Commons
appointed to enquire into the question of telephone rates and systems,
and for the Railway Companies of Canada as Counsel before the general
committee appointed by the House of Commons in the Session of 1917, to
revise and consolidate the Railway Act and Amending Acts. He has had an
extensive experience and practice as a Parliamentary Counsel, before the
Railway Commission and in the Supreme Court. His clubs are: The Rideau,
Country and Royal Ottawa Golf, Ottawa; Metis Golf Club, Little Metis,
Que. His address is 87 Catharine Street, Ottawa. Mr. Chrysler has four
children, two sons and two daughters. The elder son, Geoffrey Gordon,
was for some years in the Royal Canadian Regiment of Infantry, retiring
in 1912, with the rank of Captain. He enlisted for service in the war
with Germany, going with the first contingent as a Captain in the Second
Battalion of Infantry, of which he is now a Major. He has been three
times severely wounded and has received the Military Cross for
conspicuous valor. The younger son, Philip Harvey, qualified as a
Lieutenant of Artillery and served in France in the 3rd Divisional
Ammunition Column from 1915 until October, 1917, when he was discharged
as being physically unfit for further service. Mr. Chrysler’s elder
daughter, Margaret Gordon, Mrs. Frederick H. Emra, is married to a civil
engineer, who is now a Captain, first in the Second Pioneers and
afterwards in the Engineers, and has been wounded in France. He is now
doing engineering work for the Royal Navy. His younger daughter,
Constance Harvey, is married to Dr. Ernest W. MacBride, LL.D., F.R.S.,
formerly Professor of Biology in McGill University and now Professor of
Biology in the Royal College of Science, South Kensington, London,
England, where Professor and Mrs. MacBride with two young sons reside.
Mr. Chrysler is by temperament a student and has never occupied any
public office; a prominent member of St. Andrew’s Church, Ottawa, of
which congregation he is an officer. A lover of music, having been for
many years an active member and President of the Orchestral Society; a
keen golfer, golf being his principal recreation. Although for many
years a leading member of the Liberal Party, he is at present a strong
advocate of the policy of carrying on the war by means of a united
Canadian party.




[Illustration: HON. WILFRID GARIEPY
Edmonton]




                 *        *        *        *        *

=Aikins, Lt.-Col. Sir James Albert Manning, Kt., M.A., K.C.=,
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba, was born in Peel County, Ont., December
10, 1851, the son of Honorable James Cox Aikins, who was appointed a
Senator at Confederation, and, on December 9, 1869, Secretary of State
and Registrar General in Sir John A. Macdonald’s administration, and
afterwards Minister of Inland Revenue, and later in 1882, appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of Manitoba, and of the District of
Keewatin, and upon the expiration of his term of office, a second time
called to the Senate of Canada in 1896, and his wife Mary Elizabeth
Somerset. Educated at Brampton High School, Upper Canada College and
Toronto University (B.A., 1875, M.A., 1877), M.A. Ad eundem, Manitoba
University, studied law in the office of Matthew Crooks Cameron and also
Mowat, Maclennan and Downey, admitted to the Bar of Ontario, 1878, and
to the Bar of Manitoba, 1879, in which year he went to Winnipeg, where
he soon established himself as one of the leaders of the profession in
the Province and few members of the Western Bar have held more
responsible solicitorships. Sir James was solicitor and counsel for the
Canadian Pacific Railway throughout the western division since its
organization until he withdrew in 1911, to contest the constituency of
Brandon in the House of Commons, for which he was returned by a large
majority, retaining the seat until the general elections in 1917, when
he was succeeded by Dr. H. P. Whidden (Conservative-Unionist). He was
also counsel for the Dominion Express Co., Imperial Bank, Bank of
Ottawa, Canadian Fire Insurance Co., Great West Life Assurance Co.,
Canada Permanent and Western Canada Land Co., Manitoba Northwest Land
Co., Scottish American Investment Co. He is a director of the Northern
Trusts Co., the Canada Fire Insurance Co., and numerous other financial
corporations. From 1879 to 1896 he acted as counsel for the Department
of Justice, and, in 1880, he was appointed by the Dominion Government
one of the Royal Commissioners to investigate and report on the
administration of Justice in the North-West Territories; was chief
counsel for the Province of Manitoba during the administration of Hugh
John Macdonald, drafting the Manitoba Liquor Bill, which, on appeal was
sustained by the Privy Council in England and decided to be
constitutional, and has been a model for similar legislation in other
Provinces. Appointed K.C. in 1884, and created Knight Bachelor in June,
1914, Sir James Aikins is the senior of the Manitoba Bar and President
of the Canadian Bar Association, President of the Conference of
Commissioners on Uniformity of Law. Aug., 1916, appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba. Was elected bencher of the Law Society
of Manitoba in 1886, and has filled a large number of other prominent
positions and offices, i.e., President of Y.M.C.A.; The Canadian Club;
Chairman, Wesley College, Manitoba; Honorary Bursar, Manitoba
University; President Law Society of Manitoba. In June, 1912, was
appointed to represent Canada at the second International Moral
Education Congress, held at The Hague from August 22 to 27 of that year.
A director of the Manitoba Agricultural College, Sir James takes great
interest in all educational matters. Presented silver cup to Manitoba
Mounted Rifles for general efficiency 1907; appointed Honorary
Lieut.-Colonel 90th Regiment, Winnipeg Rifles December, 1910; is also
Col. (Honorary) of the 99th Regiment, Brandon. A Methodist in religion,
the subject of this sketch has always displayed much interest in the
affairs of his church; was a member of the 20th Century Thanksgiving
Fund, and of the Methodist Church Union Committee, and in 1896 carried a
resolution in Grace Methodist Church, Winnipeg, heartily favoring
organic union of Presbyterian, Congregational, and Methodist Churches of
Canada. Sir James has been twice married—(first) to Mary B. McLellan,
in 1884, (second) to Mary F. Colby, in 1889, and has three children,
Gordon Harold Aikins, Barrister-at-Law, married to Myrtle Clint; Mary
Helena Alberta Aikins; Elizabeth Grace Colby Aikins. Sir James has
always taken a very prominent part in the affairs of the Dominion and
that the success which has come to him early in life has been the reward
of merit is generally admitted. He is a strong platform speaker, a
brilliant advocate and sound lawyer, and at critical periods in the
country’s history has shown much dominant force as a political factor.
Sir James is extremely popular with the members of his profession with
whom he has a Dominion-wide acquaintance, and has received every honor
at the hands of his fellow-practitioners. He is a member of the
following clubs: Manitoba, St. Charles Country, Adanac, of Winnipeg,
Rideau Club of Ottawa, and Brandon Club, Brandon, Manitoba, and head of
the following law firms: Aikins, Loftus, Aikins and Fisher, and Aikins,
Loftus, Aikins, Bell and Bridgman, of Winnipeg.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pope, Major William Walter=, is of United Empire Loyalist descent, was
born in the County of Compton, in the Province of Quebec, in 1854, and
educated there. Entered the service of the Boston, Clinton and
Fitchburgh Railway, Boston, Mass., when a young man, and later he went
to Belleville, Ontario, where he studied law. Was assistant to the late
John Bell, K.C., Solicitor for the Grand Trunk Railway, 1881 to 1904,
when he was transferred to Montreal as assistant to W. H. Biggar, K.C.;
while at Belleville was alderman for two years, also Major with the 15th
Regiment, retiring retaining rank in 1909, holds long service
decoration, also medal with one clasp for the Fenian Raid, 1866. Since
September, 1909, has been Solicitor and Secretary of the Hydro-Electric
Commission of Ontario, and is recognized as a man of great practical
ability. His present address is 117 Bedford Road, Toronto. The Hon. John
Henry Pope, late Minister of Railways, was an uncle. Mr. Pope married,
October 20, 1875, a daughter of Stephen White, Belleville, manufacturer,
and has one son, W. W. Macaulay Pope. He is a member of the Victoria,
Royal Canadian Yacht Club, Canadian Empire and United Empire Loyalist
Clubs, Canadian Military Institute, Albany, and the Masonic Order, also
a member of the Anglican Church and a Conservative. His principal
recreations are golfing, bowling, and curling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pratt, Edward Courtney= (Montreal, Que.), General Manager of The
Molsons Bank, is the son of George Henry Pratt, of Monteath, Ireland. He
was born in Ireland, on October 22, 1864, and educated in Dublin. On
October 16, 1889, he married Edith Augusta White, the daughter of Wm. J.
White, K.C., of St. Thomas, Ont., and has six children. Is a member of
the Mount Royal, Montreal and Beaconsfield Clubs, and a member of the
Anglican Church.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Riddell, Hon. William Renwick= (Toronto, Ont.), Justice of the Supreme
Court of Ontario, descended from the family of “Riddell of that Ilk,” a
son of the late Walter and Mary Renwick Riddell; born in Township of
Hamilton, County of Northumberland, April 6, 1852. Educated Cobourg
Collegiate Institute and Victoria University; B.A. (1874), Prizeman in
Chemistry and Mathematics, B.Sc. (1876), LL.B. (1878), L.H.D. (Syracuse
University), J.U.D. (Trinity University, Hartford), LL.D. University of
Toronto, McMaster, Lafayette, Northwestern, Wesleyan, Rochester and Yale
Universities; graduated at Law School, Osgoode Hall. (Gold Medal and
first in all examinations); called to the bar 1883, elected Bencher Law
Society of Upper Canada 1891, re-elected until 1906, created a King’s
Counsel 1904. Successfully practised at Cobourg and Toronto, and on
removal to Ontario’s capital, enjoyed large counsel practice, civil and
criminal; was retained during Toronto Municipal Investigation in 1904.
Before taking up the study of the law was Mathematical Master of the
Normal School, Ottawa, and afterwards Chairman of the Cobourg Collegiate
Institute; President, Educational Society, Eastern Ont.; Pres., Alumni
Association Victoria University, and member of the Board of Regents.
Senator of Toronto University; a Governor, Western Hospital, Toronto. In
October, 1906, the subject of this sketch was appointed one of the
Judges of His Majesty’s Supreme Court for the Province of Ontario, (the
last to be appointed to the King’s Bench Division), a position which he
has since occupied with great distinction. His judgments are models of
beautiful diction, in which the exposition of the law is clear and
illuminating, while his grasp of the facts makes for that clarity of
deduction which always characterizes his Lordship’s deliverances. Mr.
Justice Riddell has been a generous contributor to various American and
Canadian magazines and law journals, and the author of “The Canadian and
American Constitutions.” As a lecturer he is recognized as possessing
high gifts; his ripe erudition and polished style making his addresses
of more than passing interest. During the past few years, among the
addresses delivered and magazine articles contributed by His Lordship
may be mentioned: The Dodge Lectures, Yale University; Robert Fleming
Gourlay; La Rochefoucauld’s Travels in Canada, 1795; The First Judge at
Detroit and His Court. Since the outbreak of the war Mr. Justice Riddell
has taken a deep interest in recruiting and everything tending to
forward the cause of the Allies and has given very largely of his time
and great ability, presiding at many meetings and speaking at others in
the interest of recruiting. A member of the Toronto, York, and Rosedale
Golf Clubs. Mr. Justice Riddell finds recreation in the study of
Canadian History, upon which he is an authority. He is Honorary Member
of the Bar Associations of the States of Georgia, Missouri, Illinois,
Iowa, Michigan, Wisconsin and New York, and of the Lawyers’ Clubs of
Buffalo and New York; he is also a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada
and of the Royal Historical Society. He is a Freemason, a Presbyterian,
and was formerly a Liberal. Married, March 5, 1884, Anna Hester Kirsop
Crossen, youngest daughter of the late James Crossen and Margaret Hayden
Crossen, of “Cedar Hedge,” Cobourg.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Paisley, Jas. K.= (Ottawa). One of the best known and highly respected
citizens in the Capital of the Dominion and in many other parts of
Canada, both east and west, is the subject of this sketch. Following in
his father’s footsteps, who owned and successfully ran a popular hotel
in Orangeville, at an early age he became, and for years remained,
cashier of the well known hostelry—the Walker House, Toronto. His
experiences in that popular public resort and his popularity prompted
aspirations and ambitions which caused him to launch out in enterprises
of his own, and he soon became proprietor of several of the best hotels
in the principal cities and summer resorts in Canada. In 1902 he was one
of the owners of the New Royal in Hamilton where business success and
increased patronage prompted the owners to remodel it in 1907. He took
management of the Penetanguishene Hotel at Penetang and made it one of
the attractive features of the place. He reached out and got management
of the Sans Souci at Moon River, the Belvidere in Parry Sound, the
Iroquois Hotel in Toronto, the Victoria Hotel at Aylmer, Quebec, the
Grand Union, Ottawa, and, with the late Daniel O’Connor, built the
Temagami Inn at Temagami, Ontario. In each and all these ventures
success and popularity followed in his train and created for him
unstinted fame as an enterprising, progressive and popular hotel
proprietor and manager. And while so actively engaged in the hotel
business Mr. Paisley, being an enthusiastic lover of the horse, found
time to give to that noble animal the most assiduous care and attention,
and much of his time for years was devoted to the purchase, the raising,
and the training of some of the finest saddle, harness and trotting
steeds to be found in any part of Canada. They established, for their
owner, on many a race track and at many a horse show enviable records.
His Sealskin Joe was one of those that won distinction on the Winnipeg
racecourse many years ago. Later his saddle horse, Jardie, was accorded
the admiration of all. Shortly after his arrival in Ottawa, where he
first established himself as proprietor of the Grand Union Hotel, he
became interested in such affairs—public, charitable, patriotic and
social—as had for their goal the prosperity of the city and the
happiness and betterment of its people, and his many years activity in
these lines are well marked in the memory of thousands. Mr. Paisley,
never allowing his enthusiasm for the horse to die, took a keen interest
in, and became one of the original members of, the Ottawa Hunt Club; was
Treasurer of the Horse Show while it exhibited here; became Chairman of
the Construction Committee that built the Connaught Park Jockey Club
Track, and is now a director and one of the Management Committee of the
Connaught Park Jockey Club. For years Mr. Paisley has been a Director of
the Central Canada Exhibition Association, and held the office of
Vice-President, and for a considerable time was Chairman of the Special
Attraction Committee. In 1915, owing to the resignation of Mr. Edward
McMahon, who had held the position of Manager and Secretary of the
Central Canada Exhibition Association for over twenty years, and to
replace whose efficient management the Association had to select a
competent and reliable successor, Mr. James K. Paisley was chosen, with
the result that up to date the fair has been an increased success
financially and in attendance. In his management of the Exhibition’s
affairs he carries with him a geniality and a business acumen that
attracts, establishes confidence, and produces good results. When the
Great War broke out, Mr. Paisley’s son, familiarly known as “Pep”
Paisley, who had graduated from McGill as an architect, enlisted with A.
Battery, R.C.H.A., as a gunner and was soon, owing to meritorious
conduct at the front, promoted to a Lieutenancy. His valor and good work
at the firing line received much praise from his superior officers. Mr.
James K. Paisley is the son of John Paisley and Mrs. M. J. Kenniston of
Orangeville, Ontario. He was born in 1858 and was educated in
Orangeville High School and Rockwood Academy. In 1888 he married Minnie
Bairdsall Harris, daughter of the late Isaac Harris. He has one son and
two daughters. His recreations are sports of any kind. He is an active
member of the Elks, the Knights of Pythias, and the Foresters, and an
executive member of the Hotelmen’s Mutual Benefit Association of America
and Canada, Ex-President of the Ontario Hotel Keepers’ Association, and
Ex-President of the Ottawa Hotelmen’s Association. In religion he is a
Protestant, English Church. In politics a Conservative, and his address
is Kenniston Apartments, Elgin Street, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cowan, William Frederick, The Late=, who died on October 28, 1918, at
his home in Oshawa, Ont., was long one of the noted industrial and
financial leaders of Ontario. He was born in 1832, at Fintona, County
Tyrone, Ireland, the son of Thomas and Charlotte Cowan. In 1841, his
parents having decided to remove to Canada, he made with them the long
sailing and overland voyage to Toronto, the journey occupying some
months. Shortly after the family’s arrival the father died and the
mother of the subject of this sketch was left with five young children.
She managed, however, to give her boys a good education at Boyd’s
Academy, Bay St., Toronto (conducted by the father of the late
Chancellor Sir John Boyd) and one of the pioneer educational
institutions of Toronto. On leaving school, W. F. Cowan first found
employment with “The Colonist,” a newspaper founded by Sir Francis
Hincks, an eminent statesman of the mid-nineteenth century. Subsequently
he entered the employ of Alexander Laurie & Co., dry goods merchants, at
the south-west corner of King and Yonge Sts., Toronto. Later he served
with Walter McFarland & Co., dry goods merchants, on Market Square, King
St. East, Toronto, then the heart of the retail district. In 1856 he and
his brother John founded a dry goods business of their own, at the
south-west corner of Yonge and Richmond Sts., Toronto. In 1862 he
removed to Oshawa, establishing a large general store, and with a branch
at Prince Albert some twenty miles north of the town. A few years later
he acquired an interest in the A. S. Whiting Mfg. Co. of Cedar Dale,
manufacturers of scythes, forks, hoes, etc., the firm becoming Messrs.
Whiting & Cowan. Largely through Mr. Cowan’s modern methods of business
organization, the wares of this firm became known throughout America;
and Mr. Cowan was also successful in developing a large market for them
in Great Britain. In 1872, in conjunction with Messrs. Wood &
Winterbourne, of Albany, N.Y., he founded the Ontario Malleable Iron
Co., of which Mr. D. S. Wood was the first president, and on his death
was succeeded by Mr. Cowan’s elder brother John. On the latter’s death
Mr. W. F. Cowan succeeded to the Presidency. He had been a director of
the company since its inception. He was largely instrumental in making
Oshawa one of the leading industrial centres of the province. In 1893 he
established Fittings, Ltd., of Oshawa, of which he was also President at
the time of his death. Altogether his interests furnished steady
employment to about 1,000 citizens of the town, of which he was
recognized as the industrial leader. Mr. Cowan’s financial interests
were even more widely extended. In 1875 he became Vice-President of the
newly formed Standard Bank of Canada, and in 1883, on the death of the
President, the well-known capitalist, Hon. T. N. Gibbs, succeeded to
that office, in which he continued until his demise, making weekly
journeys to Toronto to attend meetings of the board until within a few
days of his death. In 1886, in company with Mr. T. H. McMillan, he also
established the Western Bank of Canada, which, after twenty-six years of
active life, was amalgamated with the Standard Bank in 1912. Though
often pressed to enter Federal and Provincial politics, he contented
himself solely with municipal service and held the post of Reeve of
Oshawa, and of Mayor, after its incorporation as a town, for some years.
He was a steadfast adherent of the Anglican Church in religion, and a
Conservative in politics. In 1864 he married Susan, daughter of the late
John Groves, a well-known citizen of Toronto. On his death he left one
son, Mr. Frederick W. Cowan, of Oshawa, who succeeds to his interests,
and one grandson, Major R. C. Cowan, who has been overseas for the past
three years.




[Illustration: HON. W. L. MACKENZIE KING, C.M.G.
Ottawa]




=Reid, Frank= (Simcoe, Ont.), Barrister and Solicitor, was born at
Vittoria, Norfolk County, February 22, 1862, the son of the late
Archibald Reid, a cabinet maker, and Elspit Shand. He was educated at
the Vittoria Public School, Simcoe High School and Osgoode Hall. He
married Katherine C. Ferguson, September 17, 1890, the daughter of the
late Alexander Ferguson, railway agent, of Simcoe, and has one son,
Francis Macdonald Reid. In politics he is a Conservative, is a member of
the Ancient Order of United Workmen and a Mason. Mr. Reid is Town
Treasurer of Simcoe, a member of the Presbyterian Church, and takes a
great interest in golf as a pastime.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Minehan, Rev. Lancelot= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Killaloe, County
Clare, Ireland, son of Michael Minehan and Hanna Skehan. He was educated
at All Hallows’ College, Dublin, came to Canada in 1884, and was
ordained at Montreal. Served as Assistant Priest at Thornhill, House of
Providence, Adjala, St. Helen’s, St. Mary’s, St. Paul’s, St. Michael’s,
Toronto. Was Chaplain for two and a half years at Penetanguishene,
transferred to Toronto, and appointed R.C. Chaplain of the Central
Prison, Mercer Reformatory and Toronto Asylum; later, was pastor at
Schomberg, Ont., where he spent three and a half years, following which
he was first parish Priest of St. Peter’s Toronto, where he built a
splendid new church and where he ministered for over eighteen years; he
is now parish priest of St. Vincent’s Church, on Roncesvalles Avenue,
Toronto, which will be one of the finest edifices in Toronto diocese.
For twelve or more years Rev. Father Minehan has been connected with
“The Catholic Register,” and has been identified with various
organizations for the promotion of temperance, social welfare and the
moral uplift of the city. He is Vice-President of the Ontario Branch of
the Dominion Temperance Alliance and Vice-President of the Moral and
Social Reform League. Father Minehan is as famous for his gifts as a
pulpit orator as for his eloquence as a platform speaker. His magnetic
personality, frankness and loyalty have given him an assured place in
the esteem of all classes. He is a man of indefatigable energy, opposed
to intolerance and bigotry, with a mind fixed on the promotion of the
highest ideals in all walks of life. He is a frequent contributor to the
press, and is a writer of force and choice diction. His reverence favors
a Canadian Navy and the development of a policy of protection under the
British Flag. He exercises a wide influence both as a clergyman and a
private citizen, and at his Silver Jubilee, in 1909, was presented with
many proofs of his personal worth, and great popularity. Of him it has
been said that he is “truly Catholic in spirit and in service and
charity.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=L’Esperance, Hon. David Ovide= (Quebec City), Member of the Senate and
Chairman of the Harbor Commission of Quebec, was born in the thriving
town of Montmagny, in the County of Montmagny, in the Province of
Quebec. He is the son of Edouard L’Esperance, his mother’s maiden name
having been Morin. His career as a business man, banker and broker, has
been a successful one, his connection with sundry influential exploiting
firms having given him an influence in public circles which has been
enhanced by his acumen as a parliamentarian. He has been for years a
Director of the Quebec Railway Light, Heat and Power Co., a Director and
President of the Quebec Exposition Board, President of the Grande Allee
Apartments Company, and President of L’Evenement Publishing Company. He
is President of the Amable Belanger, Ltd., Manufacturing Co., Montmagny,
and of the General Car & Machinery Works of the same place. His
prominence as a successful business man and his influence as a
public-spirited citizen, did not fail to bring him into touch with the
political circles of the Conservative Party; and in the year 1911 he was
elected a Member of the Federal Parliament for Montmagny. While a member
of the House of Commons, his influence as a deliberate speaker and his
industry as a member of committees were acknowledged by all associated
with him in parliamentary work; and, when the vacancy occurred on the
Harbor Commission of Quebec, on the withdrawal of Sir William Price, he
was selected to succeed the latter as Chairman of that Board. In July,
1917, he was called to the Senate. His efforts to improve the harbor
facilities of the port of Quebec have been appreciated and seconded by
the Federal Government and his associates in office, with due
recognition of his public spirit and energy by his fellow-citizens and
the country at large. In 1888, he married Miss Clara Dionne, of Ste.
Anne de la Pocatiere, of the Province of Quebec. Their family residence
is on Ste. Genevieve Avenue, and their summer residence at Percé, Co. of
Gaspé. Mr. L’Esperance has won for himself a prominence in all the
movements that have had for their purpose the advancement of the city in
which he has his home. He is a loyal Quebecer. As a Conservative, he has
won an influential place in his party. And as a philanthropist he has
won the good opinion of his fellow-men and co-workers.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=O’Reilly, His Honor James Redmond=, is the eldest son of the late James
O’Reilly, Q.C., M.P., and Mary Jane (Redmond), born at Kingston,
Ontario, February 14, 1862, and educated at Regiopolis College,
Kingston, Collegiate Institute, Kingston, St. Mary’s (Jesuit) College,
Montreal, and Queen’s University, Kingston, from which latter
institution he graduated with the degree of B.A., and Gold Medal in
Political Economy in 1882. Called to the Bar, May, 1885. Created a K.C.,
1899, successfully practised his profession at Prescott for several
years until his appointment as Senior County Judge for Stormont, Dundas
and Glengarry, in March, 1900. His Honor was formerly a Liberal.
President of the South Grenville Liberal Association for 13 years.
Married December 31, 1889, Rose Mary, fourth daughter of the late James
Bermingham, and is the father of two children: James, born November 16,
1891, and Wm. H., born December 26, 1896. In religion the Judge is Roman
Catholic. He resides at Cornwall, Ont., and is a member of the Cornwall
Club. In earlier years Judge O’Reilly had some military experience,
being Bombardier in Wellington Field Battery.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Keefe, R. Daniel= (Penetanguishene, Ont.), Principal of the High School
of that town; was born at Iroquois, Ont., June 10, 1877, and is the son
of Patrick Keefe, a native of Cork, Ireland, who came to this country
when a child and later settled on the St. Lawrence in the Town of
Iroquois and became a builder and contractor, erecting a large planing
mill, installed an electric light plant for the Town and bought the
waterworks system which was afterwards sold to the municipality.
Principal Keefe’s mother was of United Empire Loyalist descent. He was
educated at the Iroquois High School, McGill University, Montreal, and
the University of Toronto, and the School of Pedagogy, Hamilton.
Graduated in 1901 with the degree of B.A., Toronto University. On
graduating, taught successively in the High Schools of Port Elgin,
Colborne and Gananoque, and was then appointed Principal of the
Penetanguishene High School, where he has been for over twelve years
teaching Science and Classics. Principal Keefe has the reputation of
being one of the best after-dinner speakers in Northern Ontario. Besides
the father, one brother, W. S. Keefe, a School of Science graduate in
Electrical Engineering, survives. Principal Keefe has been an active
member of the Carnegie Library Board, having acted as Secretary and
Chairman of the Buying Committee for several years. Is President also of
the Penetanguishene Hospital. Married in 1905 to Ethel Madeline,
daughter of Norval Manning, of Toronto, and is the father of two
children, Beverley Hartle, born 1913, and Wilbur Neville, born 1916. He
is a member of the Masonic order, being Past Master of Georgian Lodge,
No. 348, and Past Z. of Kichikewana Chapter No. 67, Midland; P.G.S. of
the Grand Lodge of Canada. Is keenly interested in all manner of sports
and prominent in Association football, hockey and curling. Has played
football in the Champion team of Eastern Ontario and the Champions of
Hamilton District League, winning the Spectator Cup. Has managed several
hockey teams and is a Past President and Past Secretary-Treasurer of the
Penetanguishene Curling Club, and has been one of the District Tankard
Skips for the past four years. In religion, Mr. Keefe is a member of the
Methodist Church, and politically, a Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacLean, Archie=, R.R. No. 4, Paisley, Ont., was born in Bruce
Township, County of Bruce, in 1868, of Highland Scotch parents, and
glories in the fact that he has Highland Scotch blood flowing through
his veins. He attended the public school in the section in which he
lived until he was about thirteen years of age, when, being the eldest
of the family, he had to leave school to assist on the farm. His
ambition for an education was unquenched and he studied at home, and at
the age of twenty-one took a three-months’ course in the public school,
secured his matriculation. He went to Port Elgin and Walkerton High
School and succeeded in creditably securing a second-class certificate.
He taught school for a few years, but the profession at that time not
being over-remunerative, he again took up farming, and also engaged in
grazing and shipping cattle, which occupation he still successfully
follows. In 1901 he was elected to the Township of Bruce Council, where
he served for two years. In 1903-4 he was elected to Reeveship of the
Township. In 1910 he again contested the Reeveship successfully and held
the office until 1912. This office he did not covet for office sake, but
being enthused with the true spirit of co-operation for the benefit of
all he set the log rolling for the establishment of a municipal
telephone system, for the benefit of nine different municipalities, his
own native township being the initiating one. This enterprise is now
looked upon as the greatest example of co-operation in the whole county.
In his efforts he was ably seconded by men who caught his vision. He is
at present one of a commission of three, the other two being, D.
McNaughton, Ex-M.P.P., and J. J. Hunter, who handle the business of this
system. Mr. MacLean is a man of splendid executive ability, which has
been shown by his able judgment in all public enterprises with which he
has been connected. It has been said that the farmer needs ideas. In his
case he has ideas—big ones—and is not afraid to champion them even in
the face of strong opposition. He is a leader and a safe one to follow,
because of his canny Scotch nature. He is a good public speaker and has
such splendid control of himself that he has never been known to show
anger even under trying circumstances. In patriotic endeavor he is
always to the fore, having done his part ably and conscientiously ever
since the war began. As yet he has not taken unto himself a wife. He is
a Liberal in politics, and his name has often been mentioned in
connection with Parliamentary honors. He is a member of Port Elgin
Lodge, No. 429, A.F. & A.M., Camp McCrimmon, S.O.S., and the I.O.O.F.
His genial good nature, wide knowledge of municipal affairs and splendid
physique, make him an outstanding farmer in any company.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Heaton, Ernest= (Toronto, Ont.), born in 1861, at Bellws-yn-Rhos, North
Wales. Is the son of Rev. Hugh E. Heaton, of Plas Heaton, Denbighshire,
North Wales. Educated at Marlborough College and University College,
Oxford (B.A., 1884). Came to Canada on his graduation and was called to
the bar of Upper Canada at Osgoode Hall, 1887. Successfully practised
his profession in Toronto till 1892, when he removed to Goderich;
returned to Toronto in 1900. Now manager of Heaton’s Agency, Toronto.
Founded a semi-official system of publications, including Heaton’s
Annual, Heaton’s Provincial Booklets and Heaton’s Handbooks of Canadian
Resources. Has contributed many articles to Canadian and English
magazines and is the author of “Canada’s Problem” (1895); “The Trust
Company Idea and Its Development” (1904); and also editor of the
“Commercial Handbook of Canada.” Married Grace, daughter of H. G.
Attrill, of Baltimore and Ridgewood Park, Goderich, and is the father of
the following children: Helen Grace, born 1891, married Capt. Ruggles
George; Hugh Attrill, born 1893; Thomas Gilbert, born 1900; Catherine
Mary, born 1893. Mr. Heaton is a member of the Toronto Golf Club,
Toronto Hunt Club and Albany Club; is an adherent of the Church of
England, and has been a delegate to its Synods. He is a Conservative in
politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jones, Henry Victor Franklin= (Toronto, Ont.), Assistant General
Manager of the Canadian Bank of Commerce, son of the late Charles S.
Jones and Helen (MacDougall); mother sister of the late Honorable
William MacDougall, C.B., one of the “Fathers of Confederation.” Born at
St. Mary’s, Ontario, September 28, 1871; educated at Toronto; married
June 4, 1904, Bunella, daughter of the late E. W. Rathbun, Deseronto,
Ontario. Entered the service of the Canadian Bank of Commerce, December
13, 1887. Was at head office and New York branch, and manager of the
London, England branch of this bank. Chairman Editing Committee Journal
Canadian Bankers Association, member Ontario Provincial Housing
Committee. He is a member of the City Club and Conservative Club, and
the Royal Colonial Institute, London, England; Richmond Country Club,
New York; The York, Toronto, National, Racquet, and the Toronto Golf
Clubs. Mr. Jones is the father of four children, three girls and one
boy. His principal recreation is golf, racquets, fishing, shooting.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Middlebró, William S., K.C.= (Owen Sound, Ont.), son of John and
Margaret Middlebró. Born, October 17, 1868, at the town of Orangeville,
Ont. Educated at the Owen Sound Collegiate Institute and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto; called to the Bar, 1892, and created a King’s Counsel in 1910;
Mayor of the city of Owen Sound, 1889, and 1900. Married, September 2,
1903, to Laura J. Trethewey, who died April 21, 1907, leaving no
children; on October 22, 1913, married Pearl Irene, daughter of G. B.
Ryan, of Guelph, Ont. Mr. Middlebró, who enjoys a large legal practice
in the city of Owen Sound, was first elected to the House of Commons in
1908; re-elected in 1911 and again in 1917, by a majority of 2,291, to
represent the constituency of North Grey. He has been a prominent member
in the House since his first election to Parliament and has been
Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee and Chairman of the Special
Committee appointed to investigate Army boots in 1915, and also chief
Government Whip of the former Borden Government and of the Union
Government. Mr. Middlebró is a fluent platform speaker and well versed
in all questions of National importance. He is a member of the Church of
England, and belongs to the Sydenham Club of Owen Sound, and has one son
by his second marriage, William George.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marsh, Lieutenant-Colonel Lorne Wilmot= (Belleville, Ont.), born at
Frankford, Ont., June 29, 1871, son of John Secord Marsh and Lydia M.
(Hunt), U.E. Loyalist descent. Educated at the Public and High Schools,
Belleville. Matriculant of Toronto University and an Undergraduate.
Married, February 13, 1894, Euretta M., daughter of John and Isabella
Smith, Point Fortune, Quebec. Father of one son, John Edward, born June
16, 1900. Is a member of the Masonic Order and a Past Master, and a
Member of The Chapter, a Knight Templar, A.O.M.S., also the I.O.O.F. and
the I.O.F. Interested himself in the Municipal affairs of the city of
Belleville, and served as Alderman five years, 1903-1907, inclusive, and
elected Mayor in 1909 and 1910, Took active interest in military
matters: Served in the ranks of the 15th Argyll Light Infantry.
Lieutenant, 1898-9; Captain, 1899, and by gradual promotion rose to the
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel and Commanding Officer of the Battalion. Has
been a successful manufacturer since 1897, when he took over the
manufacturing business of the defunct G. & J. Brown Manufacturing
Company, with the late W. H. Henthorn, which was incorporated in 1908
and conducts the manufacture incident to a foundry, machine shop and
boiler shop, specializing in hoisting machinery, steel tanks and general
contractors’ machinery, and has recently built a $75,000.00 plant to
take care of the rapidly increasing output. The nomenclature of his
business is “Marsh Engineering Works, Limited.” Lieutenant-Colonel Marsh
is a Methodist in religion, and has been classed as an Independent
Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hebert, Zepherin=, President, Hudon, Hebert & Co., Ltd., Montreal,
Quebec, Wholesale Grocers and Wine Merchants, importing direct from
manufacturers in Europe, China, Japan, Asia Minor and United States.
Born in the city of Montreal on February 6, 1866, the son of Charles P.
and Rose (Busseau) Hebert, the subject of this sketch is in the prime of
life. Having attended the Catholic Commercial Academy and St. Mary’s
College, Mr. Hebert received a liberal education, and to this fact,
marked business ability, which he displayed at an early age, and a
winning personality are due his rapid rise, and present recognized
position in the Eastern Metropolis. Mr. Hebert’s business career and his
advancement is worthy of note. He joined his present firm as clerk in
1883, when but seventeen years of age; admitted partner ten years later;
became Director and Assistant Manager, 1906; elected Vice-President,
1908; President, 1911. This business was established, 1839, under the
name of E. & V. Hudon; later, V. Hudon, J. Hudon & Co.; Hudon, Hebert &
Cie, 1883; incorporated under present name, 1906, the late C. P. Hebert
being first President. They now employ a staff of 170, and have 25
travelling salesmen constantly visiting all Canada and selling their
goods from the Atlantic to the Pacific oceans; their turn-over ending
January 31, 1913, was $4,000,000, an increase of $1,000,000 over the
past two years’ business. For the last twenty-five years Mr. Hebert has
been a member of the Montreal Board of Trade, second Vice-President in
1915, first Vice-President in 1916, and in 1917 was accorded the honor
of being elected President of that influential body, being the first
French-Canadian upon whom such a signal mark of distinction has been
conferred. He was appointed a member of the Council in February, 1913;
elected member Transportation Bureau December, 1913; has held most of
important offices, Dominion Grocers’ Guild, and is now President;
Chairman, Prize Committee, Province Quebec; President Montreal Wholesale
Liquor Association; Treasurer and Governor, Notre Dame Hospital;
Governor Montreal General Hospital, Governor Laval University. Mr.
Hebert is a dominant force in the cultivation of harmonious relations
between the Provinces of Ontario and Quebec, and was one of the
promoters of the Bonne Entente movement, having presided as Chairman at
the Conference when the idea was first crystallized, which led to such
happy results, and is at present a member of the executive. Of broad
opinions, and liberal views, he has been described as “a thorough-going
Canadian.” He is an ardent admirer of British institutions, with a fine
pride of his own race and its splendid traditions. His opinions on
economic questions, of which he has been a close student, are held in
the highest regard and his addresses before the Canadian Credit Men’s
Association on “Credit and Co-operation,” and before the Wholesale
Grocers’ Guild, on “Evolution of a Credit Plan” were considered masterly
expositions of the subjects dealt with. Mr. Hebert has had a
distinguished military career. He served with the 65th Regiment, Mount
Royal Rifles, as private, 1882; saw active service in the North-west
Rebellion, 1885; promoted to Sergeant and Captain, and retired with the
rank of Major, after eighteen years of service. With such a fine record
he is enthusiastic on the winning of the war, and prominent in all
undertakings of a patriotic nature. With admirable diction he is able to
speak English and French, and has all the courtesy and charm of manner
which characterizes the educated French-Canadian. He married Blanche
Robidoux, daughter of J. O. Robidoux, Oct. 9, 1894; has two sons,
Charles P. and Jacques Robidoux, and two daughters, Marielle and
Gertrude. He belongs to the following clubs: Canadian, Jockey.
Recreations: General, military affairs. Politics, Independent Liberal.
Religion, Roman Catholic. Address, Montreal, Quebec.




[Illustration: L. J. Breithaupt, Kitchener.
Hugh Paton, Montreal.]




=McMahon, Edward= (Ottawa), arrived in Canada from Ireland in 1882, and
immediately entered into the real estate business as agent for the
owners of By Estate. In 1891 he was appointed to the Secretaryship of
the Central Canada Exhibition Association, and held that position until
1916, when he retired. During this period he remained in the real estate
business and was also Secretary-Treasurer for Registered Sale Pure Bred
Cattle. Mr. McMahon is a member of the firm of Bate & McMahon, builders
of Connaught Rifle Range, South March (1913), and member of the firm of
Bate, McMahon & Co., Contractors with the Dominion Government for the
construction of Valcartier Camp, Quebec; Camp Sewell, Manitoba; and Camp
Hughes, Alberta; Camp Borden, the largest Military Camp in the world;
also builders of Aviation Camps, viz., Borden, Mohawk and Leaside, under
contract with the Imperial Munitions Board. Mr. McMahon is also senior
member of the firm of E. McMahon & Son, Insurance and Real Estate
Agents, and is on the Board of Directors of the following companies,
viz., Dominion Hardwoods, Limited; the Ottawa Construction Company; the
Standard Paving Company, and the Ottawa Artificial Ice Company. It was
owing to Mr. McMahon’s marked business and executive ability during the
twenty-five years that he held the Secretaryship and, practically, the
General Management, that the Central Canada Exhibition Association, next
to Toronto, is now the best institution of the kind in Canada. Each
year, from the time of his appointment, it grew stronger, more
attractive and more valuable, until to-day it is second only to
Toronto’s Great Annual Exhibition. Mr. McMahon came to Canada from
Monaghan, Ireland, where he was born, January 17, 1862. His father and
mother were Edward McMahon, farmer and accountant, and Jane Mitchell. He
was educated at the National and Collegiate Schools and graduated with
honors. He married Susan Jane Haram, daughter of Robert Haram, Ottawa,
and has two sons and one daughter, viz.: H. E. McMahon, Lillian M.
McMahon and Robert M. McMahon. He is a member of the Loyal Orange
Institution and a Mason; is a Conservative in politics and a Protestant
in religion. He resides at 87 James St. and has offices in the Central
Chambers.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jacobs, Samuel W., K.C., M.P.=, senior member of the legal firm of
Jacobs, Couture & Fitch, Montreal, Que. Has been President of the Baron
de Hirsch Institute, 1912-1914, and is a member of the Canadian
Committee of the Jewish Colonization Association of Paris, which
administers the Baron de Hirsch Fund. He is an Honorary Vice-President
of the Jewish Publication Society of America, and was a director and
member of the governing board of the Montreal Reform Club for many
years. Mr. Jacobs has contributed numerous papers on legal subjects to
various law Reviews, and is the author of “Railway Law of Canada,” also
joint editor of Jacobs and Garneau’s Code of Civil Procedure. He was
born in Lancaster, Glengarry County, Ontario, the son of William and
Hannah Jacobs, and received his early education at Montreal High School,
graduating from McGill University in 1893, as B.C.L., with first rank
honors, and from Laval University in the following year as LL.M. cum
Laude. He was elected to the House of Commons at the general elections
in 1917 for the George Etienne Cartier Division of Montreal by over
6,000 majority, defeating two opponents. In 1906 he was created a King’s
Counsel. Mr. Jacobs married Miss Amy Stein, daughter of the late Michael
Stein of Baltimore, Md., in April, 1917, and they have issue one
daughter, Hannah, born in 1918. He is a member of the Jewish religion,
and a Liberal in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Boyer, Major Gustave=, son of Benjamin Boyer and Angelique Latour (both
French-Canadians), born November 29, 1871, at St. Laurent, Jacques
Cartier County, near Montreal. Educated at St. Laurent College and Laval
University. Married April 10, 1907 to Pamela, daughter of François
Rheaume of Montreal. Formerly a public lecturer on agriculture for the
Quebec Government. Has been connected with both “La Patrie” and “Le
Canada,” as agricultural editor. Founded the “Echo de Vaudreuil,” 1897;
was alderman and mayor of the town of Rigaud for nine years. Has had an
active military career, being Major and Second in Command of the 17th
Regiment Duke of York’s Royal Canadian Hussars, of which he organized B.
Squadron in Vaudreuil County, and afterwards organizer and first
commanding officer of the 33rd Regiment of Hussars, Vaudreuil and
Soulanges. First elected to the House of Commons as a Liberal at the
general election of 1904, and re-elected in 1908, 1911, and 1917. Major
Boyer is recognized as an authority on all matters pertaining to
agriculture.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Crothers, Hon. Thomas Wilson, B.A., K.C.=, son of William and Nancy
(Grey), was born at Northport, Prince Edward County, Ontario, January 1,
1850. Educated at the Public School, Northport, and Albert College,
Belleville, and graduated from Victoria College with the degree of B.A.
in 1873, taught public schools in Lennox and Prince Edward for two years
and was head master of Wardsville High School 1874-75-76. Studied law in
the office of Foy, Macdonald & Tupper, and Messrs. Bethune, Osler &
Moss, in 1877-78-79. On being called to the Bar, began practice of Law
in St. Thomas in 1880 and for a number of years was in partnership with
Samuel Price, formerly Mining Commissioner for Ontario, under the firm
name of Crothers & Price. Appointed a K.C. in 1906; contested West Elgin
as Liberal Conservative candidate for a seat in the Legislative Assembly
for Ontario at the general elections in 1879, was defeated by the late
Dr. Cascadden, who was elected by a majority of 7. Was Chairman of the
Text Book Commission appointed by the Ontario Government in 1906 to
enquire into the price of Public and High School Text Books, which
enquiry resulted in the price being very greatly reduced, when he
declined to receive any emolument for his services; appointed governor
of Toronto University 1908. First elected to the House of Commons at the
general elections in 1908 as a Conservative member for West Elgin, and
re-elected at the general elections in 1911 and sworn in as Privy
Councillor and appointed Minister of Labor in the Borden Government,
Oct. 10, 1911. In 1917 elected as a Unionist and retained the portfolio
of Minister of Labour until November last, when he resigned owing to ill
health. Upon accepting this office was returned by acclamation. The Hon.
Mr. Crothers accompanied Premier Borden on his western tour June, 1911,
and is recognized as a platform speaker of splendid presence and much
force. Married July 26, 1883, Mary E., daughter of the late Dr. J. A.
Burns, of St. Thomas. The Minister is a member of the First Methodist
Church, St. Thomas.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pyne, Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. Robert Allan, M.D., LL.D.=, Minister of
Education for the Province of Ontario, was born at Newmarket, Ontario,
October 29, 1853; son of Thomas Pyne, M.D., and Hester Jane Roberts,
cousin of Field-Marshal Earl Roberts; educated at public schools,
grammar school and University of Toronto; physician and surgeon; M.B.,
M.D. College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario, of which he was for
many years secretary and registrar; LL.D. (hon.) University of Toronto,
1905, and Queen’s University, Kingston. Married Mary Isobel, daughter of
His Honor Judge Macqueen, County of Oxford; has issue: Mona Aileen,
Frederick Roberts, Frank Herbert. As a youth played football and cricket
as member of the Toronto Cricket and Lacrosse Clubs. Practised his
profession in Toronto and took active part in public affairs as member
of Toronto School Board, Public Library Board and Toronto Board of
Health. While resident of Haldimand County served in the 37th Haldimand
Rifles and was subsequently Assistant Surgeon, Royal Grenadiers,
Toronto. Having been prominent in politics, was elected to Ontario
Legislature as Conservative member for East Toronto, at the general
elections of 1898, and on the redistribution of the city in 1914 was
chosen to represent North-East Toronto, which seat he resigned in 1918.
Recently appointed a Governor of the University of Toronto. On the
formation of the Whitney Administration (1905-1914) was appointed
Minister of Education, and reappointed to the same office in the Hearst
Administration (1914—). In 1918 he resigned to give place to Hon. Dr.
Cody and accepted the post of Clerk of York County. During his term of
office the educational system was greatly developed, the legislative
grants to schools largely increased, the policy of cheap text-books
inaugurated, and a complete organization for technical training and
agricultural teaching in elementary and secondary schools effected. The
successful expansion of the Provincial Schools for Deaf Children (at
Belleville) and for blind children (at Brantford), is due in great
measure to his encouragement and his knowledge as a physician. In 1915
he was requested by the Ontario Government to visit England in
connection with the gift by the province of a Military Hospital for
wounded soldiers, and gazetted a lieutenant-colonel in the Canadian
Army. The hospital was built at Orpington, Kent, England, under his
supervision, and has been pronounced the best equipped and organized
institution of its kind erected during the war. Has twice visited the
Canadian forces on the battle line in France. Is prominent in a number
of societies, including the Masonic Order, the Orange Association, Sons
of England, etc., etc. In religion a member of St. Paul’s Church of
England. Clubs: Toronto, Albany, Royal Canadian Yacht, Canadian Military
Institute, Riverside Athletic Club. Residence, 21 Dunbar Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Shier, Walter C., M.D.= (Uxbridge, Ont.), is the son of James Shier and
Mary Ann Mooney, and was born at Leaksdale, Ont., June 23, 1869, and
educated at one of the Public Schools of Scott Township and the High
School of Uxbridge, in the County of Ontario, and also at Toronto
University, graduating in Arts with the degree of B.A. in 1897, and in
Medicine with the degree of M.B. with honors, in 1907. Doctor Shier’s
grandfather, John Shier, was one of the early settlers of the Township
of Brock, where he located in 1827, a little north of the present West
Brock Anglican Church, and was of Irish Palatine stock. His
great-great-great-grandfather was driven out of the Palatinate by the
wars of Louis XIV of France. He left his native country in 1709 and
among thirteen thousand of his countrymen, threw himself upon the
generosity of the British Government. After living one summer in
England, he settled at Balligarane in Limerick County, Ireland, August,
1709, on the estate of Lord Southwell. The Doctor’s progenitors were all
of the farming class. The story of the expulsion of his ancestors from
that portion of France which is now known as the Provinces of
Alsace-Lorraine, is of absorbing interest. Dr. Shier after considerable
trouble and research, has traced the history of his forefathers during
the interesting period referred to, and has written a book entitled “A
Family from Balligarane,” being a history of the Irish Palatines. Dr.
Shier was married on the 4th of February, 1908, to Martha Kaufmann,
daughter of the late Henry Kaufmann, of Wellesley, Ont., and has one
adopted daughter, Elsie Grace Ball, age 7. He is a member of the
Oddfellows and of the Masonic Order, being Past Master of Zeredatha
Lodge, A.F. & A.M., Uxbridge. In religion he is a Presbyterian and a
Conservative in politics. The Doctor has been Coroner of the County of
Ontario for some years and Surgeon of the G.T.R. He devotes his
attention very closely to his profession and specializes on Eye, Ear,
Nose and Throat, Consultations and Anæsthetics. He is an ardent motorist
and expert marksman. The Doctor is a man of fine literary tastes and
exceedingly well posted on all matters of national importance. He
entertains very decided opinions on public questions and is never afraid
to have them known.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, Wm. John= (St. Catharines, Ont.), son of John and Emma
(Rudsdale) Robertson. Father, a Scotch Canadian; mother, a native of
Yorkshire, England. Born Westmeath, County Renfrew, Ontario, Sept. 12,
1846; educated Perth High School, Toronto University (B.A. with gold
medal in metaphysics, ethics and civil polity; silver medal in
mathematics; 1st honors in history and Prince of Wales prize for highest
standing in 1873); and Victoria University (LL.B., 1883). Married, 1887,
Margaret K., youngest daughter of John Junkin, St. Catharines, Ontario,
for a time assistant to late Professor Kingston, Meteorological Bureau,
Toronto, and 38 years as chief teacher of mathematics and history, St.
Catharines Collegiate Institute; for 7 years was examiner in
metaphysics, ethics, modern history, and political science, Toronto
University; was also examiner for Upper Canada College and McMaster
University; was Ontario Representative on the Committee of the Dominion
Education Association for securing and revising Canada manuscripts from
a Dominion standpoint, 1892; first President Canadian History
Association, 1895; founded Robertson Prize in Canadian Constitutional
History, Toronto University; formerly a Senator Victoria University;
Pres. Ontario Library Assoc., Mathematics Assoc., and chairman St.
Catharines Free Library Board, also Vice-Pres. Y.M.C.A. Ont. and Quebec;
Pres. Canadian Club, St. Catharines, and Pres. Local St. Andrews
Society. Member of the St. Catharines College Institute Board, Pres. of
the Local Branch Bible Society. Author, sketch of “Canadian Banking and
Currency since 1867,” “The Teacher’s Relation to the State,” “A
Comparison of the Political Institutions of Canada with those of Great
Britain and Ireland, and with those of the United States,” “The Growth
of the Canadian Constitution,” “The High School History of England and
Canada,” “The Public School History of England and Canada,” for many
years of other authorized Text Books in Ontario and other provinces, and
of numerous other works of a like nature and reputation. In politics an
Independent Liberal; a Methodist in religion. A member of the Methodist
Board of Education, and for 32 years a Delegate to the General
Conference and member of Superannuation Fund Board of the Church; a
believer in Free Trade as far as it can be obtained; the development of
a Canadian sentiment and literature; and the moderation of party
feeling. Member of the Golf Club, St. Catharines, and of the Canadian
Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Seguin, Paul Arthur, B.S., LL.B.= (L’Assomption, Que.), son of Felix
Seguin and Vitaline Noiseux, both French-Canadians. Born October 2,
1875, at Charlemagne; educated at L’Assomption College and Laval
University, from which latter institution he graduated with the degree
of B.S. and LL.B. Married, October 30, 1899, to Marie Anna Rivest,
daughter of François Rivest and Delphine McGoun, and is the father of
the following children: Roland, Rolande, Jeanette, Fernande and Pauline.
Mr. Seguin is a Notary Public by profession and has been
Secretary-Treasurer of the town of Terrebonne from 1900 to 1907, and
Secretary-Treasurer of the Parish of St. Paul l’Ermite from 1907 to
1912, and now practises his profession at the town of L’Assomption, of
which town he is the Mayor, and member of the School Board. Mr. Seguin
was first elected to the House of Commons as a Liberal in 1908 and again
in 1911, and also at the general elections in 1917. He has always been a
staunch Liberal and a member of the Roman Catholic Church.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Smith, John Charles, B.A.=, son of William Smith and his wife Sarah
Josephine Whitlow, was born at Kingston, Ont., November 28, 1875.
Educated at Kingston Public Schools, Kingston Collegiate Institute, and
Queen’s University, Kingston, from which latter institution he graduated
with the degree of B.A. in 1898, with honors in Classics. Mr. Smith
taught in the Public Schools in Frontenac County, Ont., and was
subsequently Classical Master in Dutton High School and in Dundas High
School, afterwards Classical Master and Principal in the Wingham High
School, and filled a similar position in the Ingersoll Collegiate
Institute. In 1916 was appointed Inspector of Public Schools for the
Inspectorate of Elgin East. Married Rose, daughter of John Critchley, of
Toronto, and has one child, Hugh Cyprian Whitlow. Mr. Smith is a member
of the Canadian Club and the Masonic and Orange Orders, and of the
Canadian Order of Foresters. He is an Anglican in religion and a member
of Trinity Church, St. Thomas, at which city he resides.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Samuel, Sigmund=, one of the most interesting of Toronto’s wholesale
merchants is Sigmund Samuel, son of Lewis Samuel, who, with his wife,
formerly Miss Kate Sickleman, came to Toronto in 1855, where Mr. Samuel
founded his iron, steel and metal business, now located at the corner of
King and Spadina Avenue, Toronto, at 120 Broadway, New York, and 18
Philpot Lane, London, E.C., England, and is also vice-president of the
Metallic Roofing Co. of Toronto. It is now the oldest established firm
in direct succession in Canada in this branch of industry. The present
head of the firm was born in Toronto on October 24, 1868, and educated
at the Model School and Upper Canada College, from which he graduated in
1884. In 1898 he married L. May Mandelson, daughter of L. P. Mandelson,
a retired merchant of London, England, and their family numbers four:
Kathleen May, Lewis Sigmund, Norman Sigmund and Florence May. Of Jewish
religion, in politics Conservative, Mr. Samuel’s chief recreations are
golf and motoring. He is a member of the York Club, Toronto Hunt Club,
the Albany, the Lambton Golf and Country Club, the Caledon Mountain
Trout Club and, in England, of the Carlton Club and the Hanger Hill Golf
Club. He is also a member of the council of the Art Museum of Toronto.
Nor is Mr. Samuel neglectful of philanthrophy, for he is a life member
of the Western Hospital, Toronto, and a governor of the Children’s
Hospital, Great Ormond St., London, England. Mr. Samuel is truly
Imperialistic in maintaining his English connections, and maintains his
English address at 64 Porchester Terrace, London. His Canadian home is
at 140 Madison Avenue, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rose, Hon. Mr. Justice Hugh Edward=, (Toronto). Son of the late Hon.
Mr. Justice J. E. Rose, LL.D., Judge of the Supreme Court of Judicature
for Ontario. Born in Toronto the 16th of September, 1869. Educated at
Toronto Collegiate Institute and the University of Toronto, from which
latter institution he graduated in 1891 with the degree of B.A., and
received the degree of LL.B. in 1892. Called to the bar in 1894. Created
K.C. in 1908. Before his elevation to the Bench, was a member of the
firm of Fasken, Cowan, Chadwick & Rose. Some time Examiner in Law,
Toronto University, and one of the examiners of the Law Society of Upper
Canada. Appointed to the Bench the 4th of December, 1916. Member of the
following clubs: Toronto Club, and Toronto Golf Club. In religion, Mr.
Justice Rose is a member of the Church of England.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mills, Charles Henry, M.L.A.= (Kitchener), was born at Clinton, Ont.,
October 27, 1861; son of Rev. John Mills and his wife, Eliza Coleman.
Educated at the Grimsby High School. Was President of the Kitchener
Board of Trade, 1904-5, and Alderman for the City, 1911-12. Has been
member of the following boards in the City of Kitchener: Parks
Commissioner, Light and Power Commission, and Collegiate Institute. Was
first President of the Canadian Club in his home City in 1908. First
elected to the Ontario Legislature at a by-election, October 28, 1912,
as the Conservative representative for the constituency of North
Waterloo and again returned in the General Election of 1914 by a
majority of 1454, being the largest majority ever given a Conservative
candidate in the riding. In religion, the member for North Waterloo is a
Methodist. He married Bernice Mitton, daughter of William J. Mitton of
Dutton, September 7, 1898, and is a member of the Kitchener and Waterloo
Clubs and of the following societies: Masonic, Canadian Order of
Foresters, and Knights of Pythias.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hazen, Hon. Sir John Douglas, K.C.M.G., K.C., LL.D., O.C.= (St. John
City and County). Descended from Edward Hazen, who moved from
Northumberland, Eng., to Massachusetts in 1648, and more immediately
from John Hazen, who, with his brother William, came from Haverhill,
Mass., and settled at Portland, New Brunswick, in 1775. Son of the late
James King Hazen, mother a daughter of the late Hon. John A. Beckwith.
Maternal grandfather was Provincial Secretary of New Brunswick and
member of the Legislative Council. Paternal grandfather was an officer
in H.M. Army, and Sheriff of Sunbury County for over 25 years. Born at
Oromocto, Sunbury County, New Brunswick, June 5, 1860. Educated at
Collegiate School, Fredericton, and University, New Brunswick; degrees,
B.A., B.C.L., LL.D., University New Brunswick. Married Sept. 22, 1884,
Ada C., daughter of James Tibbits, of Fredericton. Five children:
Douglas King, Katie Elizabeth, Frances Edith, James Murray (Lieutenant
C.E.F., died of wounds in France) and Ada A. A barrister-at-law.
Director of the Eastern Trust Co., Senator of the University, New
Brunswick and ex-President Alumni Society thereof. Ex-President of the
Barristers’ Society, New Brunswick. Was Alderman of Fredericton for
three years and Mayor too. Removed to St. John, 1890. President of
Horticultural Society. Returned to House of Commons, general election,
1891, for St. John city and county. In 1891, moved address in reply in
House of Commons; an unsuccessful candidate 1896; elected to House of
Assembly 1899-1903 and 1908 (Sunbury County). Chosen 1899 Leader of the
Opposition. The Opposition Party under his leadership administered a
crushing defeat to the Robinson Government at the general election,
March, 1908, and at the close of the polls he found himself at the head
of a contingent of 31 supporters, as against 12 adherents of the
government. Upon the resignation of Premier Robinson and his colleagues,
Mr. Hazen was summoned by His Honor the Lieut.-Governor to form a
government, which he did, assuming the portfolio of Premier and
Attorney-General. The Cabinet was sworn in, March 24, 1908, and all the
members thereof re-elected by acclamation April 7. Retained office until
Oct. 10, 1911, when he was sworn of the Privy Council and appointed
Minister of Marine and Fisheries in Premier Borden’s Cabinet. Dr.
Daniel, the M.P. elect for St. John City and County, retiring, Mr. Hazen
was placed in nomination and elected by acclamation. Member of
Inter-Provincial Conference, Ottawa, and of Maritime Provincial
Conference (1910), attended coronation of King George and Queen Mary
(1911) as representative of the Province of New Brunswick. Delegate to
Washington on two occasions in connection with the Hague Award _re_
North Atlantic Fisheries and delegate to England with Premier Borden,
_re_ Naval affairs (1912). In the latter part of 1917 he became Chairman
of the Canadian Section of the International Fisheries Commission to
settle all outstanding fisheries questions between Canada and the United
States; appointed Chief Justice New Brunswick November, 1917. Created a
K.C.M.G. for public services same year. Member of Union Club, St. John;
Mount Royal Club, Montreal; Rideau Club, Ottawa; Royal Colonial
Institute, London Eng., and of the following societies: St. George’s,
Loyalist, New Brunswick, Historical, and Natural History, St. John, N.B.
Recreation, golf and motoring. Member of St. Paul’s (Anglican) Church,
St. John, New Brunswick. Address, St. John, N.B.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sinclair, Victor Albert, B.A., LL.B.=, born May 16, 1872, at
Tilsonburg, Ont., son of Dr. Lachlin C. Sinclair and Roxilana Nan
Norman, both Canadians. Dr. Sinclair contested North Norfolk on three
occasions in the Conservative interests against the late Hon. John
Charlton. Educated at the Public and High Schools of Tilsonburg, the
University of Toronto and Osgoode Hall; graduated B.A. in 1892 with
first-class honors in Political Science and English, took degree of
LL.B. with honors in 1894; called to the Bar at Osgoode Hall, in 1895,
receiving medal. Commenced practice at Tilsonburg with W. A. Dowler,
K.C., as Dowler & Sinclair, has practised alone for past eight years,
entered Municipal Council of his native town in 1896, and served three
years as councillor and two years as Mayor, was high school trustee from
1910 until 1919, member of Council, Board of Trade. President of
Tilsonburg Conservative Club, President Tilsonburg Horticultural Society
1910-1919, Vice-President Bowling Club, Vice-President Tilsonburg Shoe
Company, Limited. The subject of this sketch was first elected to the
Ontario Legislature for South Oxford at the general elections of 1914 by
a majority of four over Colonel T. R. Mayberry; on recount this majority
was increased to five, and on appeal reduced to one. Mr. Sinclair is
recognized as a valuable member of the Legislature, he was acting
Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee during the session of 1916, he
is a member of several fraternal societies, including the Masonic, of
which he is now Worshipful Master, C.O.F., A.O.U.W., also O.C.H.C., of
which he is Supreme Leader for Canada, and has made a special study of
Municipal and Company law. He enjoys a large practice, and is the
solicitor for several townships in the counties of Oxford, Elgin, and
Norfolk. Married February 6, 1901, to Gertrude L., daughter of George
Draper, of Listowel, and is father of two children: Mildred Roxilana,
and Gertrude Helen. In religion the member for South Oxford is a
Methodist. His chief recreation is bowling and horticulture.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, Norman= (Walkerton, Ont.), author of “The History of the
County of Bruce,” and Treasurer of the County of Bruce, Walkerton, Ont.,
was born on June 27, 1845, in Belleville, Ontario. His father, Peter
Robertson, was a merchant of Scottish birth and the son of a
Presbyterian minister, at Kilmaurs, Ayrshire. Mr. Robertson’s mother,
Sarah Ross, was born in England, although of Highland descent, her
grandfather being one of those who followed “Bonnie Prince Charlie” into
England in 1745. Norman Robertson attended the Grammar School at
Belleville, but left school when only eleven years of age, that he might
accompany his father and assist him in his business when he came to the
County of Bruce and settled at Kincardine in 1856. The disadvantage
arising from leaving school at so early an age was in part overcome by
private study and tuition. In 1863 he went to Montreal, taking a
position in a wholesale dry goods warehouse, rising to the position of
English buyer. In 1877 he returned to Kincardine and took over the
business of his father, who retired. He was married at Montreal in 1871,
to Lilla M. Warren, daughter of S. R. Warren, builder of church organs
at Montreal, and afterwards at Toronto. His family consists of three
sons and two daughters. In religion Mr. Robertson is a Presbyterian, and
has been an active worker in Sunday School work for over fifty years. In
politics he is a Conservative. The position of Treasurer of the County
of Bruce became vacant in 1887, and Mr. Robertson was chosen from among
twenty-five applicants. A desire to have put in book form and so
preserved, the records of the settlement of the County of Bruce, induced
the County Council in 1896 to offer a prize for a Historical Sketch of
the County. The sketch prepared by Mr. Robertson carried off, jointly
with another, the prize. This initial effort was followed in 1906 by a
volume of 560 pages bearing the title “The History of the County of
Bruce.” This work has been very favorably commented upon and classed as
one of the best of the County Histories of the Province that have been
published. Mr. Robertson was with the Victoria Rifles, of Montreal, when
that regiment went to the front at the time of the Fenian Raids in 1866,
and has received his military medal therefor.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Price, Samuel, B.C.L.= (Toronto, Ont.), Chairman, Workmen’s
Compensation Board. Born at Caradoc Township, Middlesex County, Ont.,
February 16, 1863, son of Richard and Mary (Whiting) Price. Educated at
local Public School, Strathroy and St. Thomas Collegiate Institutes;
Trinity University (B.C.L., gold medal); Osgoode Hall (scholarship each
year, gold medal, 1895). Taught school for some time; read law with
McLean & Son, St. Thomas, and Magee, McKillop & Murphy, London; called
to Ontario Bar, September, 1895; practised at St. Thomas; Secretary,
Elgin Law Association. Royal Commissioner (Ontario) for settlement of
Cobalt mining disputes, 1905; Mining Commissioner for Ontario,
1906-1912; Royal Commissioner for inquiry into alleged fraudulent action
of Fort Frances Lumber Co., and Keewatin Lumber Co., 1909; Commissioner
_re_ eight-hour day for miners in Ontario, 1912-1913; reported to
Ontario Government on eight-hour law and drafted Bill (now in force);
Royal Commissioner to investigate mining labor troubles on Vancouver
Island, 1913; assisted in general revision of Mining Act of Ontario,
1908; drafted amendments to mining laws and other Ontario legislation,
1907-1913; refused Chairmanship of Ontario Railway and Municipal Board;
engaged (on recommendation of late Chief Commissioner Mabee) in
consolidation and revision of Railway Act, 1912-1913; recommended by
late Chief Commissioner Mabee for appointment as a member of Railway
Board of Canada; appointed to present position Aug., 1914; President
West Elgin Liberal-Conservative Association, 1904-1905. Member Public
Library Board. Author “Mining Commissioner’s Cases,” 1910; articles on
Mining Law, “Canada Law Times” and Journal Canadian Mining Institute,
1910-1911. Societies: A.F. & A.M., K.P., C.O.C.F., C.O.F. Liberal
Conservative; Anglican.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jones, George Burpee= (Apohaqui, N.B.), son of Stephen Jones and Susan
Eliza, his wife, both Canadians, was born January 9, 1866, at Belle Isle
Bay, Kings County, N.B. Educated at Apohaqui Superior School. At twelve
years of age Mr. Jones entered the employ of the late J. A. Sinnott, and
after six years resigned and accepted the position of General Manager
with Hugh McLean, of Salmon River, Queens County, in general business
and lumber. Resigned that position in September, 1889, and commenced
business in his present stand in Apohaqui and is senior member of the
firm of Jones Brothers, general merchants and lumber manufacturers, of
Apohaqui. Is president of the “St. John Daily Standard.” Has been a
member of the School Board of Apohaqui Superior School for the past 25
years. First elected member of the New Brunswick Legislative Assembly in
1908 and re-elected at the general elections in 1912, and re-elected
general elections in 1917. Is of Loyalist descent and a member of the
Presbyterian Church. Married August 15, 1888, to Melissa J., daughter of
William Fowler, and is the father of two children, Colby Herbert and
Muriel B.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Izzard, Dennis Jabez=, son of James Izzard and Elizabeth Whetstone, was
born in Norton, Hertfordshire, England. With his parents he came to
Canada in 1861, and for a time worked as a boy at farming. He secured
his education in the schools of those early days under the excellent
teachers who have left their stamp on the men and women of to-day.
Growing to manhood Mr. Izzard decided to follow contracting and
building, in which he achieved success for many years. Many of the
public buildings in Bruce County were erected under his guidance, and
stand as a monument to his ability. He made Port Elgin his home shortly
after coming to the County of Bruce, and he has ever been one of its
leading men. He served as councillor in the village council for a number
of years. In 1880-81 he served as reeve. Retiring, he was out of
municipal life until 1890-91, when he again adorned the reeve’s chair.
In 1909 the people again made him their choice, and he continuously
represented them from that time until 1918. At the January meeting of
the Bruce County Council in 1917, he received the marked honor of being
elected warden of the county, by acclamation, he being the second man in
the history of the county to have been so honored. He is kindly and
courteous in disposition, and nowhere has it shown to better advantage
than in his able handling of public bodies he has been connected with.
His advice has always been received with the fullest confidence that he
knows the matters being dealt with from a first hand knowledge. In
January, 1918, he was chosen by the county council of Bruce as
superintendent of the good roads of the county. In politics he is a
Liberal, and his parents were English Methodists. He is fond of curling,
fishing, shooting, in all of which he is skilful. He is a member of Port
Elgin Lodge, No. 429, A.F. & A.M. In April, 1891, he married Mrs.
Frilzinger, Waterloo County. Two children were born, Stewart Elmo,
deceased, and Miss Pearl E., who resides at home.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Shutt, Frank Thomas= (Ottawa, Ont.), son of William D. and Charlotte
Shutt. Born, London, England, September 15, 1859. Educated at London and
the University of Toronto, from which latter institution he graduated in
1885 with honors in Natural Science; M.A., 1886; he also has had
conferred on him D.Sc. and is regarded as one of the highest authorities
on Agricultural Chemistry in America. Dominion Chemist and Assistant
Director Experimental Farms. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of
Canada, Fellow of Chemical Society (Eng.), Fellow of the Institute of
Chemistry (Eng.), and Fellow of the American Chemical Society, and also
Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Since
1887 he has been Chemist of the Dominion Experimental Farms. Dr. Shutt
founded the “Cawthorne Medal” in Natural Science, Toronto University,
and has been examiner in Chemistry there. President of Toronto
University Graduates’ Club, Ottawa, 1894-5; President of Ottawa Field
and Naturalists’ Club, Ottawa, 1895; President, Ottawa Schubert Club,
1896. President Chem. and Phys. Section Royal Society 1916-17. British
Judge, World’s Fair, Chicago, 1893, and is the author of the reports and
bulletins of the Dominion Chemists’ Experimental Farm and of many papers
on original investigations in the Royal Society of Canada. The Doctor is
a man of fine musical tastes and is especially interested in the organ.
He finds recreation in pictorial photography.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Montgomery, Hugh John= (Wetaskiwin, Alta.), was born on the 31st of
July, 1876, at Bedeque, P.E.I., son of James Montgomery and Kate
McFarlane, both Canadians, born of Scotch parents. Educated at the
Public School, Bedeque, P.E.I., and Charlottetown Business College. Went
to Wetaskiwin in the Province of Alberta in 1898. Elected to the City
Council as Alderman in 1905, and served four years and elected Mayor in
1910. First elected to the Provincial Legislature as Liberal candidate
for the constituency of Wetaskiwin at a by-election on November 17,
1914, defeating his opponent by a majority of 501. Re-elected at the
Provincial general elections of June 7, 1917, by a majority of 817.
Married December 31, 1903, Adelaide, daughter of Clifford E. Vaughn, of
Minneapolis, Minn., and is the father of two children: Kenneth Gordon,
and Lawrence Vaughn. Mr. Montgomery is a successful general merchant. In
religion he is a Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacDonald, Selkirk M.=, Portage la Prairie, Man. A thorough westerner
is Selkirk M. MacDonald, Deputy Clerk Crown and Pleas, C.J.D.; Surrogate
Court Clerk, C.J.D., and County Court Clerk, since November 1, 1903. Mr.
MacDonald, who succeeded his father, John MacDonald, in the above
offices, was born in Portage la Prairie on February 1, 1875. His mother
was Isabella MacKay, a daughter of Selkirk Douglas MacKay, who had the
distinction of being the first white child born in Manitoba, his parents
having come to Canada with the Lord Selkirk settlers. Mr. MacDonald is
not only a westerner by birth and by all his traditions, he was educated
in Portage la Prairie and has always taken a prominent part in the
outdoor sports which are such a feature of Western Canadian life. In his
youth he played hockey and lacrosse with the Victorias of Winnipeg, and
the Portage la Prairie clubs and was also a member of the famous
lacrosse club of Victoria, B.C. In bicycling, football, baseball,
running, jumping he was always prominent, and he finds his greatest
present recreations in hunting, curling, motoring and trap-shooting. Mr.
MacDonald is not married, is a Presbyterian in religion, a prominent
member of the Masonic Society, and a member of the Portage Club, and of
the Portage Country Club.




[Illustration: THE LATE W. F. COWAN
Oshawa]




=Sainte-Pierre, F.=, Managing Director and Secretary-Treasurer of Credit
Canada, Limitée, the largest French-Canadian Bond houses in Canada. Mr.
Sainte-Pierre was born at Chicoutimi on the 13th December, 1885, a son
of F. Sainte-Pierre, general merchant, and Josephine Saint-Pierre. He
was educated at Chicoutimi Seminary and the Commercial Academy of
Quebec, graduating at Quebec in 1902. As a student, Mr. Sainte-Pierre
was a frequent contributor to the Society Magazine. He was married on
7th October, 1913, to Miss Noemi Decary, daughter of the late A. C.
Decary, N.P., Registrar. He has two children, Helene and Jean
Sainte-Pierre. He is a member of the Maccabees and a Roman Catholic. Mr.
Sainte-Pierre is a Liberal in politics, in which he takes a keen
interest, his name having been suggested as a candidate for
parliamentary honors on more than one occasion. Mr. Sainte-Pierre is an
enthusiastic motorist and also keenly interested in motor boating and
fishing. Having been a dealer in a very large way in municipal
securities, Mr. Sainte-Pierre has for the past few years given a great
deal of attention to the improvement of municipal borrowing. He favors
the appointment of a Government Expert Officer to safeguard and study
the best methods of borrowing money, realizing that many municipalities
have not the expert financial knowledge that enables them to decide on
the most propitious times to float loans, he believes that the suggested
reforms would be greatly in the interest, not only of the
municipalities, but of the financial houses that deal in these
securities. Mr. Sainte-Pierre, as the executive head of Credit Canada,
Limitée, has been very active in the financing of large school
municipalities and cities. His firm has handled some of the largest
issues floated in the Province of Quebec in recent years. He has made
various suggestions for the improvement of School municipalities in the
province. Mr. Sainte-Pierre is also well known as an expert accountant,
and systematizer. He is a member of several fraternal societies and it
is well recognized that the prominent position obtained by Credit
Canada, Limitée, is due to the energy and financial skill of Mr.
Sainte-Pierre.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackenzie, Norman, K.C.=, one of the leading barristers of the Canadian
West, is head of the firm of Mackenzie, Thom, McMorran, McDonald,
Bastedo and Jackson, Regina, Saskatchewan. He was born at Sarnia, Ont.,
January 27, 1869, the son of John Alexander and Helen Mackenzie. He was
educated at private schools. Upper Canada College and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto. He read law in the offices of Morphy, Miller, Levesconte &
Smythe, Toronto, from 1888 to 1891, and in latter year was called to the
Ontario Bar. He at once went to Regina, then the capital of the
North-West Territories, was there called to the Territorial Bar and
commenced practice. On the division of the North-West Territories into
Provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1905, he became a solicitor
entitled to practice in both Provinces by virtue of the Act. Was created
K.C. in 1907, was elected a Bencher of the Law Society of the North-West
Territories in 1898, and continued to represent the North-West
Territories until 1905, and since then the Province of Saskatchewan,
retiring in 1919 as a Bencher ex-officio under the Act, during which
period he was at different times President of the Society, served as
Public Administrator from 1898 to 1910; 1916 to 1918 he was
Vice-President for Saskatchewan of the Canadian Bar Association. Mr.
Mackenzie finds his chief recreation in art and in his dogs. He is a
member of many social organizations including the Assiniboia Club,
Regina, Wascana Country Club, Regina Golf Club, Manitoba Club, Winnipeg.
He is a Presbyterian and a Liberal in politics. On May 29, 1909, he
married Clara Erma, daughter of Henry McMorran of Port Huron, Michigan
and resides at 2336 Victoria Ave., Regina.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Johnston, Ebenezer Forsyth Blackie, K.C.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in
Berwickshire, Scotland, December 20, 1850, and received a thorough
scholastic training in his native country. He came to Canada in boyhood,
and for a short time looked to farming as an occupation and became also
interested in educational matters. The bent of his mind being in the
direction of the law, he pursued the studies thereof, and in 1876 was
sworn in as a solicitor, and in 1880 he was called to the Bar, and
practised at Guelph for a few years, where he met with big success. Upon
receiving the appointment (in 1885) as Deputy Attorney-General and Clerk
of the Executive Council, he came to Toronto, and held the position for
four years. He then resumed the practice of his profession and was
subsequently appointed for three years Inspector of Registry Offices,
which office, by reason of his increasing practice he was compelled to
resign in 1894. He has frequently acted as Crown Counsel at the
Provincial Assizes, being retained in several important murder trials,
and in that capacity has won distinction and success, by reason of the
fact that he has perhaps conducted more criminal cases than any man in
Canada. To cite a complete or anything like a complete list of the cases
which he has been retained for, would read like a city directory. He was
a gentleman of pleasing address, yet withal a forceful orator, and had
the faculty of being in a position through his remarkable tenacity to
hold the jury and convince them to his way of thinking. He had a ready
mental grasp, quick and clear conceptions, and was ever ready to see a
point and turn it to the advantage of his client. In 1887 was appointed
a Commissioner to enquire into the working of municipal institutions,
and was president of the Guelph Caledonian Society, and secretary of the
Reform Association for a number of years. He was appointed as Q.C. by
the Ontario Government in 1890. Mr. Johnston was senior partner of the
well-known law firm of Johnston, McKay, Dodds & Grant. He was a
Vice-President of the Royal Bank of Canada, Chairman of the Standard
Reliance Mortgage Corporation, Director on several Boards, and President
of the Chartered Trust Co. He was for some years a Bencher of the Law
Society. Mr. Johnston passed away January 29th, 1919.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Saint Cyr, Joseph Fortunat= (Montreal), one of the well-known lawyers
of that city, was born at Saint Jean, Quebec, on December 6, 1875, the
son of Olivier Saint Cyr, clerk, and Rose de Lima Gosseline, his wife.
He was educated at the College de Montreal and graduated in 1897 with
the degree of B.A. Studied law at Laval University, where he obtained
the degree of LL.L. Admitted to the Bar in 1900. He at once commenced
practice as an advocate in St. John’s, P.Q., in which his talents
speedily brought him to the fore. He is the author of several legal
treatises, including “La Loi des Licenses de Quebec”; “La Loi pour
Tous,” and a Digest of Montreal Law Reports. In 1909 he was appointed
magistrate for the district of Beauharnois and Iberville, and in 1917
became Judge of the Sessions of the Peace for the District of Montreal.
In 1918 he resigned the latter office to take the very important post of
Chairman of the Montreal Tramways Commission. He is a Liberal in
politics, a Roman Catholic in religion, and a member of the Knights of
Columbus. In April, 1910, he married Cecile, daughter of L. G. Dubois
and has one daughter, Lisette.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Boyd, Leslie Hale, B.A., B.C.L., K.C.= (Fort William, Ont.), Chairman
of the Board of Grain Commissioners for Canada, was born in Montreal,
July 31, 1873, the son of Andrew and Georgiana Louisa (Hale) Boyd. He
was educated at Montreal High School and McGill University, graduating
B.A. in 1894, and B.C.L., 1897. He commenced the practice of law in his
native city and also took a prominent part in politics and municipal
affairs. He was alderman for St. George Ward from 1910 to 1917,
inclusive, and also Life Governor of the Homeopathic Hospital, School
Trustee, St. Henri; and a member of the Protestant Board of School
Commissioners, Montreal. On one occasion he unsuccessfully contested the
St. Lawrence division for the Quebec Legislature as a Conservative
candidate. His appointment by the Dominion Government to the important
post of Chairman of the Board of Grain Commissioners for Canada, for
which his abilities and experience well qualified him, necessitated his
removal to Fort William. His recreations are golf, curling and fishing,
and he is a past president of the Montreal Amateur Athletic Association.
His clubs are the Engineers and Canada, Montreal; the Kaministiquia,
Thunder Bay Golf and Canadian, Fort William. Mr. Boyd is a Presbyterian
and unmarried.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Allan, John=, Member for the riding of West Hamilton in the Ontario
Legislature, was born at Guelph, Ont., on May 22, 1856, the son of James
and Agnes (Rodgers) Allan. His boyhood was spent in the city of which he
is now an elected representative, and he was educated in the public
schools there. On leaving school in 1871 he qualified himself for
mechanical pursuits with William Hancock and John Taylor of Hamilton,
remaining with them for three years. From 1874 to 1879 he followed his
trade in the Western States and in the latter year removed to New York
City. In 1885 he became a builder on his own account in the American
metropolis and continued there for the next twenty-one years. He
prospered to an extent that in 1906, at the age of fifty, he was able to
retire from business and return to the city where he had spent his youth
and for which he had always cherished a deep affection. His friends
persuaded him to enter municipal politics in 1908 and he has proven a
most useful public servant. He was Alderman, 1908-9; Controller,
1910-12; Chairman of the Parks Board, 1911; Mayor for the years 1913 and
1914. His regime was marked by businesslike methods and he was popular
with all classes of the community. In 1914 on the retirement of Sir John
Hendrie, the present Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario, who had long
represented the riding of West Hamilton in the Ontario Legislature, Mr.
Allan was nominated by the Conservative party and elected. As a
legislator his services as a member of the standing committees of the
House are especially valued. In religion he is a Presbyterian and is a
member of the following organizations: Commercial Club, A.F. & A.M., and
Knights of Pythias. In 1881 he married Catherine, daughter of Conrad
Euler.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Stewart, Charles=, first saw the light of day in the pioneer homestead,
lot 13, concession 11, Township of Ashfield, County of Huron. His father
was David Stewart, of Caithness, Scotland, and his mother Mary McLean,
of Ross-shire, Scotland. In 1842 this estimable Scotch couple set sail
for Canada, and that same year began their pioneer life on the homestead
now occupied by the subject of this sketch. To their son they have
imparted their sterling qualities of character. Charles Stewart received
his education in the public schools of his native county, but his heart
was ever in his chosen occupation of farming and he has become one of
the sterling sons of the soil, proud that he knows how to farm and do it
well. He is unmarried. Studious by nature, his hobby has ever been
municipal affairs, and for nine years he was a member of the municipal
council. Four of these, 1914-15-16-17, he occupied the honored position
of reeve, retiring in 1918. He was a member of Huron’s County Council,
and there as in his own council he was ever found leading in movements
for forwarding the country’s interests. He is an advocate of
Hydro-Electric and Hydro Radials, feeling that the peculiar geographical
situation of the township in which he lives can eventually be served by
these two important public utilities. He is a good debater, states his
case with Scotch deliberateness, and sticks to his point in the face of
all opposition, until convinced that there might be some better way than
the one he advocates. Kindly and generous by disposition, he has friends
by the score, and has been attested by his continuous representation in
the council for so many years. He is an ardent admirer of Highland games
and fond of good driving horses, though of late the automobile has
superseded his once famous pacer. He is perhaps one of the most
aggressive farmers in his community, and his name has from time to time
been mentioned for parliamentary honors, but he has refused to be lured
into the wider field of political activity. If he should ever run and be
elected, he will be a distinct asset to the farmers of Canada, because
he knows what they want. He is a member of Lucknow Lodge, No. 184, A.F.
& A.M. In politics he is a Liberal, and in religion a Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Macaulay, Thomas Bassett, F.I.A., F.S.A., F.S.S.=, of Montreal,
occupies a high position in Canadian finance, and is besides an
insurance expert of international fame. He was born at Hamilton, Ont.,
on June 6, 1860, the son of Robertson and Barbara Maria (Reid) Macaulay,
and educated at Hamilton and Montreal. He entered the service of the Sun
Life Assurance Company of Canada at Montreal in 1877 and by 1880, when
but twenty years of age, he had so qualified himself in the science of
insurance that he was made Actuary. In 1891 he was appointed Secretary
of the Company, and in 1898 was elected a Director. In 1906 he became
Managing Director of the Sun Life and in 1915 President, succeeding his
late father. Under his direction the company has enjoyed an immense
expansion on sound and conservative lines, and its President is
recognized in financial circles the world over as an expert in insurance
and master of business organization. The head offices are on Dominion
Square, Montreal, but it has many branches in Canada and other parts of
the world. Mr. Macaulay is a Fellow of the Institute of Actuaries of
Great Britain, a Charter Member of the Actuarial Society of America, and
a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society. He was elected Vice-President
to represent the Actuaries of the United States and Canada at the
International Congress of Actuaries held at Paris in 1900, and again at
the Congress held in Berlin, Germany, 1906. He is Past President of the
Life Insurance Officers’ Association of Canada. His financial interests
are by no means confined to insurance however. He is a director of The
National Trust Company of Toronto, a Director of the Dominion Glass
Company, a Director of the Illinois Traction Company, a Director of the
Western Railways and Light Company, and a Director of the Barcelona
Railway, Light and Power Co. Mr. Macaulay has taken a great interest in
the development of closer relations between Canada and other British
possessions in North America, and is President of the Canadian and West
Indian League. The Navy League of Canada, of which Mr. Macaulay is
Honorary President, has his active support. His chief recreation is
farming, and his hobby, the breeding of fine stock. In religion he is a
Congregationalist and has been twice married, firstly in 1881 to
Henrietta (deceased daughter of O. T. Bragg, New Orleans); secondly in
1912 to Margaret (deceased), daughter of Rev. William Allen, London,
England. He has two sons and three daughters, and resides on Westmount
Boulevard, Westmount, Quebec.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Clark, Lt.-Col. Hugh=, born May 6, 1861, at Kincardine Township. A son
of Donald Clark and Mary MacDougall, both in Argyllshire, Scotland;
father was a farmer and a school teacher. Mother died in 1909, father
lived to be over 90 years of age. Educated at the public school and high
school Kincardine, from which latter institution he graduated in 1887,
and taught school for three years, 1887 to 1889. In 1890 was editor of
the “Walkerton Herald,” and in the same year purchased the “Kincardine
Review,” which he has conducted ever since, with the exception of the
years 1897 and 1898, when he was managing editor of the “Ottawa
Citizen.” A member of the Legislative Press Gallery in Toronto, 1900.
Entered the Militia of Canada in 1892 with a Lieutenant’s commission and
commanded the 32nd Bruce Regiment as Lt.-Col. from 1906 to 1911. In 1902
Lt.-Col. Clark was nominated by the Conservative party as candidate for
the Legislative Assembly for Centre Bruce, and was elected with a
majority of 5; unseated on petition he was re-elected in February, 1903
by a majority of 44, and re-elected in 1905 by a majority of 317 and
again in 1908 by a majority of 356. In 1911 Lt.-Col. Clark resigned his
seat in the Legislature to contest North Bruce for the Federal
Parliament and was elected by a majority of 82. Re-elected at the
general election to the House of Commons in 1917 by a largely increased
majority, and became Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for External
Affairs, which he held until November, 1918, when he took over the duty
of Parliamentary Secretary of Soldiers Civil Re-establishment. Married
September 24, 1894, to Catherine MacKay, daughter of Dr. H. M. Ross of
Richard’s Landing, Ont., and has one son, Hugh Stuart Clark. Has a fine
reputation as a journalist and is regarded as one of the brightest
paragraphists in the country; he is a particularly effective platform
speaker and has a clear and convincing style. He is exceedingly popular
with all classes in the House and is recognized as being straightforward
in all his election methods and business dealings. He accompanied Sir
Robert L. Borden in the campaign of 1908 through Ontario, Quebec, New
Brunswick, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island, and toured the Western
Provinces with the Premier in 1911. Lt.-Col. Clark is recognized as an
authority on everything affecting the Militia of Canada and has lectured
on Imperial defence. He is a Presbyterian in religion and belongs to the
following orders: A.F. & A.M.; L.O.L.; I.O.O.F.; C.O.F. His principal
recreations are golfing and bowling. He is a member of the Kincardine
Club, Albany Club, Toronto, Rideau and Royal Ottawa Golf Club, Ottawa.




[Illustration: J. G. B. BUTTERWORTH
Ottawa]




=Sharpe, Samuel Simpson, Lieut.-Col., D.S.O.= (Uxbridge, Ont.), son of
George Sharpe, of Suffolk, England, and Mary Ann Simpson, of County
Tyrone, Ireland, born March 13, 1873, at Zephyr, Township of Scott,
County of Ontario. Educated at Uxbridge Public and High Schools, Toronto
University and Osgoode Hall; graduated in 1895, degrees B.A. and LL.B.
Married, August 26, 1903, to Mabel E., daughter of H. A. Crosby and
granddaughter of Joseph Gould, ex-M.P. for North Ontario. Town Solicitor
for Uxbridge for ten years. He lived and practised his profession in
Town of Uxbridge, near the place of his birth, after being called to the
bar and achieved a large measure of success. Lieut.-Col. Sharpe always
took a great interest in the militia, and was formerly a member of the
34th Regiment, in which he attained the rank of Major. On the outbreak
of the war he organized and recruited the 116th Ontario County Battalion
and took it to France. He held a fine record for overseas service,
having won the D.S.O. and having been mentioned in the despatches. It is
said of Col. Sharpe that he was one of the most popular O.C.’s sent from
Canada, and he never missed an opportunity of looking after the
interests of his men. He returned to Canada in the end of May, 1918,
after having seen much hard service, his health impaired and succumbed
in a few weeks to a nervous disorder. He was elected to the House of
Commons in 1898, when he defeated George D. Grant by 200 majority;
re-elected in 1911, when he defeated Major H. M. Mowat, K.C., nephew of
the late Sir Oliver Mowat, by 588; was appointed one of the Ontario
Whips by Rt. Hon. Sir R. L. Borden, prior to the election of 1911, and
was returned by a large majority at the general elections in December,
1917, during his absence at the front. Lieut.-Col. Sharpe took an active
and prominent part in the councils of the Conservative Party after he
became a member of the House, and was recognized as a good debater, with
a full knowledge of National affairs. He was a member of the Albany
Club, Toronto, and the Rideau Club, Ottawa; also a member of the Masonic
Order, Independent Order of Foresters, Sons of England, and Independent
Order of Oddfellows. He held the Ontario championship in tennis for two
years and the undergraduate championship for one year. In religion
Lieut.-Col. Sharpe was a member of the Methodist Church at Uxbridge.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Macaulay, John= (Wiarton, Ontario), Manager of the Dominion Fish Co.,
head office, Toronto, was born April 13, 1865, at Southampton, Ont. He
is a son of Donald MacAulay, of Stornoway, Scotland, and Annie MacLeod,
of the same place. The father was a fisherman and sailor on the great
lakes. The subject of this sketch received his education in the public
schools of his native town. Early he began to follow in the footsteps of
his father, and soon became one of the best fishermen on the lakes. He
had splendid executive ability, and this with his tenacity of purpose
soon marked him as a leader in the fishing business. The Dominion Fish
Co. recognized his business acumen and made him manager of their
extensive business with headquarters at Wiarton. Here he is one of the
most highly esteemed citizens of the place. He is a member of Cedar
Lodge, No. 369, A.F. & A.M., Offanta Preceptory, Owen Sound, and a
Shriner of Rameses Temple, Toronto. His favorite pastimes are curling
and bowling. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and in politics a
Liberal. He was the Liberal standard bearer in the Federal Riding of
North Bruce in 1917. He married Miss Margaret McLeod, of Ripley, Ont.
They had a family of three sons and two daughters, Graham, Gordon,
Irvine, May, and Marie (the first three named are deceased, the two
latter living).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lighthall, William Douw, K.C., M.A., B.C.L., F.R.S.C., F.R.S.I.=
(Montreal, P.Q.), one of the most widely known of Canadian publicists,
was born at Hamilton, Ont., Dec. 27, 1857, the son of William Francis
Lighthall, Dean of the Notarial Profession in Montreal, and Margaret
Lighthall. His scholastic career was brilliant; he was gold medallist of
Montreal High School, and Shakespeare Gold Medallist of McGill
University. He was called to the Bar in 1881, and has almost ever since
been a prominent figure in both the literary and public life of Canada,
due to the fact that he is a man very fertile in ideas. He has an
international reputation as a municipal reformer, which began with his
career as Mayor of Westmount, from 1900 to 1903. In 1901, in conjunction
with the late Oliver A. Howland, Mayor of Toronto, he founded the Union
of Canadian Municipalities, which has effected a great work of municipal
improvement in Canada. He was Chairman of the School Commission in his
city for 1908-9, and is a member of the Royal Metropolitan Parks
Commission, for the planning of a Greater Montreal. Mr. Lighthall’s
literary and scientific interests are comprehensive. He was
Representative Fellow in Arts of McGill University, 1911-3, and he
originated the Society of Canadian Literature, and the Chateau de
Ramezay Historical Museum. As an author his works include: “Thoughts,
Moods and Ideals” (verse), published in 1887; “The Young Seigneur, or
Nation Making” (a romance), 1888; “Montreal After 250 Years,” 1892; “The
False Chevalier” (a romance), 1898; “The Glorious Enterprise,” 1902;
“Canada, A Modern Nation,” 1904; “The Master of Life,” 1910; as well as
many Ethical, Historical and Literary Pamphlets. He also devised and
edited “Songs of the Great Dominion,” the most important existing
anthology of Canadian verse, up to its date of publication, 1891; and
also selected and edited the volume, “Canadian Poets,” issued in
connection with the Canterbury Poets series, published in London, Eng.,
in the early nineties. Mr. Lighthall has also been actively interested
in military affairs. He served with the College Company, Prince of Wales
Regiment, Montreal, 1877-8; in the Victoria Rifles, 1881-3, and is a
member of the Reserve of that battalion. He originated the idea of the
Great War Veterans’ Association and, in 1915, was a member of the
Committee of Friends of the Canadian Association of Returned Soldiers.
He was an ardent advocate of conscription in the Great War and when the
Government decided to adopt this policy, took the platform in support of
it. He is a member of many literary, social and scientific societies,
including the Royal Society of Canada (President, 1910), the Royal
Society of Literature of Great Britain, the Literary and Historical
Society of Quebec (corresponding member), the Antiquarian Society of
Montreal (of which he is President), and the following clubs in his home
city: Canada, Arts, Montreal, Canadian and University. His recreations
include the collection of old pictures and camping. He married Cybel,
daughter of John Wilkes, and has one son, Lieut, W. W. S. Lighthall, of
the Royal Flying Corps, and 3rd Dorsets, who during the late war saw
service in France, Flanders, Mesopotamia, Macedonia, and Palestine. Mr.
Lighthall has a residence, “Chateau-clair,” in Westmount, Que., and a
summer home, “Highbury,” at Lac Tremblant, Que.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ellis, James Albert= (Ottawa), son of James and Margaret (Hall) Ellis,
and was born at Accrington, Lancashire, England, June 2, 1864, where he
also received his education. He came to Canada in 1885, and has resided
in Ottawa ever since. He was the leader in the establishment of the
Ottawa Municipal Electric Plant in 1905; Public School Trustee from 1898
to 1900; Alderman during the years 1901-1903, 1914; Controller, 1915;
Mayor, 1904-1906, 1913; City Treasurer, 1907-1912; member of Local
Legislature, 1911-1914. He was appointed Division Court Clerk in 1916
and a member of the Ontario Railway and Municipal Board, October, 1918.
Shortly afterwards he was placed in charge of the Housing Scheme of the
Province of Ontario as Director. Mr. Ellis has been for several years
Chairman of the Ottawa Hydro-Electric Commission. He was President
Ottawa Horticultural Society, 1911-1912; President Ontario Municipal
Association, 1906-1907. He was many years Secretary of the Ottawa
Conservative Association, and afterwards its President. Mr. Ellis
married Catherine Fishwick, daughter of James Fishwick, Accrington,
Lancashire, England, in September, 1884, and has one son and one
daughter. He is a Conservative in politics and an Anglican in religion.
His address is 131 Stanley Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Roche, Hon. Wm. James, M.D., P.C., LL.D.=, Chairman of the Civil
Service Commission for Canada, is a native of Clandeboye, Middlesex
County, Ontario, and was born November 30, 1859. He was educated at the
public schools of Lucan, Ont., at London Collegiate Institute, Trinity
Medical School, Toronto, where he studied for three years, completing
his course at the Western University, London, from which he was the
first graduate in medicine, and where he also took first class honors.
The hon. degree of LL.D. was conferred in 1911. This was in 1883, and he
immediately went to Minnedosa, Manitoba, and engaged in the practice of
his profession. From 1885 to 1901 he was Territorial Representative for
his district on the Manitoba Medical Council, and was very popular as a
physician among the various nationalities that constituted the early
population of the prairie province. He first entered politics in 1892
when he was an unsuccessful candidate for the Legislature in the
Conservative interest. In the Federal Elections of 1896 he was the
nominee of his party for the riding of Marquette and was elected after a
stiff contest. His constituents showed their confidence in him by
returning him to the House of Commons at the general elections of 1900,
1904, 1908 and 1911. When the recently chosen Parliament met in 1901 the
Conservative caucus chose him as Whip for the West, a position he held
until 1910 when he was elected chief assistant Whip for the Conservative
party in the Commons. On the formation of the first Borden cabinet in
1911 he was appointed to the portfolio of Secretary of State and was
sworn in as a member of the Privy Council on October 10 of that year,
and was re-elected by acclamation. On October 27 he was transferred to
the portfolio of Minister of the Interior and Superintendent of Indian
Affairs in succession to Hon. Robert Rogers, who at that time became
Minister of Public Works. This post he continued to fill until the
autumn of 1917 when on the formation of Union Government he accepted the
position of Chairman of the Civil Service Commission of Canada and
retired from active politics. In 1916 Western University, London, his
Alma Mater, honored him by making him Chancellor of the institution. Dr.
Roche is very prominent in the Independent Order of Oddfellows, of which
he was Grand Master for Manitoba in 1893. In connection with the same
Order he was a Grand Representative to the Sovereign Grand Lodge at
Chattanooga, Penn., in 1894, and at Atlantic City, N.J., in 1895. In
1883 he married Miss Annie E. Cook of Toronto. Though long resident in
Minnedosa he now by virtue of his public duties makes his home in
Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McInnes, William, B.A., F.R.S.C., F.G.S.A.=, Directing Geologist,
Geological Survey, 37 years ago became a member of the Dominion Civil
Service. He has advanced step by step from one grade to another, and
to-day occupies the responsible position of Directing Geologist, to
which he was appointed in 1915. He has explored geologically Northern
New Brunswick, Eastern Quebec, Western and Northern Ontario, Northern
Saskatchewan and portions of the North-West Territories extending to
Hudson Bay, and he explored and mapped Churchill and Winisk rivers and
much of the North Country lying between the Canadian Pacific Railway and
Hudson Bay. Reports of these explorations are contained in the annual
reports of the Geological Survey of Canada and in separate memoirs. Mr.
William McInnes is the son of John and Rachael Jane McInnes, and was
born at Frederiction, New Brunswick, January 1, 1858. He was educated at
the Collegiate School, Frederiction, and the University of New
Brunswick, graduating in 1879. The following clubs claim Mr. McInnes as
a member: the Rideau, Royal Golf and Gatineau Fish and Game. He, is a
Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, Geological Society of America and
Canadian Mining Institute. His religion is Presbyterian and his
principal recreation is golf. He resides at the Victoria Chambers, 138
to 140 Wellington Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Trahan, Arthur, B.S., K.C.= (Nicolet, Que.), born on May 26, 1877, at
Nicolet, P.Q., son of Narcisse Trahan and Rebecca Rousseau, both
Canadians. Educated at the Nicolet Seminary (B.S.). Married, Sept.,
1902, to Josephine R. Dufresne, daughter of H. R. Dufresne, N.P., of
Nicolet. He is the father of six children: Marie Therese, Madeleine,
Paul Arthur, Bernard, Jacques and Marcel. Mr. Trahan is an
attorney-at-law, barrister, solicitor, etc. Was a political candidate
for the first time at by-election held June 2, 1913, to fill vacancy
caused by the resignation of Hon. C. R. Devlin elected for two seats,
and was elected by 870 majority over D. H. Rheault, N.P. Re-elected in
1916 by acclamation. In November, 1917, resigned seat as member of
Legislative Assembly to become a Federal candidate. Elected by
acclamation to the House of Commons. Secretary of the Commission charged
with the revision, consolidation and modification of the Municipal Code
of the Province of Quebec (1910-12). In 1912 was appointed a K.C., and
has been alderman of the town of Nicolet from 1911 to 1919. Moved the
address in reply to the speech from the throne at the session of 1915 in
the Quebec Legislative Assembly. Is a Roman Catholic in religion, and a
Liberal in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Campbell, Colin=, Montreal and St. Hilaire, Que., is one of the most
widely known horsemen of the Dominion and a very prominent figure in the
social and business life of his province. He is a son of Major Campbell,
C.B., of Inverawe, Scotland, an officer of Her Majesty’s 7th Hussars and
a member of the same family as the famous Col. Duncan Campbell, of
Inverawe, who was on the staff of General Lord Howe at Ticonderoga, and
whose death in that battle, and the accompanying psychical phenomena,
form the theme of one of Robert Louis Stevenson’s most thrilling
ballads. Another relative was Col. de Salaberry, who commanded the
French-Canadians in their heroic resistance at the Battle of Chateauguay
in the war of 1812. The mother of the subject of this sketch was, prior
to her marriage, Miss Duchesnay of Quebec, and he was born at St.
Hilaire, on May 28, 1860. He was educated at Lennoxville Academy and
later engaged in business as a merchant with great financial success. At
the outbreak of the great war he organized and commanded the Mounted
Section of the 1st Regiment of Reserve Militia, in which he holds the
rank of Captain. Strong advocate of and keen worker for the “Daylight
Saving” measure, which was passed in 1918. All legitimate sports have
from youth claimed his enthusiastic support and he is noted not only as
a breeder of horses, but as a skilled equestrian. As a steeplechase
rider of his own horses, he won the Montreal Hunt Cup on four occasions
and the Allan Cup on three. As an expert on the subject of horses he is
widely known and has acted as Judge at the Olympia Horse Show, New York,
as well as at similar events in Boston, Philadelphia and other cities.
He is a member of the Montreal Board of Trade and of many social
organizations in that city, including the Mount Royal, St. James,
Montreal Hunt, Forest and Stream, Montreal Jockey, Canada, and Canadian
Clubs, as well as of St. Andrew’s Society. He is a Conservative in
politics and an Anglican in religion. On April 23, 1888, married Mabel
G., daughter of the late Sir Hugh Allan, K.C.B., of Montreal, by whom he
has had three children, Enid, Phoebie and Archie (deceased).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Coats, Robert Hamilton=, Dominion Statistician and Controller of the
Census, is one of the live wires in the employ of the Dominion
Government. At college, in journalism, as an author and a writer on
economic subjects, and as a Civil Service employee, he has distinguished
himself and proved his worth. He captured the Bankers’ Scholarship in
Economics and the Wyld Prize in English at the Toronto University; and
from the time of his graduation in 1896, taking the degree of B.A. in
Classics, to the present, he has given tangible evidence of his literary
and constructive ability. Having served on the staff of the “Toronto
World” and the Toronto “Globe” from 1898 to 1901, in January, 1902, he
became Associate Editor of the “Labor Gazette,” the journal of the
Department of Labor, afterwards editor, and continued in that capacity
until 1914. On the death of Mr. Archibald Blue, in 1915, he succeeded
that gentleman as Census Commissioner. Within a brief period afterwards,
largely as a development of Mr. Coats’ constructive work, the Dominion
Bureau of Statistics was established by Act of Parliament, and its value
to the State, under Mr. Coats’ direction, is duly recognized. Robert
Hamilton Coats is the son of Robert Coats, merchant, and Mary Park. He
was born in Clinton, Ontario, July 25, 1874, and was educated at the
Toronto University (B.A., 1896). He is a contributor to the “Journal of
Economics” and other economic reviews; joint author with R. E. Gosnell
of “The Life of Sir James Douglas” (Makers of Canada Series), 1908;
author of “The Labor Movement in Canada,” and of “Special Reports on
Prices in Canada, 1890-1909-10-11-12 and 13.” In 1912 he was appointed a
member of the Royal Commission of Official Statistics of Canada, and in
1914 a member of the Cost of Living Commission. Mr. Coats is a Fellow of
the Royal Statistical Society of England, of the American Statistical
Association, of the American Economic Association, and of the Canadian
Political Science Association. In June, 1905, Mr. Coats married Marie
Halboister, of Paris, France. For recreation he favors canoeing and
ski-ing. He is a member of the Presbyterian Church and resides at 176
Manor Avenue, Rockcliffe Park, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marnoch, George Robert=, President Board of Trade, Lethbridge, Alberta.
Born in Aberdeen, Scotland, February 19, 1873, son of George R. and
Barbara Marnoch. Educated at Robert Gordon’s College, Aberdeen. Engaged
in the commercial side of mechanical engineering, Scotland, and in
Ceylon, also, in connection with the growing and export of tea, rubber
and tropical products, and in the supplying of the building and
engineering requirements of tea and rubber estates, as well as the
supplying of fertilizers for these crops, 1896-1910; came to Canada,
1910; President (honorary office) Lethbridge Board of Trade, 1914;
re-elected 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918 and 1919; Member of Joint Committee of
Commerce and Agriculture (The Committee of 25 business men and 25
leading farmers) of Western Canada; Vice-President, Western Canada
Irrigation Association; vice-chairman (honorary office) Victory Loan
Southern Alberta, 1917, 1918. Married Harriet Lund Macdonald (deceased),
daughter of Alexander Macdonald, October 10, 1904; has one daughter.
Club: Chinook. Independent in politics. Residence, Sherlock Building,
Lethbridge, Alberta.




[Illustration: BRIG.-GEN. SIR JOHN M. GIBSON, K.C.M.G., M.A., LL.D., K.C.
Hamilton]




=Wright, William J.=, the late school principal (St. Mary’s, Ont.), gave
his life for his country while serving in the great war as Lieutenant of
the 19th Canadian Batt., C.E.F., in France. He enlisted with the 110th
Perth Batt., in January, 1916, and was transferred to the 19th Canadian
Battalion October, 1916. He was killed in action on August 18, 1917,
while fighting against the Prussians in the battle of Hill 70 outside
Lens, and is buried in the military cemetery at Fosse 10, a short
distance from Bully-Grenay, France. He was born in Oxford County, Ont.,
the son of George and Emma Wright, of St. Mary’s, Ont., was educated at
St. Mary’s Public School and the Collegiate Institute. Then he attended
Toronto University, graduating in 1896 with the degree of B.A., and in
1897 was granted the degree of M.A.; was the winner of the Edward Blake
Matriculation Scholarship and also won the Governor-General’s Gold Medal
of the Toronto University in 1895. He was Principal of Niagara High
School from 1904 to 1909 and from there went to Forest, Ont., becoming
Principal of the High School of that town until 1913, when he became
Principal of the Collegiate Institute of St. Mary’s, Ont., and at the
time of his death was Principal-on-leave. Lieut. Wright was a frequent
contributor to the local papers and the author of articles on Canadian
literature, and the study of poetry in an American encyclopædia. He was
married to Mary Edith, the daughter of Mr. David Robertson, of Fenelon
Falls, and left three of a family. He was a member of the Presbyterian
Church and an Independent in politics, with a strong leaning towards
Liberalism; a member of the Niagara Historical Society and fraternally a
Mason.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ward, Lt.-Col. Henry Alfred=, Judge of the United Counties of
Northumberland and Durham, is the son of George Charles Ward and Harriet
Amelia (Brent). His father was fifty-four years Registrar of the County
of Durham, and of East Durham, when the County was divided into two
ridings. He was born at Port Hope, Ont., on August 20, 1849, and
educated in the local schools of his native town; called to the Bar in
1871, and created a K.C. in 1908, he successfully practised his
profession in Port Hope for many years and was Mayor for a considerable
period. Judge Ward is a grandson of Thomas Ward, who came from England
as Secretary to Attorney-General White, in 1792, settled in Toronto, and
then went to Port Hope, where he afterwards became judge of the district
of Newcastle. The subject of this sketch was for a long period in the
Volunteer Military Service of Canada, joining the Port Hope Rifle
Company as a private in 1866; became Lieutenant in the 46th Regiment on
its formation in 1867, and from 1902 to 1909 was Lieut.-Colonel of the
same, and is now on the reserve of officers. Entered the House of
Commons as member for East Durham in August, 1885, as successor to the
late Lieut.-Colonel Arthur T. H. Williams, and represented that
constituency until 1891; he was again elected in 1900. In 1904 he
defeated the Hon. A. B. Aylesworth for the County of Durham, and retired
from political life in 1908. In 1916 he was elevated to the Bench, a
post for which his experience well qualified him. In referring to
Lieut.-Colonel Ward the “Montreal Standard” said of him: “A genial
gentleman, but with perhaps too fine a spirit to make a great success of
the rough and tumble game of politics.” He is a member of the Masonic
Order. In religion an Anglican, and a member of St. Mark’s Church of
Port Hope. He has always taken an interest in amateur sports and was
President of the Port Hope Baseball Club. Married July, 1895, Annie B.,
of Savannah, Ga., daughter of Major John C. Booth of the Confederate
Army, and is the father of two children, Marjorie Lesley and Madeline
Aylwin.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Garland, John L.=, is one of the most prominent business men of Ottawa
and President of the firm of John M. Garland, Son & Co., Ltd., wholesale
dry goods merchants, Queen and O’Connor Streets in that city. He was
born at Ottawa on January 9, 1867, the son of John M. and Isabella
(McKinnon) Garland. He was educated at Ottawa Collegiate Institute and
by private tuition in England. In 1884 he began his business career as a
clerk in the firm founded by his father and of which he is now the head.
He became Senior Partner, December, 1906. Mr. Garland as a young man
took a deep interest in military affairs and organized “F” Company of
the Governor-General’s Foot Guards of Ottawa, in which he held the
commission of Captain from 1896 to 1903. He is a member of the following
clubs: Rideau, Ottawa Hunt and Royal Ottawa Golf. In religion he is a
Presbyterian and in politics a Conservative. On January 18, 1888, he
married Joanna, daughter of John Hancock, Ottawa, and has three sons and
four daughters. He resides at 450 MacLaren Street, in the Canadian
capital.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pringle, Robert Abercrombie, K.C.=, one of the leaders of the Ottawa
Bar, was born at Cornwall, Ont., December 15, 1855, the son of J. F. and
Isabella (Fraser) Pringle. He was educated at the public and high
schools of Cornwall, at Queen’s University, Kingston, and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto. He was called to the Bar of Ontario in 1881 and practised in
his native town from 1883 until 1911. In 1906 he was created King’s
Counsel. In 1911 he removed to the capital and established his present
practice, and is head of the firm of Pringle, Thompson, Burgess and
Coté, Barristers and Solicitors, Quebec Bank Building, 122 Wellington
Street, Ottawa. He has been entrusted by the Federal Government with
several important commissions, notably that to inquire into news print
prices and the paper industry generally in 1918. Mr. Pringle has also
been a prominent figure in the politics of Eastern Ontario and is a
lifelong Conservative. As candidate for that party he was elected to the
House of Commons for the riding of Stormont in 1900 and proved one of
the most useful members of the then Opposition. He was re-elected in
1904, but defeated at the general elections of 1908. In 1911 he was
again tendered the party nomination by his own supporters, but having
decided to enter into practice in Ottawa, declined. As a member of the
House his courteous bearing and solid attainments made him generally
liked by colleagues of all shades of opinion. He is an Anglican in
religion. His chief recreation is motor boating. He belongs to the
Masonic Order and is a member of the following clubs: Rideau, Royal
Ottawa Golf and Albany (Toronto). In 1884 he married Ada, daughter of I.
H. Vanarsdale, and has two sons. He resides at 232 Daly Avenue, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Scott, William Duncan=, Superintendent of Immigration for the
Government of Canada, is one of the best known citizens of this country
both at home and in other lands. He was born at Dundas, Ont., on October
7, 1861, the son of James and Margaret (McEwen) Scott. He was educated
at Dundas High School and subsequently entered a law office with a view
to qualifying himself for the legal profession. He did not, however,
complete his studies, for the virgin country of Manitoba, which was just
then being opened up to the world, called him, as in the case of many
another young man, from Eastern Canada. He went West in 1881 at the age
of twenty and entered the service of the Canadian Pacific Railway, then
in course of construction, and later was employed by the Manitoba
Government. In 1887 he was appointed Immigration Agent for that
government with offices at Winnipeg. In 1895 he removed to the city of
Toronto and continued to act as Immigration Agent for Manitoba in that
city, incidentally helping to populate the prairie province with many
desirable settlers. His general knowledge of the resources of Canada and
his qualities of good-fellowship led to his appointment as Canadian
Commissioner at the Paris Exposition of 1899; and from thence until 1903
he acted in a similar capacity at other International exhibitions, at
which the Government of Canada was represented by displays and bureaus
of information. In the latter year he was appointed Superintendent of
the Immigration Branch of the Department of the Interior and removed to
Ottawa where he has ever since resided. The period of Mr. Scott’s
appointment was that in which immigration to the Canadian North-West not
only from Europe but from the United States was at its zenith and he was
very active in assisting to build up population in the new provinces of
Alberta and Saskatchewan. In 1911 the post of Chief Controller of
Chinese Immigration under treaties newly effected with the Government of
China was added to his duties, and he is now the most important factor
in all branches of immigration in this country, with a large staff under
his control. In addition to his official labors he pursues the calling
of a practical farmer. He is a Presbyterian in religion and his
recreation is indicated by the fact that he is a member of the Royal
Ottawa Golf and Laurentian Clubs. He is also a member of the A.F. & A.M.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Askwith, John E.=, is Ottawa’s Police Magistrate, to which position he
was appointed by the Ontario Government, April 23, 1918. Mr. Askwith was
born in Ottawa and, practically, Ottawa has remained his home to this
day. For forty years Mr. Askwith was in business as a contractor, both
on structural and railway work and the Government Bureau, the Halifax
Armory, and many other public buildings bear testimony to his zeal. He
has been of considerable benefit and has rendered good services to the
city of Ottawa in more ways than one. For eleven years he sat in the
City Council as representative for Rideau Ward. He served as Chairman of
the Parks Commission and had much to do in the acquisition of Rockliffe
Park. In 1901 the Conservatives of Russell County selected him as their
candidate for the House of Commons and, while he met with defeat, he
gave his opponent a sharp contest. For three years he was President of
the Association for the Blind and was and is a hard worker in the
interest of the Protestant Old Men’s Home. His contributions to the
various Ottawa Public Institutions are numerous and his attentions to
them so constant and earnest that he is rightfully called an
unmistakeable philanthropist. Following in his father’s footsteps as an
enthusiast for Volunteer Military Service, Mr. Askwith served for seven
years in the Ottawa Field Battery, and on two occasions marched to the
front in defence of home and country. Even now he walks with the
military stride. Mr. Askwith was appointed Deputy Magistrate in 1907,
and since 1916 up to the time when he received his promotion in March,
1918, had to administer the law alone as during the intervening time
Magistrate O’Keefe was too ill to attend Court, and no Deputy was
appointed. In addition, as Deputy Magistrate, Mr. Askwith presided over
the Juvenile Court, and is doing so even now, and it is owing to his
sound judgment and fatherly consideration for erring youngsters that a
vast improvement has taken place in the conduct of the Juveniles in the
city. In the Police Court as well as in the Juvenile Court he has been
stern and wise in his decisions. He metes out law and justice with
common sense and discretion and never allows technicalities or quibbles
to interfere with his disposal of cases, and he holds the explicit
confidence of the public. Magistrate John E. Askwith was born of English
parents, in 1841, and was educated in the Little Red School House in
Ottawa. On September 26, 1865, he married Annie, daughter of the late
John Fotheringham, and has two sons, William R. and John F., who is a
Lieutenant in service in France; he is 36 years old and in 1915 enlisted
with a company from McGill University to reinforce the Princess Pats,
but was transferred to a Western Battalion. He went through several
important engagements in which the Canadian Forces took part, including
Vimy Ridge; and two daughters Margaret F., and Bessie, who is married to
O. E. Culbert, Barrister, Calgary. In religion Mr. Askwith is a
Protestant, and in politics a Conservative. He resides at 24 Alexander
Street, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nickle, William Folger, K.C., B.A.= (Kingston, Ont.), was born at
Kingston, Dec. 31, 1869, son of William Nickle (Scotch), and Ellen Mary
Folger (American). Educated at private schools, Kingston Collegiate
Institute, Queen’s University and Osgoode Hall; graduated from Queen’s
with degree of B.A. in 1892; called to the Bar, Osgoode Hall, 1895;
member of legal firm of Nickle, Farrell & Day, Kingston. He was twice
married: first, September 11, 1895, to Agnes Mary, daughter of Joseph
McAdam, St. Thomas; second, June 6, 1911, to Katharine Louise, daughter
of Rev. D. D. Gordon, Principal of Queen’s University. Five children,
William McAdam 1897, Douglas Joseph 1899, Evelyn Marion 1902, Alexander
Gordon 1916, and Catherine Maclennan Nickle 1918. He is a member of the
following clubs: Kingston, Country, Yacht, Frontenac, The Rideau, Ottawa
and the Toronto Club; is also a Mason, Oddfellow and a member of the
Sons of Scotland. Mr. Nickle takes an active interest in all amateur
sports. He is trustee of Queen’s University, Governor of Kingston
Hospital; elected to the Kingston School Board in 1895, City Council in
1896, and again in 1897, for three years. He was member of the
Legislative Assembly of Ontario for Kingston from 1908 to 1911, when he
resigned seat to contest same constituency at the general election for
the House of Commons, and was elected as the Liberal-Conservative
candidate, and re-elected at the general elections in December, 1917. He
is a Presbyterian in religion. The member for Kingston has played a very
active part in the city of his birth and has been prominently identified
with the municipal, educational and social life, and has carved a secure
place in the confidence and respect of his fellow-citizens. He has
greatly distinguished himself in public life, for which he has displayed
much talent, and his sterling integrity is recognized by his
fellow-members in the House of Commons. Mr. Nickle is a forceful
speaker, with a convincing style and a pleasing and magnetic
personality. His career in the House of Commons has been marked by a
spirit of independence and adherence to conviction. In 1913 he took
issue with the Government on the granting of certain additional aid to
the Canadian Northern Railway; and maintained that if the people had to
build the railroads they should own and operate them. His position at
that time has since been justified overwhelmingly by public sentiment
and the general course of events. In April of 1918 Mr. Nickle once more
achieved great prominence as the effective voice of the Canadian people
in connection with the titles controversy. He introduced a motion in the
House of Commons requesting that representations be made to the Imperial
Government that hereafter no hereditary titles should be granted in
Canada. In a speech replete with convincing historical detail on the
obsolete nature of hereditary honors he also stated his conviction that
it would be better if no further titular distinctions of any kind were
granted, except those of an officiary character. He felt, however, that
public sentiment on the question was not sufficiently ripe to permit him
to jeopardize his resolution on the subject of hereditary honors, by
making it as wide as his personal views would indicate. Subsequently Mr.
R. L. Richardson, M.P. for Richmond, Manitoba, moved a resolution
demanding that no titular honors of any kind be granted thereafter. This
was defeated on the Prime Minister declaring it to be a
want-of-confidence motion. On this motion Mr. Nickle was placed in the
peculiar position of having to abandon the Government or his personal
convictions, but decided to stick by conviction. Another broad principle
that was discussed as a result of Mr. Nickle’s original motion was
whether the Government of Canada should not be consulted before titular
distinctions were conferred by the Crown on Canadians resident in this
country. The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Borden, announced that he had
accepted this principle, except in connection with military honors, so
that Mr. Nickle may be regarded as having materially aided in checking
an abuse which was becoming a cause of public unrest, by precipitating
discussion of the matter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tory, John A.= (Toronto), one of the leading life insurance men of
Canada, was born at Guysboro’, N.S., November 17, 1869, the son of
Robert K. and Anora (Ferguson) Tory. He was educated at the public
school of his native town, at the Guysboro’ Academy and Halifax Business
College. He commenced his business career at the age of eighteen as a
clerk in the establishment of D. G. Kerm, Antigonish, N.S., where he
remained from 1887 to 1890. In the latter year he joined the staff of A.
N. Whiten & Sons, Canso, N.S., becoming Manager of the business in 1892.
His entry into the insurance field was made in 1895 when he became
Inspector of the Sun Life Insurance Company of Canada for West Indies
and part of South America. In 1897 he was transferred to Detroit and
became manager of the company for the State of Michigan where he
remained until 1908, when he was transferred to the management of the
Toronto office of the Company. He has been instrumental in widely
extending the power and influence of the Sun Life in Canada. Mr. Tory is
keenly interested in all movements for social betterment, and
particularly in building up a clean and healthy manhood in this country.
He is a Director of the Y.M.C.A. and also a member of the Social Service
Commission. He is a member of the following clubs in his adopted city:
National, Royal Canadian Yacht, Queen City, Canadian, and Empire. His
recreations are tennis and motoring, and in politics he is a Liberal. He
is a Methodist and on December 28, 1898, married Abbie G., daughter of
Dr. Buckley, Guysboro’, N.S., by whom he has two sons. Mr. and Mrs. Tory
reside at 17 Elm Ave., Rosedale, Toronto, and have a summer home at
Guysboro’, N.S.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chisholm, William Craig, K.C.= (Westmount, Quebec), Barrister-at-law,
was born at Port Hope on August 20, 1864, his parents being His Honor
Judge Chisholm, of Kitchener, and Mary Craig Chisholm. Educated at Port
Hope High School and Toronto University, from which latter institution
he graduated in 1885 with the degree of B.A., and first-class honors in
Classics. Was created a K.C. in 1908. Mr. Chisholm was Assistant City
Solicitor of the city of Toronto from 1891 to 1895, when he became City
Solicitor, and was in private practice in Toronto from 1909 to 1913, in
which latter year he was appointed General Solicitor for the Grand Trunk
Railway System. He was a member of the Executive of the Ontario
Municipal Association from 1907 to 1909. On June 30, 1894, he married
Gertrude Foster, daughter of the late James Foster, of Guelph, and is
the father of the following children: Capt. J. F. Chisholm, Royal Air
Force, D.S.C., D.F.C. (killed in action near Arras Sept. 7, 1918);
Duncan Gavin, Mary, Helen and Harry. In religion Mr. Chisholm is a
Presbyterian, and a Conservative in politics. He is a member of the
following clubs: University, Thistle Curling Club, Kanawaki Golf Club,
Montreal; University Granite, Toronto; and Rideau, Ottawa. His
recreations are golf, curling and lawn bowling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tetreault, Joseph Sylvini= (Sherbrooke, Que.), Notary Public, was born
at Ste. Madeleine, County of St. Hyacinthe, Quebec, Feb. 9, 1877, the
son of Napoleon and Ombeline (Durocher) Tetreault. He was educated at
St. Hyacinthe Seminary and Laval University and took up practice as a
notary in Sherbrooke, in 1900. Ever since he has been a prominent figure
in the social and municipal life of that city. He has represented the
West Ward in the City Council since 1914 and is very prominent in many
French-Canadian organizations, taking a strong interest in sports and in
all measures to promote mutual goodwill among the French and English
people. He is Grand President of L’Union St. Joseph du Canada, with head
office at Ottawa, a mutual and benevolent society which has built up a
membership of 28,000 since 1908 and of which he was a director before
his promotion to the presidency. He is also a member of the Knights of
Columbus, of l’Alliance Nationale, and L’Union St. Joseph de Sherbrooke,
and Secretary of the Chambre de Commerce Canadienne Française du
District de St. François. He is Major of the 54th Carabineers of
Sherbrooke, a Roman Catholic and an Independent in politics. On Sept. 4,
1906, he married Lena, daughter of S. J. and Marie (Simard) Caron, by
whom he has had three children, Rejane, Marielle and Adrienne.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cody, Hon. Henry John, B.A., M.A., D.D., LL.D.=, Rector of St. Paul’s
Anglican Church, Toronto, and Minister of Education of the Province of
Ontario, was born at Embro, Ontario, on December 6, 1868, his parents
being E. J. Cody and Margaret L. (Torrance). Educated at Galt Collegiate
Institute and Toronto University, where he had a most distinguished
career, winning the gold medal in classics, first-class honors in Mental
and Moral Philosophy and Civil Polity, and Wyld Prizeman in English
Essay. After graduation, was Classical Master of Ridley College, at St.
Catharines, then Professor of Church History and Systematic Theology,
and also lecturer in Latin and examiner in classics, Toronto University.
Is Rector of St. Paul’s Church, Toronto, and Archdeacon of York, and
Canon of St. Alban’s Cathedral. Was elected Bishop of Nova Scotia, but
declined the preferment in 1904. Was a member of the Royal Commission on
the reorganization of The University of Toronto, 1905-6, and a member of
The Ontario Commission on Unemployment, 1914-15. One of the founders of
Havergal Ladies’ College, Toronto. In May, 1918, on the resignation of
the Hon. Dr. R. A. Pyne as Minister of Education of Ontario, Dr. Cody
was invited by Premier Hearst to assume the duties of that most
important portfolio and, on May 23, he was sworn in as Minister of
Education of the Province and at once took up his duties, and was
subsequently nominated for the riding of North East Toronto. His
election was opposed by Sergt. William Varley, a popular soldier, who
had distinguished himself overseas on active service. Dr. Cody was
returned by a very large majority. The Minister of Education has special
gifts for the office he has been called upon to fill. His wide learning
and eminence as a scholar, his tireless energy and organizing ability,
caused his selection to be acceptable by all classes and few Canadians
occupy a more secure place in the confidence, respect and esteem of
their fellows. Splendidly informed in all great National questions and a
brilliant orator, his services have been in constant demand. Shortly
after assuming the duties of his present position, the Minister, at the
request of the Premier, made a trip overseas and visited the soldiers in
the firing line for the express purpose of familiarizing himself with
the conditions existing at the front, with a view to make his Department
more efficient in the reconstruction period after the war. The Minister
also conferred with leading educationalists in England and acquired a
vast amount of useful and necessary information. Hon. Dr. Cody holds the
rank of Lieutenant-Colonel in the Canadian Militia, is Senior Chaplain
of the Queen’s Own Rifles, and is recognized as one of the outstanding
figures in the Canadian public life. In 1894 he married Florence L.,
daughter of the late H. E. Clarke, M.P.P., and has one son, Henry
Maurice Cody, Captain in C.A.M.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Roadhouse, William Albert=, Deputy Minister of Agriculture for the
Province of Ontario, was born at Malton, Peel County, Ontario, July 25,
1880, the son of Neriah and Elizabeth Roadhouse. He was educated at the
Malton and Brampton public schools and on leaving school became—what so
many men afterwards famous in many fields of activity have been—“A
printer’s devil” in the office of the Brampton “Conservator,” where he
spent six years under Samuel Charters, now member of the House of
Commons for Peel. While working in the printing department he also wrote
local items and on leaving the “Conservator,” took up newspaper work,
joining the staff of the “Evening Telegram” in 1902. While with that
paper he represented it in the Legislative Press Gallery. Subsequently
he spent a year in London, England, as correspondent of the Canadian
Associated Press, “covering” the general election in Britain in 1905-6
for the Canadian papers. On his return to Canada he rejoined the
“Evening Telegram” staff and continued as a member of it till June 1,
1909, when he was appointed Secretary to the Minister and Department of
Agriculture. During the same year he served as Secretary to the Ontario
Government Milk Commission. On the retirement of the late C. C. James,
LL.D., from the position of Deputy Minister, March 1, 1912, Mr.
Roadhouse was promoted to his present position—being probably the
youngest man ever appointed a Deputy Minister in the Province of
Ontario. He has made many addresses and contributed numerous articles to
the press on the subjects with which he is specially familiar. He
married, July 3, 1912, Lillian Maud Wyndow, daughter of Wm. Wyndow,
Toronto. He is a Protestant and a member of the A.F. & A.M. In his
dealings with the public, Mr. Roadhouse is extremely courteous while in
the conduct of his department, his guiding idea seems to be clear cut
thinking and practical action. His address is Parliament Bldgs.,
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Poulin, Stanislas, K.C.=, Advocate of St. John’s, Quebec, is a son of
N. Poulin, farmer, and Marie Surpremant, his wife. He was born at
Stottsville, Que., on August 2, 1881, and was educated at Montreal
College, L’Assomption College and Laval University. From the latter
institution he graduated in 1905 with the degrees of B.A. and LL.L. He
entered the practice of law in St. John’s shortly after his admission to
the Bar, and has been solicitor for that city since 1913. In 1916 he was
appointed King’s Counsel on the recommendation of the Prime Minister of
Quebec, Sir Lomer Gouin. He has distinguished gifts as a public speaker
and is a liberal in politics. As a member of that party he was induced
to run for the Legislature in 1913, but was defeated by a fellow
Liberal. In religion he is a Roman Catholic, and was married on April
23, 1907, to Corinne, daughter of Hon. Justice A. N. Charland, Judge of
the Superior Court, St. John’s, Quebec. He has two children, Claire,
born June 24, 1909, and Simone, Oct. 26, 1912.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kent, Controller Joseph=, is the Accountant, etc., in the Ottawa River
Works Office, a branch of the Department of Public Works of Canada. He
has held that position for many years and is considered by those in
authority a reliable and painstaking official. He is a Justice of the
Peace for the County of Carleton, and is Chairman of the Grounds and
Buildings Committee of the Central Canada Exhibition Association. During
the years 1911-1912 he represented, as Alderman, Central Ward, in the
Ottawa City Council, and was elected for the years 1913, 1914, 1916,
1917, 1918 and 1919, as one of the four Controllers in charge of Civic
Affairs. For years previous to his aspiring to civic honors he was a
conspicuous figure in all kinds of sports and was active and skilled in
the games of lacrosse, football, etc. As an Alderman he was one of the
men that never faltered in his duty and his value to the city may well
be judged by the number of years he has been elected as Controller.
Controller Kent is the son of the late William and Martha (Wallace)
Kent. He was born in Quebec City on January 28, 1864, and was educated
in the Public and High Schools. Mr. Kent, in 1885, married Nellie Edna
Whitney, daughter of Phillip P. Whitney, of Ottawa, Ontario. He is a
member of the Rideau Curling Club and the Canadian Club, and of the
C.O.F., A.O.U.W., societies, and Past Master of Civil Service Lodge,
number 148, A.F. & A.M. His residence is 184 Second Avenue, Ottawa,
Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Baillie, Sir Frank, K.B.E.= (Toronto), one of the most eminent of the
younger generation of Canadian business men, and who rendered very
important service in the matter of munition production during the great
war, was born at Toronto on August 19, 1875. He is the son of John and
Marian (Wilton) Baillie, and was educated in his native city. He
commenced his business career as a clerk in the offices of the Central
Canada Loan and Savings Company, Toronto, and later became private
secretary to the eminent capitalist, the late Senator George A. Cox, in
which capacity he obtained a very close insight into modern methods of
business organization. In 1896 he was appointed accountant of the
Central Canada Loan and Savings Company, and was successively promoted
to Secretary (1898) and Assistant Manager (1901) of the same
corporation. In 1902 he became General Manager of the newly incorporated
Metropolitan Bank, being probably the youngest man ever placed in full
managerial control of a chartered bank in the history of this country.
In 1903 he founded the firm of Baillie, Wood & Croft, stock brokers, and
members of the Toronto Stock Exchange. His position as an industrial
leader began in 1910 with the organization of the Burlington Steel
Company of Hamilton, Ont., of which he is still President. In 1912 he
organized the Bankers Bond Company, Limited, Toronto, and in the same
year the Dominion Steel Foundry Company of Hamilton, Ont. Shortly after
the commencement of the European War in 1914 he organized the Canadian
Cartridge Co., Ltd., of Hamilton, of which he is President, to undertake
the much needed work of manufacturing cartridge cases for the British
Government. He personally equipped himself with knowledge of the
technical work of munition making and so successful did he prove as an
industrial organizer that he was able within two years to return to the
British Government over $750,000 profits earned from war contracts, as a
patriotic gift. Subsequently the Canadian Cartridge Company engaged in
the manufacture of anti-aircraft cases for the United States Government
on a large scale. In December, 1916, Sir Frank was appointed Director of
Aviation for Canada, and in the same month acting for the British
Government, organized and became President of Canadian Aeroplanes,
Limited, which corporation manufactured aeroplanes for the Royal Air
Force in Canada and flying boats for the American Government. On January
9, 1918, shortly after the institution by His Majesty of the Order of
the British Empire, to honor those who had rendered distinguished
service in the prosecution of the war, the subject of this sketch was
created a Knight Commander of that Order. Sir Frank is essentially an
outdoor man and his recreations include golf, motoring, curling and
yachting. He is a member of the following clubs: National, Toronto,
Albany, Lambton Golf and Country, Mississauga Golf and Royal Canadian
Yacht Club, Toronto; Victoria Club, Hamilton, and Hamilton Golf,
Hamilton. In politics he is independent and in religion an Anglican. On
June 8, 1900, he married Edith Julia, daughter of the late Aubrey White,
C.M.G., for many years Deputy Minister of Lands and Mines for Ontario.
He has three sons, Aubrey Wilton, born July 6, 1908, Frank Wilton, born
November 4, 1913, and James Wilton, born December 1, 1918; and two
daughters, Marion Wilton, born April 23, 1901, and Edith Wilton, born
October 1, 1904. He resides at 146 Crescent Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McCuaig, Clarence James= (Montreal, P.Q.), Stockbroker. Born in Quebec
City September 1, 1855, educated at Ontario College, Picton. Married
Emma Margaret, daughter of the late J. C. Rykert, Q.C., St. Catharines,
Ont., and has three sons: Lieut.-Col. D. Rykert McCuaig, D.S.O.,
Brig.-General G. Eric McCuaig, C.M.G., D.S.O., and Major Clarence N.
McCuaig. Mr. McCuaig is Honorary Colonel of the 53rd Regiment. In 1896
he bought a seat in the Montreal Stock Exchange, the firm later becoming
McCuaig Bros. & Co., in which the three sons are partners. He organized
the Sherbrooke Railway & Power Company and the Southern Canada Power
Company, of both of which he was President, but retired from these
positions to devote himself to the business of the firm during the
absence of his three sons overseas. He is a director of the Ottawa
Light, Heat & Power Co., and is a member of St. James, Canada, Montreal,
Hunt, Forest & Stream, Royal St. Lawrence, and Royal Montreal Golf Clubs
in Montreal, and of the Rideau Club, Ottawa. He is a Protestant in
religion and a Conservative in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tessier, Auguste Maurice=, Barrister, Rimouski. Born 20th of July,
1879, at Rimouski, Que. Son of the Honorable Judge Auguste Tessier of
the Superior Court, and his wife, Corrine Gauvreau, both
French-Canadians. His grandfather was the Honorable U. J. Tessier, Judge
of the Court of King’s Bench, Quebec. Mr. Tessier was educated at Quebec
Seminary and Laval University, receiving degrees, B.A. (1898), LL.M.
with very great distinction (1901). Married, February 7, 1907, to
Yvonne, daughter of Sir Alexandre Lacoste, former Chief Justice Court of
King’s Bench, Montreal. He is a director of Rimouski Land Co., and the
Canada and Gulf Terminal Railway Co., Rimouski, and Cie Fonderie de Mont
Joli. Admitted to the bar July, 1907, having studied in the office of
Sir Charles Fitzpatrick, Quebec; practised his profession first at
Richmond, with Hon. P. S. G. Mackenzie, and at Rimouski since 1905;
senior member of the law firm of Tessier & Cote. Was Crown Prosecutor
for the District of Rimouski, 1909-1913. Created K.C. in 1912. Is Mayor
of the parish of Rimouski, Warden of the County of Rimouski, and
President of the Agricultural Society of the County of Rimouski and has
been Warden of the County. First elected to the legislature at the
general elections, 1912, as a Liberal for the riding of Rimouski and
still continues to represent the County, being re-elected in May, 1916.
A Roman Catholic in religion, he is the father of two children, Yves and
Maurice. He is a member of the following clubs: Montreal Reform, Quebec
Garrison, Snellier Fish and Game Club, Kidgewick Game Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cane, James Gilbert=, 97 Delaware Ave., Toronto, and one of the best
known business men of that city, was born at Weston, Ont., the son of
Martin and Nancy (Morrison) Cane. He was educated at Weston Grammar
School, and as a youth had a thorough business training. Subsequently he
engaged in the wholesale lumber business on his own account and built up
one of the most extensive connections in Toronto. As a young man he took
an active interest in military matters and enlisted in the Royal
Grenadiers. As a member of that famous regiment he served in the
North-West Rebellion of 1885. He was present at the actions of Fish
Creek and Batoche, and was awarded the medal for that campaign.
Subsequently on the formation of the 48th Highlanders of Toronto he
became an active member of that battalion. Mr. Cane is a Liberal in
politics, though he has never been a violent partizan. At the
legislative by-election for North-West Toronto in 1916 when Hon. W. D.
McPherson sought re-election, on his elevation to the post of Provincial
Secretary, Mr. Cane, on account of his universal popularity was induced
to become a sacrifice candidate in order that the party organization
might be kept alive. The contest that ensued was one of the cleanest and
most courteous ever conducted in Canada, the two candidates being on
terms of personal friendship; and Mr. Cane polled a vote that surprised
many purely on his personal qualities. Mr. Cane is a Protestant in
religion and a member of the Masonic Order. He married Margaret B.,
daughter of the late Andrew Henderson of Toronto, and has ten children,
James M., Donald A., William, Charles, Gordon G., Nellie, Margaret,
Annie, Nora and Lillian. Three of his sons, James, William and Charles,
saw service with the Canadian army overseas in the great war and won
honorable records.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wilkes, Alfred John, LL.B. K.C.=, (Brantford, Ont.) is a distinguished
member of the Ontario bar, and prominent in the commercial and social
activities of his native City, where he was born on December 15, 1847.
He is the son of the late Lieut.-Colonel James Wilkes, formerly City
Treasurer of Brantford. His father was a native of Birmingham, England,
who came to Canada in 1821, and carried on a mercantile business in the
City of Toronto until 1823, (muddy Little York then had a population of
800 and only three brick houses), when he removed to the site of the
present City of Brantford, continued his business as a general merchant,
and was for twenty-six years City Treasurer. His mother, Eliza (Elliot)
Wilkes, was a Canadian by birth. Educated at the Public and High Schools
of Brantford until the age of sixteen, the subject of this sketch
matriculated at Osgoode Hall, at the age of sixteen, and commenced the
study of law, being articled to Hon. S. H. Blake, of the then legal firm
of Blake, Kerr, and Wells, Toronto, and was called to the bar in 1869,
heading the list, at the early age of twenty-one. Subsequently the
degree of LL.B. was conferred on him by Toronto University on passing
the usual examinations. Returning to Brantford on being admitted to the
bar, he entered into practice with the late Daniel Brooke, for three
years. Then, after practising one year alone, he formed a partnership
with Hon. Arthur Sturgis Hardy, late Premier of Ontario, which continued
from 1873 to 1898. In 1890 Mr. Wilkes was created a Queen’s Counsel by
the Ontario Government, a distinction richly merited. In 1894 he became
Acting County Crown Attorney, and five years afterwards was appointed to
that office, and on the 3rd of January, 1885, was gazetted Deputy Judge
of Brant County, acting for the late Judge Jones, once for three months
and again for six months. Mr. Wilkes enjoys an enviable distinction in
the legal profession and has long had a large and successful practice;
was City Solicitor, in partnership with Hon. A. S. Hardy, and later also
with Lt.-Col. Jones and the present Judge Alex. D. Hardy of Brant County
from 1873, and only recently resigned on account of advancing years; was
also solicitor for Waterous Engine Works Company and for late Bank of
B.N.A., and was and now is solicitor for the Bank of Montreal, with
which that bank is amalgamated, and many other corporations doing
business in the City of Brantford. Always taking a deep interest in
educational matters, Mr. Wilkes was for many years a member of the
School Board of the City of Brantford, and for four years Chairman. He
has had an extended military career, was an ensign in the Reserve
Militia in his early years, and was also for many years a Captain in the
38th Dufferin Rifles. He assisted in forming the 25th Brant Dragoons, of
which he was gazetted Lieut.-Col., retiring retaining the rank of
Lieut.-Col. Mr. Wilkes is a Director of the Royal Loan and Savings
Company, and Vice-President of the Manufacturers Life Assurance Company,
and interested in many other large financial institutions. He is a
Fellow of the Royal Canadian Institute, a Mason, being Past Master of
Doric Lodge, and has long been prominently identified with the Canadian
Order of Foresters, having been High Court Solicitor. From 1897 to 1901
he was Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada. A member of the
Church of England, and for several years a Churchwarden. Before his
acceptance of the office of County Crown Attorney he was a Liberal in
politics. He is a member of the Brantford Club, University Club,
Military Institute, and the Empire Club, Toronto. Married, June 22,
1887, to Esther Frances, daughter of Francis H. Haycock, late Collector
of Customs at Paris, Ontario, and his family comprise Marjorie H. (wife
of Lieut.-Col. F. Logie Armstrong, O.B.E.), Captain A. Burton Wilkes,
overseas with the Canadian Army Medical Corps, Captain F. Hilton Wilkes,
with Royal Canadian Dragoons in France, Captain J. F. Ransom Wilkes,
late of Military Headquarters Staff, Toronto, now of Can. Siberian
Expeditionary Force, Vladivostok, Russia, and Miss E. Gwendolyn Wilkes.




[Illustration: JNO. E. ASKWITH, OTTAWA
THOMAS BIRKETT, OTTAWA]




=Workman, Mark= (Montreal, Que.), was born in Buffalo, N.Y., on August
4, 1864, the son of Isaac and Sarah (Rosenthal) Workman. He received his
education in the public schools, and came to Montreal with his father in
1876, joining with him in the clothing business. The lad became the head
of the business in 1880, at the remarkably youthful age of sixteen
years. With unusual business instinct and untiring industry, the young
Workman piloted his enterprise along the course of steady growth until,
in 1906, the company of which he remained head was incorporated, and
expanded until its travellers covered the whole of Canada, from Atlantic
to Pacific. For nearly twenty years now (1917) the Mark Workman Company
has been contractors for the British and Canadian Governments for
military clothing, and has been responsible for many enormous contracts
during the present war. Beyond the confines of his own business, Mr.
Workman also found scope for his enterprise and ability. He interested
himself extensively in Canadian industry, notably the Dominion Steel
Corporation, of which he is one of the largest shareholders and was
elected President in 1916. Endowed with foresight and courage,
attributes which helped to raise him to his enviable position in the
business world, he believed that the formation of the Dominion Iron and
Steel Company, with its adjunct, the Dominion Coal Company, would not
only open the way for a gigantic steel enterprise in Canada which would
take care of the big domestic business in the Dominion, but also extend
to other parts of the Empire and to foreign countries. He believed in
the future of the undertaking, invested money in it, fought it
successfully through the dark days of its early experience, and won out.
In 1911 he became a director of the Corporation, and his active interest
in the management resulted in his being made chairman of the finance and
selling committees of the directorate. Mr. Workman is also the
Vice-President of the Federal Parquetry Company, of Lexington, Ky.;
vice-president of the Jacobs Asbestos Company, Ltd., of Thetford Mines,
Que., and is interested in the B. Gardner Company, of Montreal. While
the success that came to Mr. Workman brought him great wealth and
influence, his business activities did not prevent a generous and
personal interest in many charitable works, his yearly benefactions to
worthy causes and individuals being estimated at fifty to sixty thousand
dollars. He is a life Governor of the Montreal General Hospital and
other hospitals and charitable institutions, to the funds of which he is
a liberal contributor. He has given most generously to the Patriotic
Fund and to the various regimental funds, and was a subscriber to the
extent of $200,000 to the Canadian War Loan. Mr. Workman is also
prominent in philanthropic work among the Jewish population of Canada
and is president and actual upbuilder of the Mount Sinai Sanatorium for
fighting the white plague. A sample of his deep interest in the race was
his remarkable response to the appeal of Mr. Leopold Rothschild since
the outbreak of the war on behalf of Jewish sufferers in Russia. Mr.
Workman forwarded an immediate cash contribution of $5,000, with an
appended offer to supplement that gift by the subscription of $1,000 per
month. Mr. Workman married, when twenty years of age, Miss Rachel Lewis,
of Syracuse, N.Y., on February 18, 1886. He has one son, Edward, a
Lieut. in the Canadian overseas army, and four daughters, Mrs. Nathan
Gordon, of Montreal; Mrs. Harry Rosenthal, of Ottawa, and the Misses
Nina and Daisy Workman. He is a member of the Masonic and the Royal
Guardians.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wrong, Professor George McKinnon, M.A.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in
Gravesend, County of Elgin, Ontario, June 25, 1860, is a son of Gilbert
Wrong, of Aylmer, Ont., and Christina McKinnon. Educated at the
University of Toronto, from which he graduated with the degree of B.A.,
1883; M.A., 1896; also Wycliffe College, Oxford University; took Orders
in the Church of England, 1883, but has since been engaged continually
in Academic work; succeeded in 1894 the late Sir Daniel Wilson, as
Professor of History in the University of Toronto. Was a lecturer on
History and Apologetics and Dean of Wycliffe, 1883 to 1892. Received the
degree of F.R.C.S., 1908. Appointed a member of the Canadian Historical
Manuscript Committee, 1887. Is a Senator of Toronto University, and is
the author of several historical works, among which may be mentioned
“The British Nation, a History” (1903), “The Earl of Elgin” (1905), “The
Review of Historical Publications,” “The Crusade of 1883.” Appointed by
the Canadian Institute a member of the Fleming Electoral Reform
Committee. Has been a Director of Havergal Ladies’ College, Ridley
College and the Working Boys’ Home. Is a member of the Royal Historical
Society, Secretary Champlain Society. In 1886 married Sophia Hume Blake,
daughter of the Hon. Edward Blake, K.C., M.P., and is the father of the
following children: Margaret Christian, born 1887, Edward Murray (1889),
Harold Verschoyle (1891), Humphrey Hume (1894), Agnes Honoria (1903).
Professor Wrong is a member of the York Club, Toronto; The Golf Club and
Savile Club, London, England, and is recognized as being one of the
foremost scholars of the present day.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Arnold, Wm. McCullough=, General Manager of the Ottawa Car
Manufacturing Company, was born at Ottawa, October 26, 1879, and is the
son of William and Georgiana (Eaton) Arnold. He was educated at Model
and Public Schools, Ottawa. At the age of sixteen (in 1895) he commenced
his business life by joining the firm of H. N. Bate & Sons, wholesale
grocers, as clerk, where he remained for five years. In 1900 he was
appointed accountant in the firm of T. Lindsay & Co., at that time
extensive retail dry goods merchants, Wellington Street, Ottawa, and
remained with the firm for two years. In 1902 he was appointed by the
then Minister of Customs, Hon. William Patterson, appraiser in the
Customs Dept., where he remained until 1911. In 1912 he became
Purchasing Agent for the Ottawa Car Manufacturing Company, and a year
later was promoted to the position of Assistant General Manager. In the
early part of January, 1918, Mr. Arnold became General Manager of the
Company. Aside from the immense business carried on by the Ottawa Car
Mfg. Co. in the manufacture of cars of all descriptions—wagons, street
and railway cars, etc.—under Mr. Arnold’s management the company have
erected, facing on Albert Street, and running back to Slater Street, the
largest and best equipped and, architecturally, the handsomest garage to
be found in the Dominion of Canada. It covers a floor space of 60,000
square feet and holds 300 automobiles. On December 5, 1900, Mr. Arnold
married Pearl Gladys Ritchie, daughter of William D. Ritchie,
Rockcliffe, Ont. He has two sons, William Russell and Lewis Arthur, and
one daughter, Dorothy. He is a prominent member in the A.F. & A.M. and
the I.O.O.F. Societies, a member of the Canadian Car Manufacturers
Association, and of the Connaught Park Jockey, the Laurentian and the
Canadian Clubs. Mr. Arnold is a Presbyterian in religion, and a Liberal
in politics. His recreations are hockey, lacrosse, bowling and
automobiling. He resides at 149 First Ave.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wilson, James Lockie= (Toronto, Ont.), is of Scottish ancestry, the
third son of Robert Wilson and Agnes Logie, was born at Alexandria,
Ont., November 12, 1856, and educated at the Public and High Schools of
Glengarry. Is at present Superintendent of Agricultural and
Horticultural Societies of Ontario, and Managing Director of the Ontario
Vegetable Growers’ Association. Secretary of Fairs and Exhibitions
Association; Secretary and Managing Director Ontario Ploughmen’s
Association, and Secretary Ontario Horticultural Association; was
President of the Glengarry St. Andrew’s Society; President of the
Agricultural Society; President of the Farmers’ Institute; President
Patrons of Industry of Canada; President Farmers’ Association of Canada;
President Sons of Scotland Athletic Association, Toronto; President
Burns Literary Society; Grand Master Ancient Order United Workmen; Grand
Chieftain Sons of Scotland; Director Toronto Playgrounds Association;
Director Vacant Lots Garden Association; Vice-President American Civic
Association, Washington; was first President of Ontario Civil Service
Association; Farmers’ Candidate for Glengarry, House of Commons, 1896,
his opponent being Colonel R. R. McLennan. The most successful breeder
of pure-bred cattle (Ayrshires, Shropshires and Berkshires) in Eastern
Ontario, and a large prize winner at all the leading exhibitions in
Canada; the author of various official reports. The great success of the
Fairs and Exhibitions throughout the Province held under the auspices of
the various Agricultural Societies are in a large measure due to the
untiring efforts of Superintendent Wilson. The subject of this sketch
was married to Mary, daughter of late Andrew Hodge, of Cornwall, Ont.,
and is the father of six: Winnifred May (deceased), Jennie, Margaret,
Georgina, John Ruthven, winner of Military Cross 1918, and Marion. He is
a member of the following Clubs and Societies: Empire Club, Toronto, and
the Canada Lawn Bowling Club, Burns Literary Society, and Ancient Order
of United Workmen, and Sons of Scotland. In religion he is a
Presbyterian, and a supporter of the Conservative Party.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Camaraire, Alfred Frederick= (St. John’s, Que.), is a son of Joseph
Camaraire, Superintendent of M.L.H. & P. Co., of Montreal. He was born
May 12, 1881, and educated at St. John’s Academy and St. John’s High
School, later taking a commercial course at Montreal Business College,
to qualify himself for a banking career. He now holds the position of
Manager of the St. John’s (Que.) branch of the Royal Bank of Canada. He
still retains affiliations with Montreal and is a Lieutenant in the 87th
Battalion, as well as a member of the Canadian Club, the Y.M.C.A., the
Amateur Athletic Association and the Engineering Club, of that city. He
is also connected with the Knights of Pythias and the Royal Arcanum. In
religion he is a Roman Catholic and in politics a Conservative. He was
married in October, 1904, to a daughter of C. D. Hust (retired), of St.
John’s. His eldest son, Roland, born 1906, was killed by a motor
accident on Oct. 11, 1918, and he has a second son, Conrad, born 1910.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Studholme, Allan= (Hamilton) is of English origin having been born at
Drake’s Cross, Worcestershire, near Birmingham, England, December 8,
1846. Son of John and Hannah Studholme. Came to Canada in 1870; went to
Australia in 1887, returning to the Dominion in 1892. Has always been a
strong advocate of everything which would advance the cause of Labor,
and was first elected to the Ontario Legislature for the Riding of East
Hamilton as a straight Labor candidate, in December, 1906, and
re-elected 1908, 1911 and 1914. Has refused to identify himself with
either Party and has preferred to maintain his independence. Bill
protecting telephone girls from working more than five hours a day was
framed in 1907 to meet a strike. Strike being settled, bill was
withdrawn. Favors an eight-hour day for male adults. Is a member of the
General Executive, Ontario Single Tax League. Has been Vice-President of
the Social and Moral Reform Council for Canada. Is a Stovemounter and
member of the Executive of the Stovemounter and Steel Range Makers’
International Union. Is popular with the members of both sides of the
House and is recognized as one of the most fearless and independent
members of the Legislature. Married, April 27, 1874, to Priscilla
Stearne and is the father of the following children: Foster, married
Helen Holder; Gordon, married to Josephine Holder; Edward, married to
Lois Young, and May, married to Earle R. Morrow March 24, 1915.
Religion, Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tourigny, Alfred F. X.=, Advocate (Magog, Que.), was born at Batiscan,
Champlain County, Que., the son of a farmer, L. E. Tourigny and Eugenie
Trudel, who is a sister of the Honorable F. X. A. Trudel. Deciding to
get a thorough education, he studied at Three Rivers, Que., and
graduated with the degree of B.A. He studied law at Laval University,
and graduated with the degree of LL.B. On August 10, 1898, he married
Clara Marchand, the daughter of Louis Marchand, manufacturer, of Ste.
Genevieve de Batiscan, Que., and has eight children—Olivier, Charles
Edouard, Alfred, Anselme, Henri, Louis, Claire and Ives. In religion he
is a Roman Catholic and a Conservative in politics, and at the present
time he is Secretary-Treasurer of the town of Magog.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Widdifield, John W.=, Agriculturist (Uxbridge, Ont.), comes from
Pennsylvania and New Jersey stock and is of United Empire Loyalist
descent. After he graduated from the Ontario Agricultural College, he
returned “to the land,” on the farm which had been homesteaded by the
family for five generations; another branch of the family, the Lundys,
pioneering on historic soil in the Niagara peninsula during this time.
He has served as Reeve of Uxbridge Township, as Ontario County
Councillor, as editor of the “O.A.C. Review,” as Secretary of the North
Ontario Farmers’ Institute, and as Chairman of the County Committee on
Agriculture. Mr. Widdifield has been a frequent contributor to the
press, besides travelling extensively as a lecturer on Agricultural and
Natural Science topics. In the general elections of 1914 he contested
North Ontario in the Liberal interests, unsuccessfully, against Hon. W.
H. Hoyle, Speaker of the Ontario Legislature. At the by-elections for
the Ontario Legislature in Feb., 1919, as an Independent Farmers’
Candidate, he again entered the lists, at this time successfully
contesting the riding with Major Harry S. Cameron. Born in Uxbridge
Township, March 16, 1869, the son of Watson P. and Annie (Frankish)
Widdifield, he was educated at the Uxbridge High School and Ontario
Agricultural College, Guelph, Ont., being admitted to the status of
A.O.A.C. in 1894, and granted the Degree of B.S.A. by Toronto University
in the following year. He married Lucy, daughter of Cornelius Dike, July
3, 1895, and has one daughter, Annie Enid Widdifield, born July 24,
1896.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Watt, John Ralston=, Barrister (Claresholm, Alta.), was born in 1875 at
Ayr, Scotland, and educated at Ayr Academy, Wimbledon and the Glasgow
and Cambridge Universities. Graduated in 1896 with the degree of B.A.
(Cantab.), is a director of the Alberta Agricultural Fairs Association
and Secretary of Claresholm Agricultural Society; has written on “The
Turf” and other subjects to various periodicals in Canada, the United
States and Great Britain under the signature of “Craignorth.” In 1914 he
was married to Jessie G. Young.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wallis, Horace= (Toronto, Ont.), born in London, England, 1862. Has had
extensive newspaper experience and understands the work of a practical
printer in all branches of the craft. Has had a successful career as an
editor, journalist and parliamentary correspondent, having been editor
and managing director of “The Quebec Chronicle,” and Associate Editor of
the “Mail and Empire,” Toronto, for which paper he acted as
Parliamentary correspondent, 1887-91, and resident Ottawa Correspondent,
1894-8; presented with silver service by the citizens when leaving
Ottawa. Resigned position of Associate Editor of “The Mail and Empire,”
1905, to become Secretary to the Prime Minister of Ontario, and has been
Deputy Minister of the Department of the President of the Privy Council
since 1914. Has been President of the Parliamentary Press Gallery at
Ottawa and Toronto; Vice-President of the Quebec Associate Press.
Interested in motoring and golfing and identified with the Masonic
Order. Has taken an active part in the establishment of Temperance
organizations, and in the promotion of the Prohibition movement. A. F.
Wallis, Registrar of the Surrogate Court of the County of York, is a
brother, who has also had a distinguished career as a journalist. Mr.
Wallis married in 1893, Miss Margaret J. Tripp, of Toronto. He is an
Anglican in religion and has received many tributes to his worth and
acknowledgements of the esteem he is held in by his fellow citizens.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hagedorn, Charles Kappler= (Kitchener, Ont.), was born in the County of
Waterloo, February 5, 1859, son of Ernest A. P. Hagedorn and Mary
Kappler, his wife. His father was a farmer who came from Hanover,
Germany, when an orphan of twelve years old, settling in Waterloo
County, where he worked at farm labor and by his diligence and economy
acquired land and began farming on his own account, which he continued
successfully until his death, in 1875. He was one of the early settlers
of the county, clearing the homestead of 100 acres and endured all the
difficulties and privations of pioneer life. The subject of this sketch
was reared on his father’s farm and received a primary education at the
public schools which was completed at the Normal school, Toronto. In
1877 Mr. Hagedorn began teaching in the public schools of his native
county, which he continued until the end of 1884, when he turned his
attention to mercantile life and acted as travelling salesman throughout
the Province of Ontario until 1889, when he began the manufacture of
suspenders and buttons. In 1895 he organized the Berlin Suspender and
Button Company; in 1900 the present plant on King St. was erected. The
company was later incorporated and subsequently, when the name of the
city was changed, it became The Kitchener Suspender Company, Limited.
The company employs a large number of skilled operators, and their
product is known favorably throughout Canada. Mr. Hagedorn has given
fully of his time and ability to his fellow citizens and served as
Alderman in the City Council for a number of years, acting as Chairman
of the Original Commission which operated the Electric and Gas Plants
when these public utilities were taken over by the city. He has been an
active member of the Board of Trade and was for two years president. Mr.
Hagedorn is a Presbyterian in religion, and has been Superintendent of
the Presbyterian Sunday School and an Elder for many years, taking a
deep interest in temperance work. He has been President of the Waterloo
Temperance Alliance for a number of years. Mr. Hagedorn was married on
May 15, 1889, to Emily, daughter of John Cairns, of Kitchener, who was a
pioneer farmer of North East Hope Township, now retired. He is the
father of three children, Lloyd Elmo, Grover Cairns, and Edna Aleen.
Politically he is a Reformer; in business affairs and in his private
life he is a man of strict probity, and has always displayed promptness,
reliability and sterling honesty in all his relations with his fellow
citizens, by whom he is held in the highest esteem. He is well informed
and is regarded as being a progressive man thoroughly in touch with
modern progress.




[Illustration: E. C. WHITNEY
Ottawa]




=Pennington, David Henry=, one of the prominent lumber merchants of
Quebec City, formerly a member of the Legislative Assembly, and later a
member of the Harbor Commission of Quebec, was born in that city on
February the 14th, 1868. He is a son of William Pennington of Preston,
England, who for many years lived at Montmorency Falls, while engaged in
the office of the G. B. Hall Lumber Company. Entering as a junior clerk
of that company, the subject of this sketch worked his way up to the
post of general manager of the Company’s branch of operations in the
Eastern Townships. Eventually buying out the interests of the Company in
the Townships, he established himself at Lyster, there possessing two
saw-mills, a large dressing lumber mill, and a pulpwood storing station.
His business activities were soon felt in the community, making it, as
they did, an important business outlet on the Grand Trunk Railway route
between Quebec and Richmond, for the adjacent counties of Lotbinière and
Megantic. During the twelve years he resided at Lyster he was Mayor of
the place for nine of them, besides being Warden of the County of
Megantic. In 1908 he was elected to represent that county in the Local
Legislature at Quebec, where his intimate knowledge of French as well as
English, won an influence for him at once. In 1912 he sold his
properties at Lyster, and returned to Quebec, there to continue his
successful career as a lumber merchant. During these years there has
passed through his hands an annual output of from sixty to seventy
thousand cords of pulpwood alone. He was among the first to export
pulpwood to the United States, and was one of the promoters of the
Wayagamack Pulp and Paper Company of Three Rivers. He has been largely
interested for years in the asbestos industry in the Thetford Mining
district, and has a large business interest in timber limits on and near
the Lower St. Lawrence. As a public-spirited citizen he takes high rank,
having in 1916 been appointed by the Federal Government at Ottawa to the
highly responsible position of one of the three Harbor Commissioners of
his native city. He has given two of his sons to the Service of the
Empire, his eldest, Lieut. Ronald N. Pennington and his younger brother
Frank, having distinguished themselves with Canada’s “bravest” at the
front. Mr. Pennington has been married twice, first to Miss S. E. Neil,
the mother of the two lads just mentioned; and, second, Miss Mary S.
Stewart, the daughter of the late Duncan Stewart of Inverness. By the
latter he has one son and one daughter. Mr. Pennington’s mother was born
in St. John’s, Newfoundland. He is a Warden of the Anglican Cathedral
and a member of the Board of Trade, being prominent in all the public
and patriotic movements of the city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacLean, Hon. John Duncan, M.D.C.M., M.L.A.= (Victoria, B.C.), is a son
of Roderick A. MacLean and his wife, Effie Mathieson MacLean. Was born
at Culloden, P.E.I., on November 8, 1875. Educated at Prince of Wales
College, Charlottetown. Taught school in British Columbia and Alberta
until 1901, when he entered McGill University, from which institution he
graduated in 1905, with the degree of M.D.C.M. with Honors in Surgery
and Pathology. Successfully practised medicine in Arizona, U.S.A.,
Rossland and Greenwood, B.C. Was a candidate for the first time in the
Liberal interests at the general Provincial Elections for the Province
of British Columbia in 1916, when he was elected for the constituency of
Greenwood, and was subsequently appointed Minister of Education and
Provincial Secretary for British Columbia, being called to the Cabinet
on the formation of the new Liberal Government after the election.
Before taking up his residence in Victoria, the capital, the Hon. Dr.
MacLean resided at Greenwood, B.C., of which municipality he was Mayor,
1914-16. He is a member of the Masonic Order, Independent Order of
Oddfellows, and Knights of Pythias, and in religion is a Presbyterian.
Married, 1911, to Mary Gertrude, daughter of Joseph Watson of Owen
Sound, Ontario, and is the father of four children—Jessie Marion,
Roderick Watson, Elizabeth, and John Angus. The Provincial Secretary is
a member of the Pacific Club of Victoria and the Greenwood at Greenwood.
He takes a lively interest in sports, and his principal recreation is
trap shooting and curling. The Minister’s ancestors were Highland Scotch
of the Isle of Skye, Inverness. His parents came to Canada in 1834,
settling in Prince Edward Island, where his father engaged in farming.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=O’Hara, Francis Charles Trench=, Deputy Minister of Trade and Commerce
for Canada, and one of the best known citizens of Ottawa, was born at
Chatham, Ont., November 7, 1870, the second son of Robert O’Hara, Master
of Chancery in that city, and Maria S. (Dobbs) O’Hara. He was educated
at the Chatham Collegiate Institute and in 1888 entered the service of
the Canadian Bank of Commerce. His inclinations led him to literary
pursuits, however, and in 1891 he left the service of the bank to enter
newspaper work in Baltimore, Maryland. In this field he showed great
promise, but in 1896 Rt. Hon. Sir Richard Cartwright, having entered the
first Laurier cabinet as Minister of Trade and Commerce, persuaded him
to return to Canada and become his private secretary. Since then Mr.
O’Hara has continued to reside in Ottawa, and has been a vital factor in
the Department of Trade and Commerce, of which, since 1908, he has been
Deputy Minister. He was Superintendent of the Trade Commissioners
Service, to extend Canada’s markets in various parts of the world from
1904 to 1911, and from 1908 to 1911 Chief Controller of Chinese
Immigration. During the late war he rendered very important service as
Chief Canadian officer in charge of British and United States Import and
Export Trade Restrictions; until that work was assumed by the War Trade
Board in 1918. He was also a member of the Ships Licence Committee, the
Editorial Committee on Government Publications, and officer in charge
under H.M. Ministry of Munitions of the distribution in Canada of
Industrial diamonds. Since June, 1918, he has been also Deputy
Commissioner of Patents. He is a Fellow of the Royal Statistical Society
and of the Royal Colonial Institute. In 1907 the late Earl Grey, then
Governor-General of Canada, induced him to become Honorary Secretary of
his Musical and Dramatic Trophy Competitions, which for six years did
admirable service in stimulating public interest in these arts. In
1914-16 he was Local Officer for Canada for the Dominion Royal
Commission to inquire into there sources of the Overseas Dominions. Mr.
O’Hara wields a skilful pen as evidenced by numerous magazine and
newspaper contributions. He is also a Captain of the Corps Reserve of
the Governor-General’s Foot Guards. His recreations are golf, fishing
and shooting, and he is a member of the Rideau, Country and Royal Ottawa
Golf Clubs, Ottawa. He married Helen R., a daughter of the late Senator
Corby of Belleville, Ont., and has one daughter. His residence is at 125
Wurtemburg Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Henderson, William Andrew=, Barrister, Toronto, Ontario, was born at
the Provincial Capital on August 10, 1878, his parents being Andrew
Henderson and Mary Elizabeth (Carpenter). On his mother’s side he is of
United Empire Loyalist stock. A portion of the Crown grant made to his
mother’s great grandfather by George the Third, of land in Halton County
is still in the possession of the family. Educated at the Toronto Public
Schools, Jarvis Collegiate Institute, Trinity University and Osgoode
Hall. Studied law under James Milton Godfrey and Thomas Cowper
Robinette, K.C., and on being called to the Bar in 1908 became a member
of the firm of Robinette, Godfrey, Phelan and Henderson, and so
practised until 1913 when he formed a partnership with Austin G. Ross,
under the firm name of Henderson and Ross, which continued until 1915
when he practised alone until 1918 when he entered into partnership with
W. N. Irwin (Henderson & Irwin). Mr. Henderson has achieved a marked
distinction in his professional conduct of famous criminal cases and has
probably defended more people, since commencing practice, charged with
capital offences than any other Ontario Counsel in recent years. Among
the notable trials which greatly enhanced Mr. Henderson’s fame as an
able advocate may be mentioned, the baby adoption case, in which Mabel
Turner was indicted on a charge of murder; Peter Snider, Krystik and
Strinkaruk, known as the Rosedale mystery; Hassan Neby (Tucker murder);
Archie McLaughlin (the Uxbridge tragedy); a cause celebre. Mr. Henderson
has defended no less than nine persons charged with murder and many
others charged with serious offences and has a wide reputation as a
successful criminal lawyer. He has held numerous briefs in civil cases,
particularly those involving Mercantile law, being solicitor for several
large corporations. A sound lawyer with an incisive style of
cross-examination, he is able to present the law and the facts to the
Court or Jury in a convincing and effective manner. An Anglican in
religion and a Conservative in politics. He is a member of the Masonic
Order. Married July 6, 1918, to Beatrice Helen, daughter of Donald
Graham, of Toronto. Mr. Henderson has always been interested in amateur
sports and prominent in local baseball circles. He is also proficient in
boxing and swimming. A native of Toronto he is widely known and regarded
as one of the most prominent and popular members of the Ontario Bar.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Earle, Rufus Redmond, LL.B., K.C.=, 1995 19th Ave. West, Vancouver,
B.C., was born May 8, 1873, in Winchester Township, Dundas County, Ont.,
the son of Rufus Earle, a farmer, and his wife Catharine Redmond, a
distant relative of the late John and Major William Redmond, the noted
Irish parliamentary leaders. He was educated at the public schools of
Winchester Tp., Morrisburg High School, Ottawa Normal School, and
Ontario High School Teachers’ Institute, Toronto. He taught school at
Cass Bridge, Ont., 1892-3, and Morrisburg Model School, 1894-5. In 1896
he went to Manitoba and was principal of the Killarney High School for
three years, subsequently entering Manitoba University and taking up the
study of law with the present Mr. Justice Metcalfe, of the Court of
King’s Bench, Winnipeg, and the late Hon. J. H. Agnew, Provincial
Treasurer of Manitoba, Virden. He was called to the Manitoba Bar in
1904. Removing to Saskatchewan in 1905, he was immediately called to the
Bar of that province and that of Alberta also. He began practice in
Battleford, Sask., in partnership with ex-Chief Justice McGuire, of the
Bench of the North-West Territories, and played a prominent part in
public affairs. He was elected Mayor of Battleford in 1912, having
previously served as a member of the School Board and a Director of the
General Hospital there. In 1914 he was chosen President of the
Battleford Board of Trade, and military affairs also claimed his
attention. In 1911-12 he was Provisional Major and O.C. of “D” Squadron
22nd Saskatchewan Light Horse. He was also a Director of the
Saskatchewan Anti-tuberculosis League and a Bencher of the Law Society
of the province. President of the Law Society of Saskatchewan 1917. In
1918 he removed to Vancouver, where he was called to the bar of British
Columbia and at once took a prominent place in legal circles. He is a
member of the Terminal City and Canadian Clubs, Vancouver; of the
Shaughnessy Heights Golf Club and the Masonic Order. His recreations are
golf, tennis, swimming, motoring, and all outdoor sports generally. He
is a Presbyterian in religion, a Liberal in politics, and was married on
December 26, 1908, to Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Barry, Morrisburg,
Ont. He has two daughters, Mona Redmond and Marjory Kathleen, and two
sons, Barry Redmond and Max Redmond.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Buckles, Daniel, K.C.=, Barrister and Solicitor (Swift Current,
Saskatchewan), was born at Margaree, Nova Scotia, April 11, 1876, son of
Archie and Bridget Buckles. His father was a farmer. Mr. Buckles was
educated at the Public Schools of Margaree and Dalhousie University,
Halifax. On graduation, he taught school for a number of years in Nova
Scotia. Admitted to the Bar of Nova Scotia, September 24, 1907, and
successfully practised his profession at Sydney Mines, Nova Scotia,
until July, 1911, when he removed to Swift Current, and is at present
head of the firm of Buckles, Donald, McPherson, McWilliam & Thompson,
which was formed in 1913. Appointed Crown Prosecutor, 1913, for the
Judicial District, Swift Current. Elected a Fellow of the Royal Colonial
Institute, 1916. Appointed King’s Counsel 1919. Mr. Buckles, who is a
Liberal, has taken a prominent part in politics as a speaker and
organizer, and has been active in Red Cross work, and has addressed
recruiting meetings in different parts of the Province of Saskatchewan.
He is deeply interested in educational matters and is a member of the
Swift Current School Board. On January 4, 1912, he married Edna I.
Murray, daughter of S. Murray, of Milton, Nova Scotia. He is a member of
the following clubs and societies: The Canadian Club, Knights of
Columbus, C.M.B.A., F.O.E. and the Royal Colonial Institute. He is a
Roman Catholic in religion. His recreations are walking, shooting and
skating.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jarvis, Ernest Frederick=, is one of the important officials of the
civil branch of the Department of Militia and Defence, Ottawa, in which
he holds the offices of Assistant Deputy Minister and Secretary of the
Militia Council. He was born at St. Eleanor’s, Prince Edward Island, on
September 16, 1862, the son of Edward Fitzgerald Jarvis, M.D., and Lucy
DesBrisay Harding, his wife. He was educated at Summerside, P.E.I., and
entered the public service of the Dominion on March 23, 1881, before he
had completed his nineteenth year. In 1892 he was appointed Secretary to
the late Hon. J. C. Paterson, Minister of the Crown in the cabinets of
Sir John Thompson and Sir Mackenzie Bowell, and remained with him until
Mr. Paterson was sent to Manitoba as Lieut.-Governor in 1895. Continuing
in the civil service Mr. Jarvis was appointed Chief Clerk of the
Department of Militia and Defence by Sir Frederick Borden in January,
1903. He became Secretary of the Militia Council on November 28, 1904,
and Assistant Deputy Minister on September 1, 1908. His expert knowledge
of departmental organization was recognized when the administration of
Sir Robert Borden appointed him a member of the Royal Commission to
inquire into the state of records in the public departments of the
Dominion, 1912-14. During the late war and the demobilization period Mr.
Jarvis whose duties were enormously augmented has given proofs of his
great abilities as a departmental officer. He was appointed a Companion
of the Imperial Service Order on June 3, 1918. He is an Anglican in
religion and in 1892 married Ethel Colborne, daughter of the late E. A.
Meredith, LL.D., of Toronto. He resides at 347 Stewart Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McCuish, Robert George= (Regina, Saskatchewan), was born at Parkhill,
Ont., April 12, 1877, the son of Donald John and Flora McCuish. His
father was a farmer and, the family moving to the West when he was a
child, Mr. McCuish was educated at Morden (Man.) High School and at
Manitoba University. In 1898 he joined the staff of the Winnipeg
“Tribune,” and served as Sporting Editor for some years. From 1901 to
1905 he published the “Chronicle,” of Morden, Manitoba, and in 1905
founded the Fort William “Evening Herald,” which he continued to conduct
until 1907, when he decided to enter the life insurance business in
Winnipeg. He was Manager of the Ætna Life for two years, and then became
Manager of the Manufacturers Life, and in 1912-13 served as
Vice-President of the Dominion Life Underwriters’ Association. In the
latter year he came East and became Montreal Manager of the
Manufacturers Life Insurance Company, and on July 1, 1915, accepted the
position of Manager for Saskatchewan of the Canada Life Assurance
Company, with headquarters at Regina, a post he at present holds. Among
the many important offices identified with his name are those of
President of the Regina Liberal Association; Past President of the
Regina Life Underwriters; Honorary Life Member and Past President of the
Western Canada Press Association. He is a member of the Council of the
Regina Board of Trade. Clubs: St. George and National of Montreal, the
Wascona Country Club, Regina, and Assiniboia Club, Regina. His
recreations are curling and golf. He is a Knight of Pythias and a Mason;
at the present time is Deputy Supreme Chancellor for Saskatchewan of the
order K. of P., and a P.G.C. of the order for Quebec. He is a
Presbyterian in religion and on Sept. 14, 1904, married E. Maud,
daughter of Andrew Macfarlane, for many years Superintendent of the
William Hamilton Foundry, at Peterboro, Ont. He has one son, Donald
Emmerson McCuish.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Patrick, John Alexander Macdonald, K.C.= (Yorkton, Saskatchewan), one
of the best known barristers of that province, was born at Ilderton,
Ont., June 28, 1873, the son of George B. and Alecia Patrick, both
deceased. His father was a farmer and the son was educated at the
Collegiate Institute and Model School, London, Ont. Later he took a
course at the Normal School, Regina, in 1896, and taught school for six
years, concurrently taking up the study of law with Mr. Gifford Elliott,
of Yorkton, in 1899. Subsequently, in 1903, he entered the office of
George W. Watson, Yorkton, and in 1904 that of the late Hon. G. W.
Brown, ex-Lieutenant-Governor of Saskatchewan. In the latter year he was
called to the bar and since 1905 has practised in Yorkton. He is at
present head of the firm of Patrick, Doherty, Killam & Walton. He was
created King’s Counsel in 1913, is ex-President of the Law Society of
Saskatchewan and has been a Bencher of that body since 1906. He is also
a member of the Executive of the Canadian Bar Association. Mr. Patrick
has also taken a prominent part in public affairs and was Mayor of
Yorkton for four terms, 1908-9 and 1913-4, and President of the Board of
Trade from 1910 to 1913, inclusive. Earlier he held the post of Public
School Trustee from 1906 to 1909, inclusive. He is a Conservative in
politics and was an unsuccessful candidate for the Legislature at the
provincial elections of 1917. He is also a member of the Executive of
the Navy League of Saskatchewan, and of the Executive of the Canadian
Patriotic Society for that province. In religion he is a Methodist and a
Governor of Regina College, affiliated with that religious body. He is a
Past Grand Master for his province of the I.O.O.F., and his recreations
are big game hunting and farming. On Oct. 15, 1905, he married Sadie
Pearl, a daughter of the late William A. Hawkins, retired contractor, of
Yorkton, Sask., and has six children, William Alexander, John Arden,
Ethel Cecilia, Sadie Alecia, Hugh-Arthur and Mona Ione.




[Illustration: T. B. MACAULAY
Montreal]




=Hogg, Andrew Brydon=, Barrister (Lethbridge, Alberta), was born at
Flesherton, Ont., on January 24, 1883. Educated at the Public and High
Schools of Toronto and Toronto University, at which latter seat of
learning he graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1904 and in 1916
received the degree of LL.B. from Alberta University. Studied law with
the Hon. Arthur Meighen, Portage la Prairie, Manitoba, afterwards
Solicitor-General of Canada, with whom he subsequently formed a
partnership, and with whom he practised law from 1908-10, the firm being
known as Meighen and Hogg. From 1910-14 he practised alone at Carmangay,
Alberta. In 1914 he formed a partnership with Mr. Russel, the firm name
being known as Hogg & Russel, removing to Lethbridge in 1916, where he
practised alone, and in 1917 he formed a partnership with C. F.
Jamieson, the firm style being Hogg and Jamieson. On May 10, 1917, he
married Ada Wright, adopted daughter of D. H. Elton, Barrister,
Lethbridge. He is an adherent of the Presbyterian Church and a
Conservative in politics, and a member of the Masonic Order. Mr. Hogg’s
recreations are golf and motoring.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Todd, John Lancelot= (Montreal), son of the late Jacob Hunter Todd and
Rosanna (Wigley) Todd. Was born in Victoria, B.C., December 10, 1876.
Educated at Upper Canada College and McGill University, B.A., 1898;
M.D., C.M., 1900; M.R.C.S., London, 1907; D.Sc. (Hon.) Liverpool
University, 1909; a member of the staff of the Royal Victoria Hospital,
Montreal, 1901. Sent by Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine to Gambia
Protectorate and to Senegal to study trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)
and report on sanitation, 1902. Sent by Belgian Government and Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine to Congo Free State to study the same
disease and report on sanitation of the Free State posts, 1903; Director
of the Tropical Research Laboratories, Liverpool School of Tropical
medicine at Runcorn, 1905-7; has published observations on
trypanasomiasis in men and animals, on spirochactoris (tick fever), and
on other tropical and insect-borne diseases; decorated commander of the
Order of Leopold II, by the King of the Belgians in recognition of his
scientific services, 1905; awarded Mary Kingsley Gold Medal by Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, 1910. Since June, 1907, has been Associate
Professor of Parasit., McGill University; author of reports and papers
in association with the late J. Everett Dutton (embodied in the memoirs
of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and elsewhere). Married M.
Clouston, a daughter of Sir Edward Clouston, Bart., Montreal. Is a
member of the Mount Royal Club, University Club, Montreal, and York
Club, Toronto. Dr. Todd holds the rank of Major in the Canadian Army
Medical Corps, and is a member of the Board of Pension Commissioners for
Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Adamson, John Evans, B.A.= (Winnipeg, Man.), was born at Nelson,
Manitoba, on Sept. 9, 1884, and is the son of Alan J. and Julia Adamson.
He was educated at the public schools of Manitoba and Saskatchewan and
graduated from St. John’s College, Winnipeg, with degree of B.A. in
1907. Called to the Bar in 1910. Member of the law firm Adamson &
Lindsay, Winnipeg. Married Mary Turriff, daughter of Senator J. G.
Turriff, Ottawa, on April 8, 1912, and is the father of two children. Is
a member of the Carlton and St. Charles Country Club and also a member
of the Masonic Order. In religion he is an Anglican and a Liberal in
politics. His recreations are golf and motoring.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Peuchen, Lieut.-Col. Arthur Godfrey=, Capitalist, retired Manufacturer,
son of Godfrey E. Peuchen and Eliza Eleanor Clarke of Hull, Eng. born in
Montreal, April 18, 1859; educated in private schools there. His father
was a Railroad Contractor in South America and built a railroad from
Laguero to Caracas, Venezuela; his grandfather was manager of the
London, Brighton and Midland Railway in England. Canada is indebted to
Col. Peuchen for his ingenuity in being the first man to grasp the
possibility of utilizing the unmarketable portions of our hardwood
forests in a scientific way. In travelling he observed that England and
France had virtually no forests, and knowing that the Canadian lumberman
was only taking from our woods the flotable timber, leaving the
unmerchantable coarse hardwood, he conceived the idea of turning this
waste into the manufacturing of valuable chemicals: Acetic Acid, Acetate
of Lime, Acetone, Wood Alcohol and Formaldehyde, the latter being so
important for the successful growing of wheat in Canada, and the former
for the dyeing industry; also benefited the English War Office by being
the first man under the British Flag to produce acetone direct from
wood, which he supplied the Admiralty in large quantities for the
manufacture of high explosives, such as cordite. Introduced our present
system of charcoal distribution in paper bags. With Sir Wm. McKenzie and
others he organized the Standard Chemical Company with a small capital,
which he gradually through his unbounded energy increased to five
millions—beginning in 1897 by distilling only 22 tons of wood per day,
eventually by 1913 this distillation was increased to over 1,000 tons.
The production of these chemicals meant a tremendous export trade. He
erected factories at: Fenelon Falls, Deseronto, Longford Mills, South
River, Sault Ste. Marie, Fassett and Cookshire, and operated factories
at Thornbury, Parry Sound and Mount Tremblant; erected refineries in
Montreal, London, England, France and Germany, where crude alcohol was
shipped and refined; bought and operated blast charcoal furnaces at
Deseronto, and built one at Parry Sound. Was President and General
Manager of the Standard Chemical Company from 1897 to 1914. Was active
in military circles: Lt., Q.O.R., 1888; Captain, 1894; Major, 1904;
Lieutenant-Colonel, May 21st, 1912. Went to England with the Queen’s Own
in 1910 as Major, for the Imperial Fall Manœuvres at Salisbury Plain,
and part of this period was in charge of the regiment under General
French. Was Marshalling Officer in command of escort of officers of
Indian Cavalry, Royal Procession, Coronation of King George, 1911;
Officer Commanding Home Battalion Q.O.R., 1914 and 1915. Officer’s long
service decoration. Was in the “Titanic,” disaster, of which he was one
of two only surviving males in Canada. President of the Imperial Land
Co.; owner, McLaren Lumber Company, of Blairmore, Alberta, which
controls all the large green timber in Southern Alberta, also saw mills
and branch retail yards. Clubs: National, Toronto Hunt, Ontario Jockey,
Life Member Military Institute; ex-Flag Officer and Life Member of Royal
Canadian Yacht Club, having held the positions of vice and rear
Commodore. Was owner for several years of the famous yacht “Vreda,”
which crossed the Atlantic under her own canvas and won more races in
her class than any other yacht in Canada. Member of St. Paul’s Anglican
Church and a Governor of Grace Hospital. In politics a Conservative.
Col. Peuchen has a strong personality, frank and genial in manner, easy
and interesting in conversation; has crossed the Atlantic 30 odd times
and travelled extensively in many lands. Recreations, golf, riding,
yachting. He married Margaret Thompson, daughter of John Thompson, of
Orillia, 1893. One son, Lieutenant Godfrey Alan Peuchen, Imperial Royal
Field Artillery, Asst.-Adjt. H.Q. to the 26th Brigade of Artillery
during the War; daughter, Jessie, married Lieutenant Harry C. Lefroy,
M.C., of the Imperial Royal Field Artillery. Residence during the War:
Queen Anne’s Mansions, St. James Park, London, England; summer home,
“Woodlands,” one of the most picturesque spots on Lake Simcoe.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Forin, John Andrew= (Nelson, B.C.), Judge of the County Court of West
Kootenay, is a son of John Forin, Architect, of Belleville, Ont., where
he was born on July 20, 1861. He was educated at Albert College,
Belleville, and at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and was called to the Bar of
Ontario in 1885. He saw service in the North-west Rebellion of that year
as a private in the Queen’s Own Rifles of Toronto, and holds the medal
and clasp for that campaign. Later he practised in British Columbia and
received his present judicial appointment in 1896. He still retains his
connection with military affairs and at the time of writing is Officer
Commanding of the 107th Regiment, B.C., with the rank of Major. Since
1915, the Internment camp at Morrissey, B.C., and the guards at the
Trail, B.C., Smelter have been details of the regiment mentioned. He has
also devoted some attention to literary pursuits and has published
essays on legal and sociological subjects. His recreations are curling
and golf; he is a member of the Nelson and Rossland Clubs and of the
Scottish Clan Society. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and on May 18,
1895, was married to Mary, daughter of Peter T. Dunn, merchant, of
Vancouver, B.C. He has five children, Jean Victoria, Isabel Dunn, John
Douglas, Peter McLaren, and Mary Edith Forin.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Coburn, John W.= (Nanaimo, B.C.), one of the leading lumbermen of the
Pacific Coast, was born at Harvey, New Brunswick, the son of A. W.
Coburn, farmer and contractor, and Elizabeth Messer, his wife. He was
educated in the public schools of his native province and, later, in
private schools in British Columbia. As a youth he took up railroading
and had sixteen years’ experience therein, principally as a passenger
conductor. Subsequently he went into the lumber business and was
extremely successful. His interests are now very extensive. He is
President of the Ladysmith Lumber Co., of Nanaimo; the Ladysmith
Hardware Co., and of the Last West Lumber Co., which latter corporation
does retail business in the Western Provinces. He is also a director of
the Shawinigan Lake Lumber Co. He has shown a progressive and energetic
spirit in public affairs and is an ex-President of the Nanaimo and
Ladysmith Boards of Trade. He has also filled the following municipal
offices: Mayor of Wellington, B.C., and of Ladysmith, B.C. (for three
terms) and School Trustee and Alderman for three terms, when his
business interests prevented him continuing in further civic affairs in
Nanaimo. He is a member of the Masonic Order, is a Presbyterian in
religion and a supporter of Union Government. On Feb. 8, 1899, he
married Ellen Cowie (his second wife), a daughter of Alexander Cowie,
Elora, Ont., by whom he has three children, Wallace, Gordon and Lorna
Maud.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ingram, George C., B.A.=, 1167 2nd Ave. N.W., Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan,
one of the well known business men of that province, was born in
Aberdeen, Scotland, on October 16, 1867, the son of James and Elizabeth
(Leith) Ingram. When nine months old his parents emigrated to Tipton,
Iowa, where the subject of this sketch spent twenty years on a farm. He
was educated in the local schools of Tipton and later took a course at
the Northern Indiana Normal School, Valparaiso, Indiana, taking the
degree of B.A. In 1890 he removed to Minnesota, where he practised as a
surveyor for two years, after which he founded the Ingram Lumber Co., of
Sank Centre, Minn., continuing in business there until 1910. In the
latter year he moved to Saskatoon, Sask., as special representative of
the Western Retail Lumbermen’s Association, a post he held until 1912,
when he became General Manager, Director and Secretary of Security
Lumber Company, Limited, of Moose Jaw, a position he still holds. While
a resident of the United States he was President (1905-6) of the
Northwestern Lumbermen’s Association, Minneapolis. He has served as an
Alderman and is a Liberal in politics. His recreation is golf and he
belongs to the Prairie Club, Moose Jaw, and to the A.F. & A.M.
(Shriner). On Sept. 22, 1896, he married Lulu, daughter of the late
David Wilcox, and has three children, Howard C., Hildred and George L.
Ingram.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Shepherd, Simpson James=, 614 11th Street South, Lethbridge, Alberta
Barrister-at-law, is a native of Uttoxeter, Lambton County, Ont., where
he was born February 6, 1877, the son of James and Mary (Dowler)
Shepherd. His father was a farmer and he was educated at Forest High
School, and later at McGill University. He had a brilliant career in the
latter institution and graduated in 1906 with the degree of B.C.L.,
capturing a Macdonald travelling scholarship in law. After graduation he
was thus enabled to spend one year in France, and later decided to
settle in the West, going to Lethbridge in 1908, when he was called to
the Alberta Bar and formed a partnership with Mr. W. C. Simmons. The
latter was appointed a judge of the Supreme Court of the province in
1910, and Mr. Shepherd then formed a partnership with Mr. Allen E.
Dunlop, previously of the Nova Scotia Bar. Later Mr. George A. Rice
joined the firm, which is now known as Shepherd, Dunlop and Rice. He is
a member of the Alberta Returned Soldiers Commission, and of the Chinook
and Lethbridge Golf Clubs, as well as the Masonic Order. His recreations
are golf, curling and shooting. He is a Liberal in politics and a
Methodist in religion. On September 7, 1908, he married Ethel M. S.
Dixon, daughter of Mr. John Dixon, merchant of Maple Creek,
Saskatchewan, and has three daughters, Marjorie C., Nancy D., and Joan
Douglas by name.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Edwards, Hon. William Cameron= (Rockland, Ont.), was born in Clarence,
May 7, 1844, and is a son of the late William Edwards, a native of
Portsmouth, Eng., who came to Canada about the year 1820, and settled in
the Township of Clarence, County of Russell, Ont., and his wife Ann
Cameron, a native of Fort William, Scotland. He was educated at the
Ottawa Grammar School. Upon the completion of his education he became an
extensive lumber manufacturer, and his business has grown to one of the
largest in Canada. He is known as a successful stock raiser, and takes a
keen interest in agriculture generally, having been President of the
Russell Agricultural Society for many years. He established the lumber
firm of W. C. Edwards & Co., in 1868; is a director of the Canadian Bank
of Commerce; a director of The Toronto General Trusts Corporation,
Toronto, and many other Toronto corporations and companies. After making
a success of his own business interests, he was induced to enter
politics by many of his closest friends, and became the Liberal
Candidate for the House of Commons for Russell at the general election
of 1882, and was defeated, but was later elected at the general
elections of 1891, 1896 and 1900, and became one of the foremost members
in Parliament, and a very close friend of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, the then
Premier of Canada. In January, 1885, he married Catherine M., eldest
daughter of the late William Wilson, of Cumberland, Ont., and since
their marriage they have drawn many warm personal friends to them both
at Ottawa and their home town, Rockland. At the outbreak of the War in
1914, between Germany and her Allies, and the British-French-Russian
Allies, Mr. Edwards displayed much generosity, and gave freely both of
his time and money in the interest of the Motherland, and continued his
services until the close of the War. On March 17, 1903, he was summoned
to the Senate, as a reward for the many sacrifices made by him during
his political and business life, and has filled the position with marked
ability.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rust, C. H., C.E.= (Victoria, B.C.), was born in Essex, England, on
Christmas Day, 1852; he received a thorough elementary and technical
education, both in the Mother Country and in Canada. He entered the
service of the City of Toronto, Ont., as rodman in 1877, and continued
in that capacity until 1881, when he was promoted to the position of
assistant engineer, and in 1883 was made assistant engineer in charge of
sewers. Mr. Rust held this position until 1891, and during his
incumbency in this office superintended the construction of 150 miles of
sewer. From 1887 until 1891 he was principal assistant engineer. In 1892
Mr. Rust was made acting chief engineer, and in July, 1898, he was
appointed to the office of Chief Engineer of the city, and filled that
office to the general satisfaction not only of the city, but also of the
citizens. His work entailed much labor. He had charge of sewers,
roadways, sidewalks, bridges and waterworks, besides which all routes of
street cars and style of cars used had to be approved by him. In 1887
Mr. Rust was elected a member of the Canadian Society of Engineers, and
in 1901 he became one of its presidents. In 1899 he was elected a member
of the American Society of Civil Engineers, and was elected one of the
Vice-Presidents in 1913, and he is very prominent in his profession. In
the beginning of 1912 Mr. Rust decided to resign the office of City
Engineer to accept a similar position in the city of Victoria, B.C., and
upon leaving Toronto he was presented with testimonials from all
sections of the community showing the high esteem and appreciation in
which he was held as a public servant and citizen.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Barry, Walter H.= (Montreal, Que.), Merchant, is the son of George
Barry and Margaret Bond, and relative of Arthur Barry and John A. Barry;
was born in Toronto, June 14, 1870, and educated at the High School.
Married Isabel L. Logie, daughter of Robert Logie, a merchant of New
York, and has one son, Gerald A. Barry, now Lieut. Gerald A. Barry. He
is a member of the Masonic Fraternity and member of the Royal Victoria
and Montreal Clubs, attends the English Church. His recreations are
golf, fishing and curling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Adamson, Alan Joseph=, is the son of John Evans Adamson, of “Kill
House,” Clifton, County of Galway, Ireland, and Harriette Bell, his
wife, who was a daughter of the Rev. James Bell, of Baragher, Queen’s
County, Ireland. He was born at Kill House, Clifton, on August 1, 1857,
and educated at the High School in Dublin. His father was a landed
gentleman in Ireland and the proprietor of the Kill estate, and the
great-grandson of the fifth earl of Carberry. Mr. Adamson married in the
year 1882, Julia, daughter of Robert Turriff, of Quebec, and a sister of
J. G. Turriff, M.P. (Assiniboia), and is the father of the following
children; John Evans and Christopher Arthur, Barristers, Winnipeg, the
latter of whom was elected as Rhodes Scholar for the Province of
Saskatchewan, in 1907; Allan Bell, Inspector, Winnipeg; James Douglas,
Captain C.A.M.C.; Herbert, Lieut. 27th Winnipeg Battalion; Lily, wife of
Capt. A. S. Bell, Engineer; Harriette, Nurse, Winnipeg General Hospital,
and Gilbert, St. John’s College, Winnipeg. He is a member of the
Manitoba Club, the Canadian Automobile Club, and Colonial Institute,
London, England. He is a member of the Church of England, and the
Masonic Order, and is a Liberal in politics; represented the
constituency of Humboldt, in the House of Commons 1904-1908. The subject
of this sketch was a director of the Northern Bank and of the
Saskatchewan Valley & Manitoba Land Company. He went originally to
Winnipeg and embarked in the grain trade in 1883; was
Secretary-Treasurer of the Manitoba Grand Company in 1896; removed to
Rosthern in 1899; was largely instrumental in attracting American
capital and settlers to that region, and while there organized Canadian
Territories Corporation, of which he was President and Manager. This
body holds the record for the value of its transactions among all the
corporations existing in the west. Is an Anglican in religion and
resides at 160 Mayfair Avenue, Winnipeg, and has also a residence at
“Carberry Hill” Limona, Florida. His principal recreation is golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Diver, Frederick= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in London, Eng., and came
to this country with his parents when a youth. Mr. Diver learned the
business of electrotyping and stereotyping, engraving, designing and
“The Art Preservative of All Arts,” namely, printing. Some years ago,
Mr. Diver established the Central Press Agency, Limited, of which he is
the President. The head offices of the Company are situated at 110-16
York St., Toronto, and the Company has large business connections
throughout the Dominion of Canada. Mr. Diver owes his success to his
untiring industry, complete knowledge of the details of the various
branches of the work of his Company, and to his practical business
ability. His wife died a few years ago leaving her surviving children:
Lt. F. G. Diver, who was since killed in action at the Battle of the
Somme on Oct. 21, 1917; Ethel May, now wife of Halsey Wells of Detroit,
U.S.A., and Victor Diver, Vice-President of the Central Press Agency,
Ltd. Mr. Diver is a member of the National, Rosedale and Mississauga
Clubs; of the Masonic Order, and also of the Church of England.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bellemare, Adelard= (St. Paulin, Que.), was born March 2, 1871, at St.
Paulin, County of Maskinonge, P.Q., son of François Bellemare and Delima
Julien, both French-Canadians. His grandfather was a teacher in 1845.
Was educated at Three Rivers Seminary. Was formerly professor for three
years at the College de Joliette and St. Laurent. Married, Feb. 2, 1898,
to Parmelia, daughter of Edmond Bourgeois of Joliet, and is the father
of six children: Hector, Lucien, Maria, Albert, Jeanne and Cecile. Was
lecturer for the C. N. d’Economie. Elected to the House of Commons at
the general elections in 1911, as an Independent Conservative, to
represent the constituency of Maskinonge. In religion Mr. Bellemare is a
Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Birkett, Thomas=, was born in Bytown (now Ottawa), February 1, 1844. He
is the son of Miles and Elizabeth (Wren) Birkett, who came to Canada
from Cumberland, England, in 1838, and who saw that he received a good
education at the Public and Grammar Schools, and that he was thoroughly
prepared for commercial business life. That their efforts were not in
vain was shown at an early date, in the rapid and successful progress
that greeted his efforts and ventures. But, and in addition, they had
the good fortune to see their son make his mark in School, Municipal,
Provincial and Dominion and other public affairs and to be elected to
many public offices of trust where he distinguished himself in various
ways and established an enviable record for progressive, reliable and
lasting service. In every public office, to which he was elected he
devoted the attention and care that was made so evident and pronounced
in his private business with the result that he not only made good, but
cemented and enlarged the confidence and esteem of those who had
selected him as their representative. Whether as director or trustee of
a public institution, as member of the city council, mayor of the city,
or as member of Parliament, his conduct was the same and the result the
same, viz., conscientious devotion to duty attended by successful
results. Many a time it has been proclaimed, even by those who were
politically opposed to him, that having rendered to the State the
continuous and valuable public services that he did, and in a manner so
effective, that he would long ago have been called to the Canadian
Senate, and great has been the surprise that he has not been. But being
still robust in health, mentally and physically, and his activities
being as marked as they were in former years, it may not be out of place
to say that a seat in the Senate will be honored by his presence at an
early date. Having served as an apprentice in the hardware trade to Mr.
Isaac, in 1866, Mr. Birkett opened a retail hardware store on Rideau
Street, prospered, and soon had to remove to larger premises. For thirty
years he kept in the retail business, which year by year assumed larger
proportions and supplied goods to the many prosperous and wealthy
manufacturing towns and villages and thriving agricultural districts in
the Ottawa Valley. Finding the demand for his goods still on the
increase in 1896 he converted his private firm into a joint stock
company, of which he became president, his son Thomas M. Birkett,
vice-president, and other members of the family shareholders, and
launched into the wholesale business under the title of Thomas Birkett &
Son Company, Limited, of Ottawa. To-day this wholesale firm is one of
the most extensive, if not actually the largest hardware house in
Eastern Ontario and is known from one end of Canada to the other. The
building forms one of the best business blocks in Ottawa and is most
advantageously situated, the warehouse doors opening direct on the
wharves of the Rideau Canal basin. Mr. Birkett served as School Trustee
from 1869 to 1873; as Alderman, from 1873 to 1878; as Mayor, during 1891
and 1892. Since 1900 he has been Trustee, Ottawa Collegiate Institute.
In 1893 he declined nomination to the House of Commons, but in 1900 he
was elected by a large majority. He ran in 1904 and 1908 and was
defeated. Mr. Birkett is President, Thos. Birkett, Son & Co., Ltd.,
Wholesale Hardware Merchants, Canal St., Ottawa; Director,
Pritchard-Andrews Engraving Co.; Life Director, Carleton County
Protestant Hospital; Life Director, Protestant Hospital for the aged. He
was instrumental in erecting the Lady Stanley Institute for Trained
Nurses; is Honorary Director, Central Canada Exposition Association. In
1871 he married Mary Gallagher, daughter of Thomas Gallagher. She died
in March, 1902. In August, 1904, he married Henrietta Gallagher, his
deceased wife’s half-sister. He is a member of the following clubs:
Ottawa Hunt, Rivermead Golf (director), and of the A.F. & A.M. (32nd
degree), the Oddfellows, and St. George’s Societies. His recreation is
golf. Politics, Conservative. Religion, Methodist, and he resides at 306
Metcalfe Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Anderson, Alexander James= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Adelaide
Township, Middlesex County, July 1, 1863, and was educated at Strathroy
High School and Osgoode Hall. Toronto is as famous for its Bar as it is
in its commercial and manufacturing industry, and in alluding to its
leading members, prominent mention must be made of the subject of this
sketch. Mr. Anderson started his professional career with J. S.
Fullerton & Co., which partnership continued from 1891 to 1897; from
1894 to 1906 he practised alone; from 1907 to 1909 was a member of the
firm of Anderson & Gray, and entered his present partnership as senior
member of the firm (Anderson & McMaster) in 1910. Having municipal
aspirations, Mr. Anderson was elected to the Council of Toronto Junction
from 1899 to 1902; was corporation solicitor for West Toronto until the
amalgamation with the city in 1909, when he was elected alderman to
represent Ward Seven in the City Council. He was for four years a member
of the West Toronto School Board, and was elected Chairman of that body
in 1899. During the elections in 1904 he was unanimously selected by the
Liberals of South York as the party standard bearer, and though defeated
he made a very creditable showing at the close of the polls. Mr.
Anderson has many warm friends and supporters in the western portion of
the city, and he will show unexpected strength should he again become a
candidate. He is a Mason and takes an active interest in the welfare of
the Order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Barnard, Hon. George Henry, K.C.=, Member of the Senate of Canada
(Victoria, B.C.), is a son of Francis Jones Barnard, a Canadian who went
to British Columbia from Ontario, when gold was first discovered in the
Fraser River, in 1859, and shortly afterwards became the founder of the
stage and express line from Yale, head of navigation on the Fraser, to
Barkerville, 400 miles to the north. On the famous Yale-Cariboo Road the
elder Barnard long operated a line of stages and carried the mail to the
mountain settlements of the district. The maiden name of the mother of
the subject of this sketch was Ellen Hillman, and he was born at
Victoria, B.C., Oct. 9, 1868. Sir Frank S. Barnard, K.C.M.G.,
Lieut.-Governor of British Columbia, is a brother. He was educated at
Trinity College School, Port Hope, and qualified for the law, entering
practice at Victoria. He was appointed King’s Counsel on Dec. 24, 1907.
Senator Barnard took an active interest in municipal affairs and served
as Alderman, 1902-3. In 1904 he was elected Mayor of Victoria and
continued in office for two years. He was first elected to the House of
Commons for that city at the general elections of 1908, as a
Conservative and was re-elected in 1911. On Oct. 23, 1917, he was
elevated to the Senate of Canada by the newly-formed Union Government of
Sir Robert Borden. Senator Barnard is a prominent social figure both at
Victoria and Ottawa, and is a member of the Union Club, Victoria, the
Vancouver Club, the Rideau Club, Ottawa and the Constitutional Club,
London, Eng. He was married on June 5, 1895, to Ethel Burnham, daughter
of Lieut.-Col. H. C. Rogers, Postmaster of Peterboro, Ont., is an
Anglican in religion and a Unionist in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ashby, Joseph Seraphin Aime, M.L.A.= (Lachine, Que.), son of George
Ashby and Eprosime Messier, both French Canadians; was born at Ste.
Marie de Monnoir, Province of Quebec, April 30, 1876. Educated at the
college of Ste. Marie de Monnoir. Married Hectorine Ste. Marie, daughter
of Pierre Zotique Ste. Marie, of Longueuil, Que., and is the father of
two children, Lucette, born November 7, 1908, and Georgette, born August
7, 1910. Mr. Ashby is a Roman Catholic in religion, and is a member of
the Montreal Reform Club, the Order of Catholic Foresters, the Alliance
Nationale, Union St. Joseph de Lachine, and The Knights of Columbus. Was
elected to the Quebec Legislature as the Liberal representative for the
constituency of Jacques Cartier on May 16, 1916. Mr. Ashby is a Notary
Public by profession.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gariepy, Wilfrid, B.A., B.C.L., K.C., M.L.A.= (Edmonton, Alberta), was
born at Montreal, P.Q., on March 14, 1877. He is the son of Joseph H.
Gariepy, for many years a pioneer and leading merchant in the city of
Edmonton, an alderman and school trustee, and, by the way, a native of
St. Lin, P.Q., where was also born Sir Wilfrid Laurier. In days gone by
the Gariepys and the Lauriers intermingled considerably and Sir Wilfrid
when a boy attended the parish common school along with the grandfather
of the hero of this sketch. It was only natural that our subject should
at his birth be christened after the renowned Liberal Leader, who in
1877 was already in the political limelight. Four generations of
Gariepys were born and lived on the same homestead at St. Lin, three
miles from the parochial church. The mother of Mr. Wilfrid Gariepy,
Etudienne Boissonneault, who is yet living and residing in Edmonton, as
well as her husband, is a daughter of Noel Boissonneault, one of the
founders of the Town of Morinville, Alberta, as he came from the
Province of Quebec with the first contingent of colonists brought west
in 1891 by the late Father J. B. Morin, one of the most enthusiastic
colonization agents of his day. Noel Boissonneault was at one time a
leading Liberal politician in the Eastern Townships and for some years
was the moving spirit of the St. Onge Gold Mining Company, which did
business on the Gilbert River in Beauce County, P.Q. A maternal ancestor
of our subject was among the French-Canadian soldiers who fought for the
British Crown in 1812. On the other hand it is worth noting that another
figured in the uprising of 1837-1838, in favor of constitutional
government, on the shores of the St. Lawrence. Mr. Wilfrid Gariepy was
educated at the Sisters of Providence Academy, “Le jardin de l’enfance,”
on St. Denis Street, in Montreal, beginning in September, 1881; at Notre
Dame College, Côte des Neiges, Montreal, where he spent two years; at
St. Laurent’s College with the Fathers of the Holy Cross, remaining
there until January, 1891, when ill-health compelled him to abandon his
classical studies. He was then in the middle of versification. Deciding
to turn his activities into other channels, he attended the Montreal
Business College for some months and afterwards became a clerk in his
father’s store: first, in general groceries on St. Paul Street,
Montreal, and later in Edmonton, on Jasper Avenue, to which town the
family moved in March, 1893. In Montreal, although very young, Mr. W.
Gariepy indicated his political tastes by being one of the active
members of the “Club Letellier,” one of the oldest Liberal
organizations, and also by taking a hand in a mayoralty campaign in
favor of the Hon. James McShane, the famous “people’s Jimmy,” and by
working for the Hon. Honoré Mercier and his candidates after the famous
“renvoi d’office.” In 1893 Edmonton had just become a town, with a
population of less than 1,000, no modern conveniences, with the
exception of a rudimentary telephone and electric light system. Needless
to say, streets were unpaved and there were not even any sidewalks.
Still the town had a Mock Parliament, and we find our subject a member
of it, with a portfolio in its government. Mr. W. Gariepy was elected
one of the secretaries of the Liberal Club and also became, in 1894, at
its foundation, secretary to the Société de St. Jean Baptiste of
Edmonton. In 1895, with the Hon. Frank Oliver, who had just been
selected as Liberal candidate of Alberta, Mr. W. Gariepy made a tour
north of Edmonton, during which he addressed several meetings. It was in
September, 1895, that Mr. Gariepy found his health and other
circumstances such that he was able to return to the St. Laurent College
to complete his classical course. He stayed in that institution until
June, 1897, during which period he for one year filled the presidency of
the Literary Academy of the college. In the rhetoric bacheloriate on
papers submitted by Laval University, Mr. Gariepy succeeded with great
honors. He next went to the Seminary of Philosophy with the Sulpician
Fathers, to follow a two years’ course in philosophy, which gave him the
degree of Bachelor of Arts of Laval University. He chose the profession
of law and became articled in Montreal to Mr. Matthew Hutchinson, now a
judge of the Superior Court, in Sherbrooke. P.Q., with whom he remained
for three years, in the meantime following the law lectures at McGill
University, from which institution he received, in April, 1902, the
degree of Bachelor of Civil Law. In 1901 Mr. Gariepy had the honor of
being selected by the McGill Faculty of Law to represent it at the Laval
Law Students’ Banquet, at the city of Quebec.

In the federal and provincial campaigns in 1900, Mr. W. Gariepy for
several months addressed meetings, spending the bulk of his time in the
constituency of Terrebonne, at the request of the late Honorables
Raymond Prefontaine and Jean Prévost. At that period, at the formation
of a Liberal Students’ Association in Montreal, he was elected its
Secretary, while the Vice-President thereof was Walter Mitchell, the
present Provincial Treasurer of Quebec. Having been admitted to the Bar
of the Province of Quebec in January, 1903, Mr. Gariepy immediately
secured his enrolment in the Bar of the North-West Territories and
opened an office in Edmonton on the same spot where years before he had
been carrying on work as a clerk in his father’s store. In the following
May a by-election having been called to elect a member for the
constituency of St. Albert, in the North-West Territories Legislature,
at a convention, Mr. Gariepy accepted the nomination but for personal
reasons subsequently withdrew from the contest. For three years Mr.
Gariepy was a member of the law firm of Taylor, Boyle and Gariepy, the
senior member being Judge H. C. Taylor, of Edmonton District, and the
other member, the Hon. J. R. Boyle, now Minister of Education in the
Alberta Government. From 1907 to 1911, Mr. Gariepy was a member of the
law firm of Gariepy & Landry, his partner being Mr. Hector Landry, son
of the late Sir Pierre Landry, of New Brunswick. Mr. Gariepy is now the
senior member of the firm of Gariepy, Dunlop & Pratt. This firm is among
the leading firms of the City of Edmonton, and while his present
political activities prevent our subject from devoting much time to law,
he has always paid great attention to his law practice. He has had the
distinction of figuring as leading counsel in two murder cases—one, the
Gladu Brothers, who were acquitted, and the other the Barrett case, that
life convict who was condemned to capital punishment after having been
convicted of wilfully killing with an axe, Deputy-Governor Stedman, of
the Edmonton Penitentiary. For six years Mr. Gariepy was a member of the
Separate School Board of Edmonton, being chairman of the commission for
two years. It was under his chairmanship that the Separate School on
Third Street was erected. In December, 1906, he was elected an alderman
of the city of Edmonton, and although running for the first time in the
city at large, as there are no wards, he came second on the list, the
first one beating him only by one vote. Two years later Mr. W. Gariepy
was re-elected, this time at the head of the list, having some 300 more
votes than the next man. While an alderman he held the chairmanship of
several important committees and was delegated on two occasions: first,
to Chicago with ex-Mayor J. A. McDougall, to inspect the automatic
telephone system, which was eventually to be installed in Edmonton; and,
second, to Ottawa with ex-Mayor Lee, to interview the Dominion
Government respecting the Dominion’s contribution towards the
construction of the C.P.R. high-level bridge between Strathcona and
Edmonton. It was during Mr. Gariepy’s term of office that the Edmonton
automatic telephone system was installed; that the street railway system
was completed and put in operation; and that the C.P.R high-level bridge
was completed and opened for traffic; and that negotiations for the
amalgamation of Edmonton and Strathcona were begun. In 1910 Mr. Gariepy
was chairman of the civic committee that organized such a splendid
reception as was tendered to Sir Wilfrid Laurier, then Prime Minister,
on the occasion of his visit to the Capital of Alberta, and it was at
that time that Mr. Gariepy secured the adoption of a resolution by the
city council giving to a park the name of “Laurier Park.” Mr. Gariepy
took a leading part in the federal campaigns of 1904, 1908 and 1911. In
1909 he was the unsuccessful Liberal candidate in the provincial
constituency of St. Albert, his successful opponent being also a
Liberal, as there was no Conservative candidate running. In 1911 he was
elected Grand Knight of the Edmonton Council of the Knights of Columbus;
in 1907 he was elected president of the Edmonton Société de St. Jean
Baptiste; in 1912 he was elected vice-president of the French-Canadian
Alberta Convention, held in Edmonton, and by that convention was elected
as the only delegate to represent it at the French-Canadian Congress
held that year in the city of Quebec; in 1913 he was elected president
of the Society du Parler-Français of Alberta, and as such presided over
the French-Canadian congress of Alberta, held at Edmonton in 1914. On
September 9, 1903, Mr. Wilfrid Gariepy married Albertina Lessard,
daughter of Jean P. Lessard and Annie Davidson, of Cranbourne, P.Q., a
sister of the Hon. P. E. Lessard, M.L.A., for St. Paul, and a former
business partner of Mr. J. H. Gariepy. We may note that Mr. P. E.
Lessard had previously married Miss Hélène Gariepy, the eldest sister of
our subject. From the marriage of Mr. W. Gariepy with Miss Lessard have
been born four children: Hormidas, Marcelle, Wilfrid and George. Mr.
Gariepy is a member of the Y.M.C.A. and a lieutenant in the 101st
Edmonton Fusiliers. In 1912 he was elected as president of the Edmonton
Liberal Association; on March 17, 1913, he was elected a member of the
legislature for Beaver River. At the first session of that parliament,
in the following September, he was chosen to make the speech in moving
the adoption of the Speech from the Throne. On November 28, 1913, he was
sworn in as Minister of Municipal Affairs, becoming a member of the
administration headed by the Hon. Arthur L. Sifton. On December 15,
1913, Mr. Gariepy was re-elected for Beaver River, by acclamation. On
December 22, 1913, at the Cecil Hotel, as a compliment on his becoming a
member of the government, his French-Canadian compatriots, numbering
some four hundred, tendered him a banquet. In September, 1915, Mr.
Gariepy represented, with the Hon. Mr. Sifton, the Province of Alberta
at a national tax conference held in San Francisco, California. In
March, 1913, Mr. Gariepy was made a King’s Counsel for the Province of
Alberta. In August, 1915, the same honor was conferred on him by the
Province of Quebec. At the date of writing this biography, Mr. Gariepy
has been for over five years a member of the Alberta Government and his
friends predict that he has yet a long public career to fulfil. As
Minister of Municipal Affairs for Alberta Mr. Gariepy has been
responsible for the introduction of legislation which has been a
landmark in the western provinces, namely: The Wild Lands Tax Act and
the Municipal Hospitals Act.




[Illustration: SENATOR W. C. EDWARDS
Ottawa]




=Byrne, Daniel J.=, Vice-President and General Manager, Leonard
Fisheries, Montreal, Que., producers, curers and packers of sea and lake
foods. Entered the employ of that firm as a lad in 1886, and steadily
rose to his present responsible position with a reputation as one of the
leading authorities in Canada on all questions relating to the fishing
industry. Leonard Fisheries, which started business in 1875, and is now
one of the leading concerns in its line, was incorporated under its
present form in 1917, as a result of the consolidation Leonard Bros.,
Matthews & Scott, and A. Wilson & Son. This was brought about largely
through the efforts of Mr. Byrne, with the object of effecting economies
in organization and distribution. The firm has branches in many parts of
the Maritime Provinces, notably St. John, N.B., and Halifax, N.S. The
subject of this sketch was born in Montreal, April, 1871, and married
Mary Louisa, daughter of William Dalt, of Montreal, July, 1900, by whom
he has one son, John W. In 1915 he was called on to address the
Conservation Commission at Ottawa on the subject of “Canada’s
Fisheries.” Mr. Byrne is a member of the following Clubs: The
Engineer’s, Country and Rotary. He is a Roman Catholic in religion and
Independent in politics. His recreation is golf, fishing and motoring.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Harper, John Murdoch= (Quebec City), the Canadian educationist and
author, came to Canada in the year of Confederation, 1867, to take
charge of an Academy in New Brunswick. He was born in Johnstone,
Renfrewshire, Scotland, on the 10th of February, 1845, the eldest son of
Robert Montgomery Harper, the founder of the first newspaper published
in that town. His grand-uncle was Robert Montgomery, who was for many
years a mill-owner and manufacturer in Johnstone. From school he entered
the Glasgow E. C. Training College, after taking a Queen’s Scholarship,
and graduated as a teacher from it with the highest certificate of his
year granted by the Lords of the Council of Education, London, and with
special certificates from the Science and Art Department, Kensington.
After coming to Canada he became a graduate of Queen’s University,
Kingston, and thereafter received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy,
from the Illinois University, after completing the three years’
post-graduate course in the section of metaphysical science. In 1881 he
was unanimously elected a Fellow of the Educational Institute of
Scotland, an honor seldom conferred on teachers laboring outside of
Great Britain. For a time he acted as principal of the Model Schools of
Nova Scotia, and afterwards as principal of the Victoria High School of
St. John, New Brunswick. While there he was asked by the Premier of
Prince Edward Island to become Superintendent of Education in that
province, which he declined to accept. But when the Victoria School
buildings were destroyed in the great fire of St. John, he was induced
to accept the principalship of the Provincial Normal School in
Charlottetown and the Supervisorship of the City Schools, while St. John
and its school buildings were being rebuilt. At the end of three years
spent in inaugurating the new system of schools in Prince Edward Island,
he was invited, in face of his inclination to return to his former
position in New Brunswick, to take charge of the Quebec High School as
its Rector; and, accepting the appointment, he thus became identified
with the educational interests of the Province of Quebec, where he has
labored ever since, closing his career as an educationist in active
service as Inspector of the Protestant Superior Schools of that
province. While holding that office he entered upon his vocation as an
author, having been for many years editor-in-chief of the “Educational
Record,” a contributor to the “Educational Monthly” of Ontario, the
“Queen’s Quarterly,” and other periodicals, besides being associated
with Dr. Thomas Morison, of Glasgow, one of the most distinguished of
the educationists of Scotland, in the compilation of sundry text-books.
His earlier essays and addresses on “The New Education,” and “Cause and
Effect in School Work,” led to his issue of “A Manual on Moral Drill,”
in line with his pleadings for an educative “Mental and Physical Drill”
in the schools of the day. His plan for a definite moral training is
thus spoken of by a New York educationist and author of high standing:
“Dr. Harper’s work is entirely original. It is sound. It is eminently
practical and it should be most heartily adopted by all who have the
training of the young in hand, and who earnestly desire that the rising
generation may develop into a ‘coming race,’ in whom moral rectitude
will be natural and spontaneous.” As an author, Dr. Harper has had a
career as full of the best kind of literary work, as has been his career
as an educationist in advice with his co-workers in school progress
throughout Canada. The list of the books he has written is all but
incredibly large. His _chef-d’ouvre_ is unquestionably his drama of
“Champlain,” which has given him rank, as one critic says, as the
greatest of our Canadian dramatic poets since the days of Heavysege. The
late George Murray, of Montreal, a writer of just discrimination,
claimed that Dr. Harper is one of the most versatile and prolific of
Canadian litterateurs. A partial list of his literary output from year
to year includes the following: “The Development of the Greek Drama,”
“The Chronicles of Kartdale,” “Sacrament Sunday and the Bells of
Kartdale,” “The Earliest Beginnings of Canada,” “The Montgomery Siege,”
“The Little Sergeant,” “The Seer of Silver Lake,” “_Domini Domus_, or
the Chateau St. Louis,” “The Songs of the Commonwealth,” and “A Guide to
Good Will in the Empire.” Three uniformly bound volumes of his series of
“Studies in Verse and Prose,” have so far appeared, including “The
Battle of the Plains,” and “The Annals of the War,” supplementary to his
“Champlain, a Drama.” With the influence of his earlier years clinging
to him, he has not failed to produce many pieces that depict the scenes
of the land of his birth; and his poetic status as a versifier in the
Doric of the Scottish Lowlands has been duly recognized by Dr. John D.
Ross in his volume on “The Scottish Poets in America,” as well as by the
gifted author of the book entitled “The Scot in America.” Dr. Ross pays
a high tribute to the author of “Sacrament Sunday,” “Saint Andrew’s
Day,” “The Old Graveyard,” “Auld Jeames and His Crack,” “Horace in the
Doric,” and others of Dr. Harper’s Scottish odes, in such words as
these: “Sweet as the note of a bird in the wildwood, strongly embued
with patriotism, fervent in religious sentiment, eloquent in thought,
pure in expression, and noble in purpose, form a few of the
characteristics of Dr. Harper, the Canadian educationist and author.” In
addition to all this, Dr. Harper is a loyal Canadian. In all his public
utterances and in the pleadings of his prolific authorship in book or
magazine or newspaper, he is a Canadian citizen who upholds as a British
subject the ample patriotism of the British Empire. He has been twice
married, his first wife’s maiden name having been Miss Agnes Kirkwood,
daughter of William Kirkwood of Stanley Muir, near Paisley, and his
second, Miss Elizabeth Hastings, daughter of Andrew Hastings, of St.
John and step-daughter of William Nossack, a former Mayor of Quebec. His
family has comprised two sons and five daughters. His grandson, Major
John Harper Evans, has been a soldier at the front, after his training
at the Kingston Royal Military College.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Brennan, John Charles.= In 1854, when but a boy, when Ottawa (then
By-Town) had only some 7,000 inhabitants, when the old Ottawa and St.
Lawrence Railway was just built—the only line of railway connecting
Ottawa with other towns at that time—when houses were few and far
between and when there was no prospect of the place being selected by
Her Most Gracious Majesty the late Queen Victoria as the Capital of the
Dominion of Canada, the subject of this sketch became a member of the
wholesale grocery firm of S. Howell & Co., with which he remained for
twenty-seven years, retiring from business in 1881. While giving his
untiring care to the affairs of the firm, and by his energy and business
tact adding in a marked degree to its advancement—its commercial and
financial success—Mr. Brennan, with full confidence in the future that
he perceived was in store for Ottawa, never lost an opportunity to place
his time, ambition and money in channels leading to its improvement and,
with other enterprising citizens, exerted his every endeavor to
stimulate its growth and importance. To-day, with marked pride, he sees
the seven thousand population increased to one hundred and twenty
thousand, the once fields and uncared-for lanes converted into
beautifully paved streets, parks, and gardens, the costly Parliament
Buildings, standing in all their grandeur upon the hill overlooking the
Ottawa River; huge commercial, financial and office buildings and
apartment houses galore facing the eye at every angle, and handsome
modern residences in abundance. Aside from his other real estate
holdings, Mr. Brennan, on the corner of Bank and Queen Streets, in the
very midst of the Capital’s commercial and financial activities, has
placed that large and solidly-constructed office building, “The
Trafalgar.” Mr. Brennan has ever taken a keen interest in Ottawa’s
hospitals, charitable institutions, churches, etc., and has unstintingly
contributed to their support. Whenever called upon to help advance their
interests he has freely contributed his quota, and more. During the
great war, his moral, physical, intellectual and financial aid have ever
been given to promote the successful operations of the Government, and
to afford the war workers, the boys at the front and the returned
soldiers, material help. Mr. Brennan has grown up with the city and
together both he and it have prospered. Although solicited on many
occasions to enter into public life he has steadfastly refused, being
satisfied in his private capacity as a citizen to do his share in making
general progress his goal. Mr. John Charles Brennan was born at
Frankville, Ontario, January 23, 1839. He is the son of John and Amelia
Maria (Howell) Brennan; he was educated in the Public Schools and
private tuition. June 5, 1899, he married Alice Maud Wilson, daughter of
Zachariah Wilson of “Clandeboye,” late Collector of Customs at the Port
of Ottawa. He has one son and two daughters—John Charles, Amelia
Elizabeth and Jocelyn Maud Wilson. He is a member of the Ottawa Hunt,
Connaught Park Jockey, the Gatineau Fish and Game, and the Rideau Fish
and Game Clubs. For recreation he indulges in hunting, fishing and
travelling. In politics he is a Conservative, in religion a Methodist,
and his place of residence is 150 Cooper Street, Ottawa.




[Illustration: W. BULMAN
Winnipeg]




=Bulman, William John= (Winnipeg, Man.), one of the most prominent and
progressive business men of Manitoba, was born at Toronto on April 5,
1870, the son of William and Frances (Cable) Bulman. He was educated in
the Toronto Public Schools and, on leaving school at the age of sixteen,
learned the art of the lithographer, in which he was employed in his
native city for six years. In 1892 he went to Winnipeg and founded the
business of Bulman Bros., Ltd., Lithographers, of which he is President
and which is one of the most important firms of its kind in Canada. In
promoting the advancement of Winnipeg he has been indefatigable. He was
one of the founders of the Winnipeg Industrial Bureau, and was its
President from 1911 to 1913. He was Hon. Secretary of the Manitoba
branch of the Canadian Manufacturers’ Association for some years and
subsequently became 2nd Vice-President for Canada. At the annual
convention of the C.M.A., held at Winnipeg in the summer of 1918, he was
elected President of that body, an office which is coveted by all
Canadian business men. He is also a member of the council of the
Winnipeg Board of Trade. Mr. Bulman has also been very prominent in
educational affairs and was for a number of years a member of the
Advisory Board of the Manitoba Education Department. He has been a
School Trustee of Winnipeg since 1912 and Chairman of various
Committees. During the great war he was very active in support of
patriotic objects, and was Vice-President of the Manitoba Patriotic
Fund. He is the originator of the Imperial Home Reunion Association,
which aims at assisting the man who desires to make a home for himself
in the West to bring the members of his family to this country. This
idea has had the approval of many eminent Imperial thinkers. He is also
the originator of the movement for citizenship through the schools, now
a national one, with a National Conference to be held in August under
the patronage of His Honor the Governor-General. Winnipeg possesses no
citizen more popular with all classes of the community and he is
Honorary President of the Manitoba Conservative Association. He is a
member of the Carleton and Manitoba Clubs and the National Club,
Toronto, and his recreations are motoring, motor boating, cruising and
fishing at his summer home, Kenora, Ont. He is a Methodist in religion,
and in 1894 married Lily, daughter of Samuel Thompson, of Toronto, and
has five children, Eileen, Bessie, Dorothy, Lillian and John. He resides
at 104 Wellington Crescent, Winnipeg.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Freiman, Archibald J.=, who conducts one of the leading department
stores of Ottawa, at 73 Rideau Street, was born at Wirballen, Poland, on
June 6, 1880, the son of H. and Hannah Freiman. His early education was
received in Poland, which was supplemented on his coming to this country
in 1893, by courses in the public schools of Hamilton and at Hamilton
Business College. He commenced his business career in 1899, by
establishing the Canadian House Furnishing Company, at Kingston, Ont.,
in partnership with M. Cramer. In 1902 the business was removed to
Ottawa owing to the limited possibilities for development in Kingston.
In 1905, Mr. Cramer’s interest was purchased by Mr. Freiman, Sr., who
remained in partnership with his son until 1910, when Mr. A. J. Freiman
bought his father out and has since conducted the business in his own
name. He has been a pronounced success from the outset and is recognized
as one of the leading retail merchants of Eastern Ontario. He is an
orthodox Hebrew in religion and president of the Congregation Adath
Eshuroon. He is vice-president of the Zionist Federation of Canada; a
member of the A.F. & A.M., Knights of Pythias and I.O.O.F.; a director
of Perley Home for Incurables; director of Central Canada Exhibition
Association; director of Protestant Hospital; member of Laurentian Club
and Kiwanis Club, Ottawa; and Montefiore and Maimondis Clubs, of
Montreal. Is an enthusiastic motorist and member of the Ontario Motor
League. On August 18, 1903, he married Lillian, daughter of Moses
Bilsky, and has one son and two daughters. He resides at 149 Somerset
Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Breadner, Robert Walker=, Commissioner of Taxation of the Department of
Finance and Dominion Appraiser, Department of Customs, Ottawa, is one of
the leading economic experts of the Dominion of Canada. He was born at
Athelstan, Quebec, on January 13, 1865, the son of the late Major Joshua
and Beatrice Dudgeon (Walker) Breadner. He was educated at the
Protestant Separate School of his native village, and later at the High
School of Port Henry, N.Y. He entered the civil service of the Dominion
in 1884 as a clerk in the Post Office Department, Ottawa. He was
transferred to the Customs Department in 1892 and in 1894 became chief
Check Clerk of that branch, a post he continued to hold in connection
with other duties until 1908. From 1898 to 1906 he also held the
position of Dominion Appraiser and in the latter year became Inspector
of Customs, holding the position until 1908. Throughout this period he
was also a member of the Board of Customs. It will be seen that few men
had had such a detailed experience in dealing with all the manifold
questions relating to tariffs, and in 1908 the Canadian Manufacturers
Association induced him to leave the service of the Government and
become manager of their Tariff Department. In this position he remained
for four years. In 1912, because of his expert knowledge, the newly
formed Borden Government induced him to return to the Civil Service as
Confidential Tariff Officer, also appointing him to his old position as
Dominion Appraiser and member of the Board of Customs. When during the
war the Government decided on its policy of taxing business profits, Mr.
Breadner was put in charge of the details and has given great
satisfaction by his efficient organization of the difficult task. In
addition to his many other duties Mr. Breadner found time to serve on
the Ottawa Board of Education for four years. He is a member of the
following clubs: Laurentian, Ottawa; Canada Bowling (Toronto), and these
societies: I.O.O.F., I.O.F., L.O.L., A.O.U.W., Royal Arcanum. He is a
Presbyterian in religion and on September 7, 1887, married Nellie,
daughter of Andrew D. Fraser, Ottawa. He has one son and four daughters,
and since his duties compelled his removal to Toronto has resided at 41
Albany Ave. in the latter city.




[Illustration: Gordon Grant, Ottawa
Stewart McClennaghan, Ottawa]




=Black, Henry=, 2322 St. John St., Regina, Saskatchewan, one of the
large realty owners of that city; was born in Grenville County, Ontario,
on February 14, 1875, the son of William John and Elizabeth Black. His
father, who was a farmer, died when the subject of this sketch was
twelve years old. His education was obtained in the Grenville Township
Public School, and as a youth he removed to British Columbia, finally
settling down in Regina, as a builder and contractor. He is now the
owner of two blocks of apartments and of a business block in the capital
of Saskatchewan, and is counted one of her most solid and progressive
citizens. He has taken an active part in municipal affairs, was alderman
in 1915-6-7 and Mayor in 1918 and 1919. On Dec. 15, 1910, he married
Jennie Lanona, daughter of C. W. Barker, and has three children, Henry
Kenneth, Charles Russell and William Franklin. In religion he is a
Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dargavel, John Robertson= (Elgin, Ont.), is the son of Robert Dargavel
and Miriam, his wife, both Scotch, was born May 3, 1864, at the Township
of Crosby, in the County of Leeds. Educated at the public schools of
South Crosby. Is a successful merchant, dairyman and farmer. Married,
September 26, 1870, to Mary Jane, daughter of the late Robert Hopkins,
merchant, of Newboro. Is President of the Eastern Ontario Dairymen’s
Association; Clerk of the Township of South Crosby for the past 30
years; a member of the Elgin School Board for the past 20 years. Is a
member of the Masonic Order being P.D.D.G.M. for Frontenac District,
also a member of the I.O.O.F. Mr. Dargavel has three children, viz.:
Helen, James Sawtell, and Mary. He was first elected to the Ontario
Legislature as a Conservative at the General Elections of 1905, and
re-elected at the general elections of 1908, 1911 and 1914. Has been
Chairman of the Agricultural Committee of the Legislature, where his
knowledge of agriculture and dairying has been very valuable to the
Assembly. Has also served on the Prison Labor Committee and the
Provincial Milk Commission. Is a member of the Church of England and a
delegate to the Diocesan and General Synods.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ethier, Joseph Arthur Calixte=, was born at St. Benoit (Two Mountains),
Quebec, May 26, 1868. Son of J. B. Ethier and wife, Julie Boyer.
Educated at Montreal College. Married, first, Therise Fortier, daughter
of Dr. L. A. Fortier, and secondly, Hedwidge Fortier, also daughter of
Dr. L. A. Fortier, and is the father of the following children: Marie
Therese and Marcelle. Deputy Prothonotary of the District of Terrebonne,
1888-1895. Crown Prosecutor for the District of Terrebonne; Mayor of the
Village of St. Scholastique for six years; Secretary-Treasurer of
Schools, rural municipalities of St. Scholastique and St. Columbin;
Secretary of “La Compagnie d’Assurance Mutuelle de la paroisse de St.
Scholastique.” Is a brilliant Advocate and King’s Counsel; is President
of the Ontario Cobalt Mining Co., Ltd. First elected to the House of
Commons, June 13, 1896, for the constituency of Two Mountains, Quebec;
re-elected in 1900-1904 and re-elected by acclamation in 1911. Appointed
Chairman of Committee on Miscellaneous Private Bills during the Session
of 1907. Mr. Ethier was again re-elected at the General Election held in
1917. He is a Liberal and a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Grierson, Hon. George Allison=, Minister of Public Works, Winnipeg.
Born, April 11, 1867, at Brantford, Ont. Son of George Grierson and
Margaret Edmundson. Educated at Brantford, Ont., and Winnipeg Public
School and Collegiate Institute. Went to Manitoba in 1879, attending the
Winnipeg Collegiate Institute, 1883-4, obtaining First Class Teacher’s
Certificate; attended Normal School, 1885, and was the first candidate
to pass newly authorized First-Class Teachers’ Professional Course,
1886. Was Principal Minnedosa Public School, 1887-90, 1892-1902.
Married, December 28, 1892, to Christina, daughter of Samuel Matheson,
of Kildonan, Manitoba. A member of the Masonic Order and a Veteran
Oddfellow. Was interested in lacrosse in the earlier days, and at
present finds recreation in curling. Member of the Presbyterian Church.
Was Councillor of the Town of Minnedosa for some years and Mayor,
1914-1915. Was a Liberal candidate for Marquette for the House of
Commons in September, 1911, but was defeated by Hon. W. J. Roche. First
elected to Legislature for the Province of Manitoba, in the general
elections, 1914, as a Liberal candidate for Minnedosa, and re-elected in
1915. Was Liberal Whip in the Manitoba Legislature during the sessions
of 1914-15-16. Was re-elected for the Constituency of Minnedosa at the
last elections and is at present Minister of Public Works in the Norris
Government. The Honorable Mr. Grierson is a gifted speaker and an
indefatigable worker, and thoroughly versed in the details of his
department.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gale, George Charles=, Secretary Gale Manufacturing Company, Ltd.,
Manufacturers, Toronto, was born in Toronto, where he has for some years
successfully carried on business, on the 26th of April, 1874. Son of
James William Gale and Matilda Sophia Pitt. Educated at Jarvis Street
Collegiate Institute, and Upper Canada College. Married, February, 1907,
Etta F., daughter of T. B. Taylor, and is the father of one son, George
Taylor Gale, born May 19, 1913. Mr. Gale always takes a prominent part
in Amateur Athletics and was actively identified for many years with the
Toronto Lacrosse Club, being one of the players of that famous
organization. He is a member of the National Club, Lambton Golf and
Country Club, and the Victoria Club and also the Masonic Order, being a
member of Ashlar Masonic Lodge, St. Paul’s Chapter. In religion he is an
Anglican.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Flavelle, William M.=, of Lindsay, Ont., is a sound, progressive
business man, who has played an important part in the development of
that section of Central Ontario adjacent to the home town. He was born
at Peterboro in March, 1853, where he attended the Public and High
Schools. His parents were John and Dorothea Flavelle; Sir Joseph
Flavelle, Baronet, of Toronto, is a brother, as also is Mr. J. D.
Flavelle, of Lindsay, Chairman of the Board of Ontario License
Commissioners. The subject of this sketch is one of the pioneers of the
Cold Storage business in Canada. Over thirty years ago he recognized the
necessity and value of the same as being of untold benefit to the
country, by means of which dairy and other perishable products of the
farm could be garnered in the seasons of their greatest production, and
conserved for future use in the non-producing intervals. The growth of
the enterprise has been of immense benefit to both producer and
consumer, as now many commodities, which would not be otherwise
available, may be freely purchased at any season in the year. The great
advancement of the business from the first simple storage, when natural
ice was used as the refrigerator, to the special brick structure
standing prominently on Lindsay’s main street, equipped with every
modern device and appliance, is the evidence of one man’s splendid
vision, business acumen, and sagacity. A natural adjunct to the Lindsay
Cold Storage Plant has been added in the way of a creamery, the first,
and one of the finest of its kind in Canada. Here the cream is received
from the farmers, tributary to the district, tested and manufactured
into the finest creamery product, to the mutual advantage of the farmer
and the country in general. In 1886 Mr. Flavelle married Mary Helen
Aird, daughter of Robert Aird, of Montreal. Six children blessed the
union, four sons and two daughters, viz.: Aird D., Stewart A., Gordon
A., Guy A., Jena L. and Helen Grace. He is President of Flavelle,
Limited, The Victoria Loan and Savings Company, The Lindsay Cemetery
Company, Dundas & Flavelle, Limited, and a member of the Public Library
Board. With his varied interests, Mr. Flavelle is a very busy man, but
finds relaxation and recreation in golf, motoring and boating. He is a
Methodist in religion, and a Liberal-Conservative in politics. Public
spirited, with a fine business reputation, he takes more than a passing
interest in matters of National importance and is keenly concerned in
all measures which will advance the community in which he has held a
prominent place for so many years.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hore, George Charles= (Hamilton, Ont.), was born in the Township of
West Flamboro, County of Wentworth, July 20, 1868, and was educated at
the West Flamboro Public School, the Hamilton Public Schools and the
Woodstock Baptist College. His father was Francis William Hore, who came
to Canada about the year 1837, when quite a young man, in company with
his parents, brothers and sisters; he was born in Sussex, England, and
was a grandson of Joseph Hore, of North Mundham, Chichester, Sussex,
England; his mother was Sophia Fearman, who in the year 1833, with other
members of their family came to Canada from Norfolk, England, in the New
York Packet ship “Ontario,” being on the ocean six weeks, and two weeks
on the Erie canal to Oswego, N.Y., and from that port took passage on a
schooner to Port Dalhousie; thence to Hamilton in a farmer’s hay rack.
F. W. Hore, father of the subject of this sketch, was a man of
exceptional ability and was one of the earlier settlers who helped to
build up the manufacturing industries of this country to their present
high position, as is shown by the magnificent factory standing to his
credit in Hamilton, known as F. W. Hore & Son, Limited, manufacturers of
Fine Carriage, Waggon and Sleigh Wood-work. Following in his footsteps,
George C. Hore commenced work in his father’s factory at the age of
fifteen years, to learn the business, and with the exception of a short
time at College, has been at it continuously and steadily ever since.
The Company of F. W. Hore & Son, Limited, are extensive manufacturers,
and their product is well and favorably known from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. They have the pleasure of showing in their office, records of
many first prizes and medals taken in the pioneer days of their
business, testifying to the quality of their product. They are believers
in the old saying that “quality will be remembered long after the price
is forgotten.” The business has been established between forty and
forty-five years, and Mr. Hore is ably assisted in the management by his
brother and other officers of the Company. He was married September 21,
1912, to Miss Emma Lenz, of Hamilton. In religion he is a member of the
Church of England; in politics, a Conservative, and is fond of outdoor
sports—being a member of the Victoria Bowling Club and the Hamilton Gun
Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Morehouse, Oscar Emery, M.D., M.L.A.= (Upper Keswick, N.B.), son of
Elisha Morehouse, a farmer (English) and his wife, nee Crouse (Dutch);
was born at Upper Keswick, on August 5, 1857, and was educated at common
schools and McGill College (M.D.), (C.M.), Montreal; of U.E.L. stock. He
has been twice married: (1st) to Alberta, daughter of the Rev. William
McKiel, of Fairville, N.B., on June 17, 1890, who died in December,
1902, to whom one child, Dorothy Eunice, was born; (2nd) to Maud,
daughter of Henry Burtt, of Upper Keswick, N.B., to whom three children
were born, Elsie Muriel, Oscar Emery, and Alberta Evelyn. Mr. Morehouse
became interested in public life at an early age, and was first elected
a member of the County Council in 1896, continuing in that office until
1903; was Warden of the County Council when the Duke of Cornwall and
York (the present King George of England) visited Canada, and presented
him with an address at the public reception given in his honor at St.
John, N.B. He was first elected to the Legislative Assembly of New
Brunswick on March 30, 1911, with the large majority of 1,215, as a
supporter of the Hazen Government, and was re-elected with the full
ticket on June 20, 1912, their opponents losing deposits. He has acted
as a Coroner in his home locality for the past twenty-five years, and is
looked upon as a leader in his profession throughout the whole Province
of New Brunswick. In the year 1890, he organized the first Board of
Health in York County, and was Chairman of the Board for six years. Mr.
Morehouse has never been associated with Clubs to any extent, but has
taken a keen interest in all work connected with the New Brunswick
Medical Society, as well as the Canadian Medical Association. He has
taken an active interest in all patriotic work since the outbreak of the
War (1914), and has given freely of his time and money. His name will
rank among the first who did their duty at home when the history of the
War is written for future generations. In religion he is an
Episcopalian, and in politics a staunch Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Thoburn, William= (Almonte, Ont.), Woollen Manufacturer, Member of
Parliament and ex-Mayor, came to Canada in the year 1857, from
Portsmouth, England, where he was born on April 14, 1847, and received
his early education at Pakenham School, Pakenham, Ontario. He removed to
Almonte in 1867, and for eleven years was engaged in mercantile
business. For the last thirty-six years he has been extensively
interested in the manufacture of woollens, having built up a large
business and his goods are known the world over. Having made a success
of his own business affairs, he was persuaded to offer himself as the
Conservative Candidate for the House of Commons for North Lanark, and
was first elected in 1908, and re-elected in 1911, and was one of the
few members in his seat in the Chamber of the House of Commons the night
of the terrible fire, when that beautiful building was totally
destroyed, Feb. 3, 1916. Besides his many business and political duties,
he connected himself with many Boards, and is Vice-President of the
Ker-Ben Stove and Furnace Foundry; director of the Trusts and Guarantee
Company, Toronto; director of the Almonte Knitting Company, Almonte;
life director of the General Hospital, Ottawa, and director of the
Rosamond Memorial Hospital, Almonte. He served for several years as a
school trustee and councillor, and was for seven years Mayor, and has
always taken a keen interest in everything pertaining to the good and
welfare of the Town of Almonte. Mr. Thoburn is a widower and has two
children: Annie, married to Percy Jamieson, Almonte, and Mae Elliott,
married to A. M. May, Toronto. He is a member of the Methodist Church,
and much interested in Church and Missionary work; a member of the
Rideau Club, Ottawa, and in politics a staunch Conservative. Mr. Thoburn
took an active part in patriotic work during the war, and was always one
of the first citizens in his district to contribute financially and
otherwise whenever called upon. In his parliamentary duties he is looked
upon as a man of good judgment and his advice on many matters is often
sought by his colleagues.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=White, Gerald Verner= (Pembroke, Ont.), Member of Parliament for North
Renfrew, Ontario, was born in Pembroke, Ontario, July 6, 1879, the son
of the late Hon. Peter White, P.C., and Janet Reid White. His early
education completed at the Pembroke Public and High Schools, Mr. White
proceeded to McGill University, where he graduated as Bachelor of
Science in Mining Engineering with the class of 1901. As a native of the
Upper Ottawa, however, he turned naturally to lumbering for a vocation,
and his success can be judged from the positions which he now holds as
President of the Cunningham Lumber Co., of Pembroke, and a director of
the Pembroke Lumber Co. Mr. White is also President of the Pembroke
Standard, Ltd., a Director of the Thomas Pink Co., Ltd., of Pembroke,
and of the Pembroke Woollen Mills. The name of White is one
distinguished in the public life of the country and Gerald V. White was
elected to the Federal House of Commons at a by-election, in October,
1906, for the Constituency of North Renfrew, which had been rendered
vacant by the death of his father, the Hon. Peter White, being
subsequently re-elected at the General Elections of 1908 and 1911. Mr.
White married Mary Elizabeth, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. D. L. Trites, of
New Brunswick, and has two daughters and one son, Muriel Elizabeth, Mary
Jeannette and Gerald Peter. He is a Presbyterian in religion and a
Conservative in politics. Among the Clubs of which he is a member are
the Rideau Club, the Hunt Club and the Golf Club, all of Ottawa. The
Member for North Renfrew takes a strong interest in military matters,
holding a commission as captain in the 42nd Regiment, Canadian militia,
and is at present (1917) in England as Lieutenant-Colonel in command of
the 224th Canadian Forestry Battalion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Crossland, E. F.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born at Port Dover, Ont., in
1866, was educated at Windsor, N.S., came to Toronto in 1886, and two
years later he entered the Steele-Briggs Seed Co., Limited, and is at
the present time the Second Vice-President. Being a man with a practical
knowledge of this business, he has been a valuable asset to the
Steele-Briggs Company, and much credit is due him for the high position
that firm holds in the esteem of the Canadian people to-day. While his
active business career requires considerable of his time and attention,
still he is a citizen of more than ordinary worth, and he takes no small
interest in all measures that have a tendency towards furthering public
welfare, and is also a worthy friend of both religious and charitable
enterprises. He is a Dominion Council member of the Brotherhood of St.
Andrew and an ex-member of the Executive Committee; rector’s warden of
St. Matthew’s Anglican Church, a member of the Toronto Board of Trade,
and Masonic Order. Mr. Crossland is a man who makes many friends by his
pleasing manner. In politics he is a Conservative, but believes that the
future prosperity of Canada largely depends upon her public men,
irrespective of their political leanings.




[Illustration: ZEPHERIN HEBERT
Montreal]




=Dickson, Rev. James A. R., B.D.= (Galt, Ont.), was born in Tranent,
Scotland, on October 22, 1839. His father was David Dickson, a pious
man, who was careful of the godly upbringing of his children, and being
a zealous Free Churchman, instructed them in the standards of that
church. Mr. Dickson came to Canada in the summer of 1857 to an uncle in
Brantford, who was engaged in business there, where he resided for some
time. His uncle attending the ministry of the Rev. John Wood, of the
Congregational Church, he went with him, and under the faithful
preaching of Mr. Wood, experienced the great change which altered the
entire current of his life. He was active in Christian work in the
Sabbath school and Y.M.C.A., but an irrepressible longing for wider
usefulness led him to prepare for the Christian ministry. He took
private lessons in Latin and Greek, attended the Brantford Grammar
School for several sessions, and in 1860 entered the Congregational
College of B.N.A. in Toronto, which was then under the principalship of
Adam Lillie, D.D. While pursuing theological studies here, he attended
classes in Logic, Hebrew, Latin and Greek in University College;
mathematics, metaphysics and other subjects being taken up by special
masters appointed by the board of the Congregational College. In 1864
the college being removed to Montreal, he attended the McGill College,
studying zoology, botany and geology under Sir William Dawson, LL.D.;
Hebrew under Dr. De Sola, and logic, English literature and moral
philosophy under Canon Leach. He graduated in 1865, and was called to
the Congregational Church in London, Ontario, where he remained for six
years. While here he edited for three years _The Gospel Message_, a
monthly, published in Montreal. He published “Working for Jesus,” which
is now and has been for the past thirteen years, issued by the American
Tract Society of New York, and the Religious Tract Society of London.
Also a 32-page tract, “Saved or Not?” and “Counsels for Young Converts.”
In June, 1867, he married Isabella E., eldest daughter of Walter
Fairbairn of London, Ontario. In 1871 he was called to the Northern
Church, Toronto. Here he remained about eight years, till he changed his
ecclesiastical relations, returning to the church of his fathers. While
in Toronto he was honored with the highest position in the gift of the
Congregational churches, being elected Chairman of the Congregational
Union, of Ontario and Quebec in 1877. Here he began to write for the
“Sunday School Times,” “Sunday School World,” and “Canada Presbyterian,”
to which he has been a frequent contributor. He published “Immediately,”
“The Rest of Faith,” “Christian Culture,” “A Good Minister of Jesus
Christ,” tracts which have had an extensive circulation. He was chosen
secretary of the Upper Canada Tract Society in 1874, which he held until
1879. On resigning his charge in Toronto, he visited for five months the
branch societies of the Upper Canada Tract Society. He filled Dr.
Cochrane’s pulpit in Brantford for three months, while the Doctor was in
Britain in 1879. While here he was called to Galt, and settled there on
October 13, 1879. Since his settlement in Galt he has published
“Expository Bible Readings,” “Working for the Children,” and a tract
entitled “A Word in Season.” On the regulations being issued for the
conferring of the degree of Bachelor of Divinity, Mr. Dickson went to
Montreal Presbyterian College, and passing the examinations proper to
the degree, took it in March, 1883. The congregation of Galt built for
him in 1881 one of the handsomest ecclesiastical structures in Canada.
It is mentioned in “Picturesque Canada.” In 1887 the Religious Tract
Society of London, England, published a little volume of Mr. Dickson’s
entitled “How We Are Saved.” In 1891 Mr. Dickson had conferred upon him
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.), by Wooster University, Ohio,
one of the great schools of learning belonging to the Presbyterian
Church in the United States. He attained the degree by a stated course
of special study in Political Economy and Social Science, and by
examinations therein. He prepared also a paper to lay before the faculty
on “Conscience the Living Source of Human Law.” In 1896 the Religious
Tract Society of New York published a volume by Dr. Dickson, entitled
“The Truth that Saves and How to Present It.” In 1904 Dr. Dickson wrote
and published “The History of the Central Presbyterian Church, Galt,”
bringing the story of the church’s life up to that time.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Choquette, Philippe Auguste, LL.B.= (Quebec, Que.), Advocate, Senator
and Judge of the Sessions, Quebec, was born on the 6th of January, 1854,
at Beloeil, County of Vercheres. His ancestors came from Amiens,
Picardie, France, in 1643, and settled in Varennes, in the county where
the subject of our sketch was born. His parents were Joseph Choquette,
farmer, and Marie Thais Audet. He received his education at St.
Hyacinthe College, and at Laval University, Quebec, and graduated
B.C.L., from the latter institution in 1880, having previously taken the
silver medal given by the then Governor-General, Lord Lorne, receiving,
in 1899, the degree of LL.D. While he was prosecuting his studies at
Laval, he acted as private secretary to the late Hon. Honore Mercier,
then solicitor-general in the Joly administration, and later on Premier
of Quebec Province. He held for about three years and a half the
position of commercial traveller in a wholesale boot and shoe
establishment in St. Hyacinthe, before he began to study law. He moved
to Quebec in 1887, and entered the office of the Hon. François
Langelier, then a Member of Parliament and Mayor of Quebec (who died in
1915 as Lieutenant-Governor), to study law. After being admitted to the
bar of Lower Canada, in 1880, he removed to Montmagny, where he
successfully practised his profession. Since 1877 he has been a
contributor to “L’Union,” of St. Hyacinthe, director of “Le Soleil” in
1905-06, having before, in 1883, founded “Le Sentinelle,” of Montmagny,
still existing under the name of “Le Courier de Montmagny.” In 1878 he
began to take an active part in politics and in 1882 he ran for a seat
in the House of Commons against A. C. P. R. Landry, now Senator, the
then Conservative candidate, but was defeated by a majority of 120
votes. At the general election held in 1887, he again presented himself
in opposition to Mr. Landry, and this time carried his election by a
majority of 195 votes, and was re-elected in 1911-1916 by large
majorities. Mr. Choquette has travelled through the principal parts of
the United States and Europe. He has been Secretary of the Reform Club
of the County of Montmagny. In politics he is a strong Liberal, a free
trader, and in favor of commercial union. In 1898, was appointed a Judge
of the Superior Court; resigned in 1904 and was called to the Senate. In
1915 was by the local Government named Judge of the Sessions of the
Peace for Quebec District. He is an adherent of the Roman Catholic
Church, but objects to the clergy interfering and mixing in political
contests. On the 29th of August, 1883, he was married to Marie, daughter
of A. Bender, prothonotary of the Superior Court, and granddaughter of
the late Sir E. P. Tache, baronet, A.D.C. to her late Majesty the Queen,
and one of the promoters of Confederation. As recreations he favors
music and sports, and has been President of the Quebec Hockey Club from
1913 to the present time (1917). He resides at 56 Conroy St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Choquette, Ernest= (St. Hilaire, Quebec), son of Joseph Choquette and
his wife, Thais Lapointe. Born at Beloeil, Vercheres County, Quebec,
November 18, 1862. Educated at St. Hyacinthe’s College and Medical
Faculty of Laval University, Montreal, from which he graduated with the
degrees of M.B. and M.D. Married, October 16, 1889, to Eva Perrault,
daughter of Dr. Perrault of Beloeil. He has been a frequent contributor
to various journals and reviews and is the author of several books, his
chief works being: “Les Ribaud,” “Claude Payson,” “Les Carabinades,” “La
Terre,” and “Madeline Rabaud.” He has successfully practised his
profession for many years at St. Hilaire and has been Mayor of his
parish for a considerable time. First entered the Legislative Council
for the Province of Quebec as a Liberal on March 14, 1910, as the
representative of the Constituency of Rougemont. Is a Roman Catholic in
religion and is the father of the following children: Fernande, Claude,
Lucas, Yves, and Girard.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cave, James G.= James Gilbert Cave is one of those sterling Canadian
business men who are the backbone of this country. Mr. Cave was born in
Weston, Ontario, his parents’ names being Martin Cave and Nancy
Morrison, and graduated from the Weston Grammar School, after which he
entered the wholesale lumber business. He married Margaret B., daughter
of Andrew Henderson, and has ten children: James M., Donald A., William,
Charles, Gordon G., Margaret, Annie, Nora, Nellie and Lillian, three of
whom, James, Charles and William, are serving overseas with the Canadian
forces. Mr. Cave is a Protestant, a Liberal and a Mason, and has been a
member of the Royal Grenadiers and the 48th Highlanders, serving in the
North-West Rebellion of 1885. His present address is 97 Delaware Avenue,
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Tytler, William, B.A.=, Inspector of Public Schools, Guelph, Ont., was
born on Jan. 5, 1842, in the Township of Nichol, near Elora, Wellington
County, Ontario. His father was William Tytler, and his mother, Jane
Inglis Forbes, aunt of Archibald Forbes, the celebrated special war
correspondent. Mr. Tytler pursued his educational studies in the town of
Elora, attending the Grammar school of that place, after he had passed
the primary departments. A university course was planned, and he
matriculated at the University of Toronto. His course here was
characterized by industry, and he was especially distinguished in
science and classics. He graduated in 1862, taking the gold medal for
natural sciences. Mr. Tytler has likewise something of a military
record. He has been a private in the Queen’s Own, Toronto University
Company, and has been a member of volunteer companies at Carleton Place
and at Smith’s Falls, Lanark County. The City of Guelph was the first to
take advantage of the free libraries act; and in 1862, a library was
established there, Mr. Tytler being secretary and chief worker in
connection with that institution. He married on the 23rd July, 1879,
Martha C. Harrison, younger daughter of Milner Harrison, of St. Mary’s.
He is a member of the Presbyterian Church. We may say that Mr. Tytler at
once turned his attention to the work of teaching upon graduation; and
his record has been a very creditable one since he was head master of
the Carleton Place Grammar School, during 1863 and 1864; of the Smith’s
Falls Grammar School from 1865 to 1868; of the St. Mary’s High School
from 1869 to 1874; and was appointed head master of the Guelph
Collegiate Institute, in February, 1875. Mr. Tytler, it can be said
without any exaggeration, stands in the front rank of the Canadian
teaching profession. He is a sound scholar; and he brings both industry
and enthusiasm into his work. In 1892, owing to ill health, he resigned
his position, and was soon afterwards appointed Inspector of Public
Schools for the city of Guelph, a position which he still holds.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Commeford, James W.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Toronto, April 6,
1877, and was educated in the public and high schools. Having decided to
follow life as an electrical engineer and contractor he gave
considerable of his time in educating himself along those lines and when
satisfied as to his ability he branched out into business for himself on
College Street, where he is located at the present time. He has been
very successful and has to his credit to-day one of the largest
electrical businesses in the city, carrying a large staff of employees
the year round. Mr. Commeford was induced to offer himself as a
candidate for alderman in Ward Four, many citizens believing that his
expert knowledge as an electrician would be beneficial to the city at
large, and was defeated by a very small margin, meaning a great loss
from a city standpoint, owing to the installation of the Hydro-Electric
System, when his services would have been invaluable. However, youth is
on his side, and Mr. Commeford will not only be elected alderman, but
will fill higher offices should he desire the honor. He is widely known
in yachting circles and acquatic sports, being a member of the Queen
City Yacht Club, National Yacht and Skiff Club, Alexandra Yacht Club and
Rochester Yacht Club. He is honorary president of the Lake Sailing Skiff
Association and President of the Canadian Power Boat Association. He has
donated the Motor Cycle Championship Cup, and the Long Distance
Endurance Cup of the Canadian Power Boat Association. Mr. Commeford has
saved thirty-three lives from drowning in Lake Ontario and received four
medals from the Humane Society for his brave and timely acts. In
politics he is a Conservative and an active party man.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Conant, Gordon Daniel= (Oshawa, Ont.), Barrister, was deputy Reeve of
Oshawa, 1914, and Mayor, 1916-1917; Secretary South Ontario Reform
Association, 1915-1916. He is genial in manner, quick and easy in
expression, goes straight to the point of things and is likely to be
heard of in a wider field in the not distant future. Mr. Conant is the
only son of Margaret and the late Thomas Conant, farmer and journalist,
Oshawa, who was an extensive traveller and writer, contributing articles
on travel, history and general subjects to the Toronto “Globe” for
years. The subject of this sketch was born in Oshawa, January 11, 1885,
and was educated at the High School of that place, afterwards graduating
from the University of Toronto in 1905, with the degrees of B.A. and
LL.B. and from Osgoode Hall in 1912, as Barrister-at-Law. He married
Verna Rowena, daughter of Senator the Hon. E. D. Smith, manufacturer,
Winona, Ont., June 25, 1915. He has one son, Douglas Smith, born in
1914, and one daughter, Verna Genevieve, born in 1916. He is a Methodist
in religion and a Liberal in politics. Mr. Conant is a member of The
Thirty and Golf Clubs, Oshawa, Ontario and Royal Canadian Yacht Club,
Toronto, and of the Masonic Order.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Perry, Nathaniel Irwin= (St. Catharines, Ont.), Rector of St. Thomas
Church, and Archdeacon of Lincoln and Welland since 1911. Spent fifteen
months in the British Isles, travelling and studying, where he also
represented the Colonial and Continental Church Society and the Church
Missionary Society in different places. He is the President of St.
Catharines Ministerial Association and Lincoln County Clerical Patriotic
Association. Until 1913 he was Chaplain of the 2nd Dragoons. His parents
are Martha and William Perry, farmer, in the Township of King, where he
was born on February 10, 1867. The Rev. Mr. Perry received his education
at the Newmarket High School, University of Toronto, and Wycliffe
College, graduating in Arts as M.A., 1891, and in Theology, 1893. Was
for some time Joint Editor of Church Record Sunday School Publications
and wrote both for the “Empire Magazine,” London, England, and the
“Cambridge Magazine.” On October 12, 1897, he married Jennie B.,
daughter of Dr. J. H. Harris, Yarmouth, N.S., by whom he has two sons,
Karl Raymond, born 1900, and Ronald Harris, born 1902. Mr. Perry is a
clergyman of the Church of England, a member of the Canadian Club, St.
Catharines, and also of the Masonic, Oddfellows, and Orange Societies.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hill, Hamnett Pinhey=, is a member of the legal firm of Greene, Hill &
Hill, solicitors for the Bank of Ottawa, the Bank of British North
America, and other large financial and commercial corporations, and has
established for himself in the legal profession and in other spheres of
life in Ottawa, a valuable reputation. Both the Dominion and the Ontario
Governments recognizing Mr. Hill’s ability as a lawyer, and his
reliability as such, in 1915 sought his services, respectively, as a
Royal Commissioner and Official Arbitrator. In that year, owing to the
charge of the Auditor-General that improprieties had arisen in the
purchase of coal for the dredges fleet in British Columbia, the Dominion
Government appointed Mr. Hill a Royal Commissioner to investigate and
hear evidence _re_ the charge. He performed his duties, on that
occasion, with marked ability. And in the same year, owing to the many
disputes that had arisen in the city of Ottawa between the city and the
owners of land, the Ontario Government appointed Mr. Hill as Official
Arbitrator and in that capacity he is now employed. He has also, on
several occasions, been called upon to act as Chairman of Conciliation
Boards appointed to settle disputes between employers and employees. In
1918 Mr. Hill was appointed a Special Returning Officer under the
Military Voters Act with headquarters in Paris. Mr. Hamnett Pinhey Hill
was born in Ottawa on December 18, 1877, and is the son of the late
Hamnett Pinhey and Margaret (Christie) Hill. He was educated in the
Public and High Schools in Ottawa, and the Toronto University (B.A.,
1898). He read law with McDonald, Shepley, Middleton & Donald, Toronto,
and was called to the Bar in 1902, when he became a partner in the legal
firm of Christie & Green, which is now, owing to the death of Mr.
Christie, known as Green, Hill & Hill. Mr. Hill was President of the
Canadian Club, Ottawa, during 1907-1908; President of the
Liberal-Conservative Association, 1912-1914; is a member of the
Executive of the Board of Trade, and was Honorary Secretary of the St.
John’s Ambulance Association of Canada for the year 1917. He holds the
commission of Lieutenant in the Army Service Corps. In 1917 he was
elected President of the University Club of Ottawa. On September 21,
1907, Mr. Hill married Beatrice Sarah Lindsay, daughter of the late
Arthur Lindsay. One son and two daughters have blessed the union. Mr.
Hill is a member of the Rideau and Royal Ottawa Golf Clubs, and of the
Sons of England and Orange Societies. His recreation is golf, his
politics Conservative and his religion Anglican. His residence is 253
Bronson Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Street, Lieut.-Col. Douglas Richmond=, one of the leading figures both
in the business and military life of the Canadian capital, is a native
of New Brunswick. He was born at Fredericton, N.B., on June 10, 1864,
the son of C. F. Street, M.A., formerly of the Finance Department,
Ottawa, and Lucy Audubon (Kendall) Street. His grandfather was the late
Hon. J. A. Street, K.C., one of the prominent public men of New
Brunswick, and for some years Attorney-General of the Province. Col.
Street’s education was received in the Separate Schools of Ottawa and at
Ottawa University. On graduation he decided to adopt a business career
in which he proved very successful; and he is now Secretary-Treasurer of
the Ottawa Electric Company, Secretary-Treasurer of the Ottawa Gas
Company, and Secretary-Treasurer of the Consolidated Light, Heat and
Power Company of Ottawa. Despite his business duties he has long taken
an active interest in the Canadian Militia. As early as 1893 he was
gazetted a second lieutenant in the Governor-General’s Foot Guards, the
crack infantry regiment of Ottawa and became its commanding officer,
with the rank of Lieut.-Col. in 1908. In that capacity he commanded his
regiment at the Quebec Tercentenary celebration of 1908, when a large
body of Canadian troops was assembled to do honor to the Prince of
Wales, now His Majesty King George the Fifth, and at which Lord Roberts,
General Pole-Carew and many other distinguished soldiers were present.
He also commanded his regiment at the Tercentenary Celebration of the
Discovery of Lake Champlain in Plattsburg, N.Y., and Burlington, Vt., in
1909. When the late war broke out Col. Street was one of those who
placed his services at the disposal of the Empire. He organized, trained
and became Commanding Officer of the 77th Overseas Battalion, which he
took to England in June, 1916. In the various engagements which followed
the battalion of Col. Street’s creation rendered most distinguished
service. Col. Street now commands the 8th Infantry Brigade M.D. No. 3.
Col. Street is a member of the Rideau Club, the Ottawa Golf, and the
Ottawa Hunt Club. He is a Roman Catholic in religion and is married to
Elizabeth Bauld, daughter of John H. Christie, Bras D’Or, Cape Breton,
N.S. He resides at 12 Range Road, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Odlum, Edward, M.A., B.Sc.=, 1710 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C., is one
of the most versatile and able citizens of the Coast Province, with a
wealth of experience such as has fallen to the lot of few Canadians. He
was born at Tullamore, Peel County, Ont., on November 27, 1850, the son
of John and Margaret (McKenzie) Odlum. The father was a gentleman farmer
and a son of Capt. Odlum, one of Wellington’s officers. The subject of
this sketch was educated at the schools of Tullamore and Goderich, Ont.,
and later at Victoria University, at a time when it was located at
Cobourg, Ont. He graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1879, and
subsequently took the degrees of M.A. and Bachelor of Science. Twenty
years of his life were spent as educationist, beginning with the common
schools and rising through all grades to college work as a professor of
Classics and the Sciences. He was for some years at the head of a large
college in Tokio, Japan, and his special studies were Botany, Geology,
Ethnology, History and Prophecy. His scholastic tastes have found
expression in several important publications, including “God’s Covenant,
Man,” “A Criticism of Rev. Dr. Campbell’s New Theology,” “The Old Book
Stands,” “The Cone-shaped Holes of Bandai-San made by Falling Stones.”
In fact, he is one of the ablest defenders of the orthodox view of the
Scriptures. In 1899 he gave up his position as an educationist in Japan
and came to British Columbia, where he speedily established himself as
an important figure in financial, mining and industrial circles. He is
Manager of the business of Clapp, Anderson and Odlum, Ltd.; Director
Mercantile Mortgage Company, Ltd.; and Director of Mills Ross, Ltd.
Though active in commerce, his pen has been an active one, and much
newspaper and magazine correspondence has flowed from it in addition to
the works mentioned. Of late years he has given much study to the
ancient languages, including the Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Assyrian and
Egyptian. At present, in his spare moments, he is preparing a
dictionary, alphabetically arranged, of the Assyrian and also of the
Egyptian. His recreations are gardening, travel, and writing; he is a
member of the Orange Order and the I.O.O.F.; is a Methodist and a
supporter of Union Government. He has been prominent in the municipal
affairs of Vancouver as an Alderman and has acted as Chairman of the
Finance, Fire and Light, and Police Committees of the Council. As a
youth he served for four years in the 36th Peel Battalion and saw
service in the Fenian Raid of 1866, for which he received the medal and
the Ontario Government’s land grant of 160 acres. He is a member of the
Board of the Carnegie Public Library. He was first married in May, 1878,
to Mary E., daughter of O. W. Powell, by whom he had four sons, Edward
Faraday, Victor Wentworth, Garnet McKenzie and Joseph Wellesley. Some
years after her decease he married Martha M. Thomas, Toronto, by whom he
had two sons, Arthur E. and Oswald. Brigadier-General Victor Wentworth
Odlum, of the C.E.F., has had a very distinguished career in the war.
One son was lost in the South African War and another at Ypres, April
24, 1915. Yet another son is in the 231st Highlanders.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lennie, Robert Scott=, 1737 Matthews Ave., Shaughnessy Heights,
Vancouver, B.C. Barrister, of the firm of Lennie, Clark, Hooper &
O’Neill, was born at Smith’s Falls, Ont., on August 16, 1875, the son of
Rev. Robert and Catherine (Harcus) Lennie. He was educated in the
schools of Ontario, British Columbia and California. He took up his
residence in British Columbia at the age of eleven and was called to the
Bar of that province in 1898. Subsequently he took up practice at
Nelson, B.C., and continued there until 1910, first as a member of the
firm of Elliot & Lennie and then of Lennie & Wragge. He removed to
Vancouver in 1910, when his present firm was formed. Mr. Lennie has long
been active in the politics of his province and was president of the
Nelson Conservative Club from 1904 to 1910; and President of the
Kootenay District Conservative Association, having charge of the
organization in nine ridings, during the same period. While resident at
Nelson he was also elected a Bencher of the Law Society of British
Columbia and was Chairman of the British Columbia Fire Insurance
Commission, appointed by Order-in-Council, the findings of which in 1910
were the basis of important legislation. Under the Military Service Act
of 1917 he was Registrar in charge of the operations of the draft in
British Columbia. Apart from his legal practice, Mr. Lennie has
important financial interests. He is a Director of the following
corporations: Forest Mills of B.C., Ltd.; Silver Ring Mines, Ltd.;
Nugget Gold Mines, Ltd.; Colonial Trust Co., Ltd.; and New B.C. Lands,
Ltd. His recreations are golf and motoring and he is a member of the
following clubs: Vancouver, Union (Victoria), and Shaughnessy Heights
Golf, and Jericho Country Club. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and on
Oct. 19, 1898, married a daughter of the late Benjamin Douglas,
merchant, of New Westminster, B.C., by whom he has three children,
Robert Douglas, Gerald Scott, and Edith Beatrice Catherine.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Landry, Hon. David V., M.D., M.A.=, is a leading and representative
Acadian, having been born on July 14, 1866, at Memramcook, Westmorland
County, New Brunswick, the son of Vital J. Landry and Matilda D.
Cormier, both French Acadians. Educated at the local schools, and the
University of St. Joseph, N.B., graduating with the degree of M.A., and
receiving the degree of M.D. from Laval University, Montreal, in 1892.
Subsequently practised his profession at Buctouche, engaged in
agriculture and has been a practical farmer on a large scale. Was
municipal councillor for the parish of Wellington in Kent County, N.B.,
1899-1900. Elected to the Legislature of his native province
representing the County of Kent in the general elections of 1908, and
entered the Hazen Administration on the 24th of March of that year as
Commissioner for Agriculture and held the same portfolio in the Fleming
Ministry up to January 22, 1912, when he resigned and accepted the
portfolio of Provincial Secretary and Treasurer in the Clarke
Government. Hon. Dr. Landry married, October 6, Annie, daughter of Felix
Michaud, of St. Leonard, N.B., and is the father of eight children,
i.e.: Huberta, Germaine, Lionel, Anne, Rosarine, Raoul, Leopold, and
Alberta. Hon. Dr. Landry, who is a brother-in-law of Pius Michaud, M.P.
for Victoria-Madawaska, N.B., is a very public spirited citizen and
recognized as a fine speaker. In religion he is a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ami, Henry M., M.A., D.Sc., F.P.S. (Can.), F.R.G.S., F.G.S.=,
consulting geologist and Palaeontologist, Ottawa, Ontario. Was born at
Belle Riviere, County of Two Mountains, north of Montreal, Que.,
November 23, 1858, the son of the Rev. Marc. Ami and Anne Giramaire. He
received his early education by private tuition, at Ottawa Public and
Grammar Schools and Ottawa Collegiate Institute, then proceeded to
McGill University, where he graduated as Bachelor of Arts in 1882;
receiving his M.A. in 1885, D.Sc. (Queen’s) in 1892, and D.Sc. (McGill)
in 1902. Mr. Ami won the Redpath Exhibition and three Macdonald
Scholarships, besides being Dawson Prizeman while an undergraduate at
McGill, and was for over twenty-nine years a member of the Technical
Staff of the Geological Survey of Canada (1882-1912), only retiring from
active government service through impaired health. He has been the
author of many government reports upon the geology, palaeontology, and
resources of the Dominion and a contributor to numerous scientific
magazines and publications. Problems relating to the geology and
stratography of the lower St. Lawrence, and of the Maritime Provinces,
have engaged his attention, while, in 1903, he was awarded the Bigsby
Gold Medal by the Geological Society of London, Eng., for his eminent
researches and results achieved, especially in the palaeozoic wells of
Canada, having definitely helped to solve the vexed problems as to the
age of large areas of carboniferous and other strata in Nova Scotia, New
Brunswick and other provinces. Mr. Ami has been a Fellow of the
Geological Societies of London and Switzerland since 1885, and of
America since 1900. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, of the Royal
Geographical Society, London, the Anthropological Society of America,
Council of the Archæological Institute of America, and a Director of the
American School of Archæology. This eminent Canadian is also a member of
the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada and a corresponding member, or
member of numerous scientific societies of Canada, the United States and
Europe. He was for years Editor of the “Ottawa Naturalist,” and for some
twenty years Associate Editor of the same publication in his special
field. He studied under the late Sir William Dawson, formerly Principal
of McGill University, and later wrote a sketch of the life of his
master; in Europe he carried on researches in Graphalites under
Professor C. Capsworth, and contributed much to the Bibliography of
Canadian Geology and Palaeontology, as also on the geography of the
Dominion, in European and North American publications. Dr. Ami is a
member of the International Congress of geology and of the Congress of
Anthropology and Pre-Historic Archæology recently held in Geneva, where
he represented the Royal Society of Canada. In 1907 he represented
Canada and the Geological survey at the Centenary Celebration of the
Geological Society of London, also the Royal Society of Canada on that
occasion. In 1903 he prepared a special report on the resources of the
country along the line of the National Transcontinental Railway between
Quebec and Winnipeg, furnishing the information necessary to Parliament
in connection with the estimates for that great enterprise. Dr. Ami is
now in London completing a work on “Canada and Newfoundland,” to form
part of the Compendium of Geography and Travel, Vol. 1, North America,
to be published shortly by Edward Stamford, Esq., F.R.S.S., geographer
to H.M. the King. Since his retirement from Government service he has
travelled in Europe, Asia and Africa, visited Algeria, Egypt, Palestine,
Turkey and Greece, paying some attention to geological and archæological
questions of interest as his health allowed. Dr. Ami married Clarissa
Jane, eldest daughter of the late G. B. Burland, for many years
President of the British American Bank Note Company, and has one
daughter, Marguerite Ami. He is a member of the Rideau Club, Ottawa;
Golf and Country Club, Ottawa; Hunt Club; Royal Societies’ Club;
Author’s Club, and Royal Colonial Institute, London, Eng. His amusements
are, skating, golf, anthropological and geological excursions and
photography. He is a member of the Presbyterian Church and independent
in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bulyea, George Hedley Vicars= (Edmonton, Alberta). A genuinely British
Canadian is His Honor George Hedley Vicars Bulyea, of Edmonton, Alberta,
Chairman of the Board of Public Utilities Commission for the Province of
Alberta. Mr. Bulyea is the son of James Albert Bulyea and Jane Blizzard,
both of United Empire Loyalist descent, and was born, February 17, 1859,
at Gagetown, Queen’s Co., New Brunswick. His father was a farmer and Mr.
Bulyea was no exception to the rule that farmers’ sons have brilliant
careers. Beginning his education at the grammar school, he graduated
from the University of New Brunswick in 1875, received his honorary
LL.D. degree in 1910 and his honorary LL.D. from the University of
Alberta in 1908. In 1885, he married Annie Blanche, daughter of Robert
T. Babbit, Registrar of Deeds, Gagetown, N.B. Their only child, Percy,
died in February, 1901. Mr. Bulyea is a Baptist in religion, a member of
the Edmonton Club, but has had very little time for recreation in the
manifold duties of his exacting political career. He was elected a
member of the North-West Council at the general territorial election,
1894. In 1897 he accepted office as a non-resident member of the
Haultain-Ross Executive Council, formed October 1, 1897. In January,
1898, he became Yukon Commissioner for the territorial government and
from 1898 to 1903 was Minister of Agriculture and Provincial Secretary.
From 1903 to 1905 he was Minister of Public Works, and in 1905 he became
the first Lieutenant-Governor of Alberta, a position he filled with
distinction until 1915, when he accepted his present appointment as
Chairman, Public Utilities Commission.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Higinbotham, John D., J.P.=, 620 12th Street, Lethbridge, Alberta, is a
son of Lieut.-Col. Nathaniel Higinbotham, formerly Member for North
Wellington (Ontario) in the House of Commons, and Margaret (Allan)
Higinbotham. His grandfather was David Allan, Esq., a prominent citizen
of Guelph, Ont., and his father after his retirement from politics,
became Registrar of Wellington County. The subject of this sketch was
born at Guelph, November 23, 1864, and was educated at the Guelph
Academy and the Guelph Collegiate Institute, Dr. Tassie’s famous school
at Galt, Ont., and the Ontario College of Pharmacy, Toronto. In 1884 he
went to Lethbridge and founded the wholesale and retail business as
chemist and druggist, which still bears his name. Growing up with the
city and province he has held a great many important offices. He was
postmaster of Lethbridge from 1886 to 1910 and is also a Juvenile
Commissioner for Alberta, a Senator of Alberta University, a Governor of
Alberta Ladies’ College, and has also been Chairman of the Lethbridge
School Board, Vice-President of the Board of Trade, President of the
Citizens’ League, President of the Alberta Pharmaceutical Association,
President of the Alberta Sunday School Association and Director of the
Y.M.C.A. He is a Presbyterian and in 1885, when but 21, organized Knox
Church Sunday School in Lethbridge and has been its superintendent
continuously from that day to this. He is a man of scholarly tastes and
has contributed articles to “The Week,” founded by Goldwin Smith;
“Grip,” the once famous comic weekly, and the “Westminster Magazine.” He
is an antiquarian, traveller and art connoisseur, and his outdoor
recreations include lawn tennis, golf and cricket. He is President of
the Lethbridge Lawn Tennis Club and a member of the Aquatic and Country
Clubs. He is a supporter of Union Government and a member of the North
Star Lodge A.F. & A.M., having been District Deputy Grand Master in
1897. In 1899 he married Anna, daughter of Rev. R. Torrance, D.D., of
Guelph, Ont., Moderator of the Presbyterian General Assembly. His
children are: Lieut. Harold Torrance, of the 13th Battalion (b. 1894);
Norman Lindsay (1900), a student of McGill University, Montreal; Helen
Phyllis, B.A. (Toronto) and R.N. (John Hopkins, Baltimore) (1890);
Marjorie (1899), of Havergal Ladies’ College, Toronto; and Mary Mewburn
and Muriel Dryden (twins, 1904).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Anderson, Prof. George R.=, University of Toronto, was born in the
Shetland Islands, Scotland, the son of an artisan, who died while he was
an infant. Coming to Canada at an early age he was educated at Seaforth
High School in Huron County, Ontario, and on matriculating at the
University of Toronto, entered on what was to prove a brilliant
scholastic career. He graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1893, taking
honors in mathematics and physics, and received that of M.A. in the same
institution, 1899. In 1905 Harvard University conferred on him the
degree of A.M. At present he is a member of the Science faculty of the
University of Toronto and is professor in charge of the Department of
Engineering Physics, and is also in charge of the Physics section, at
the Royal College of Dental Surgeons, Toronto. He has contributed
extensively to scientific journals. His chief recreations are boating
and fishing. He is secretary and a member of the Board of Directors of
the Madawaska Club, which has its headquarters at Go-Home Bay, in the
Georgian Bay District, where Prof. Anderson has a summer home. In
religion he is a Presbyterian and was married in 1901 to Margaret,
daughter of D. D. Wilson, merchant, of Seaforth, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wade, Mark Sweeten, M.D.=, 37 St. Paul St., Kamloops, B.C., was born at
Sunderland, Durham County, England, on November 23, 1858, the son of
Samuel John and Mary (Sweeten) Wade. The father was a merchant and the
subject of this sketch was educated at Gainford School, England, and at
Anderson’s College, University of Glasgow, from which he graduated in
1882, with the degree of M.D. He first paid a visit to Canada in 1881
and resolved to make his home in British Columbia, where he settled in
1883, practising first at New Westminster. In 1884 he was appointed a
surgeon in connection with C.P.R. construction and continued in the
service for a year. From 1885 to 1889 he practised at Clinton, in the
interior of British Columbia, and in the latter year removed to
Victoria, where he remained until 1895, finally establishing himself at
Kamloops where he added journalism to his professional attainments. He
became editor of the “Inland Sentinel” of that town, and also editorial
writer on the Nelson “News.” In 1904 he purchased the “Sentinel,” and
continued to conduct it until 1912. He now holds the position of Judge
of the Small Debts Court and Police Magistrate at Kamloops, offices for
which his intimate knowledge of British Columbia and its people
eminently fit him. He is also an ex-Coroner, ex-President of the Board
of Trade, and ex-President of the Liberal Association. He has been very
active with his pen and has published a monograph, “The Founding of
Kamloops,” and a book, “The Thompson Country,” as well as articles in
“The Fortnightly Review,” “To-day,” “Canadian Courier,” “Canadian
Magazine” and the Vancouver “Province.” His recreations are motor
boating and photography. He is an Anglican in religion and a Liberal in
politics. On March 10, 1886, he married Emma M., daughter of James B.
Uren, a stockraiser, of Savona, B.C., and Cornwall, England, and has two
sons, Mark Leighton, born 1889, and Daryl Frederick, born 1892.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Asselin, Olivar, Major= (Montreal, Que.), one of the most widely known
of French-Canadian writers and publicists, was born at Malbay,
Charlevoix, Quebec, on November 8, 1874, the son of the late Ricule and
Cedulle (Tremblay) Asselin. He was educated at Rimouski College and
later became Principal of the Evening School for French-Canadians at
Woonsocket, R.I. While a resident of the United States he was a frequent
contributor to the newspapers and shortly after his return to Canada in
1898, was appointed City Editor of “La Presse,” a post he resigned to
become private secretary to Sir Lomer Gouin, Prime Minister of Quebec,
filling this position from 1901 to 1903. In 1902 he founded the
Nationalist League of Quebec and became President of the Montreal
Branch, and in 1904 he re-entered journalism by founding “Le
Nationaliste,” of which he became editor. His articles in this and other
publications excited widespread attention in Canada, notably his
brochures, “Feuilles de Combat” and “A Quebec View of Canadian
Nationalism.” Mr. Asselin was always a man of military enthusiasm and in
1898 served for a time as a private with the U.S. Army in Cuba, during
the Spanish-American War. When war broke out between Germany and the
Entente powers, in 1914, he threw himself heartily into the cause of
France and Great Britain and helped to organize the 22nd Battalion
(French-Canadians), which has had a glorious record in France, and in
which he holds the rank of Major. His own service has been marked by
great sacrifice and personal bravery, and he is generally regarded as
one of the coming men in French Canada. On August 3, 1902, he married
Alice, daughter of Charles LeBoutillier, Gaspé Basin, and has three
children, Jean, Paul and Pierre. In religion he is a Roman Catholic.




[Illustration: HON. W. G. MITCHELL
Quebec]




=Ballantyne, James.= That Ottawa East is now a portion of Ottawa City,
is largely due to the efforts of Mr. James Ballantyne, Justice of the
Peace, who, when Ottawa East was a village, was the most active,
efficient and prominent man in the vicinity. It was he, as one of its
public men, who looked after the finances, who was active in placing the
water works system on a paying basis, and to whom credit is due for the
many improvements that were made in its streets, roadways, parks, and
other general matters. He took good care of the baby settlement, watched
and guarded the progress, and succeeded in having it become annexed to
the city of Ottawa; and now, in his advanced years, he sits contentedly
in his home and views with delight the rapid progress that is being made
in the erection of buildings, the handsomely paved streets and the
increase in population. Mr. James Ballantyne is a member of the firm of
J. & T. Ballantyne, Coal Merchants, 80 Elgin St., Ottawa. He is the son
of Francis and Marion (Nichol) Ballantyne, and was born at New
Castleton, Scotland, May 9, 1835. He was educated at the Public and High
Schools, and at Queen’s College, Kingston. He started in business with
J. & T. Ballantyne, manufacturers of woodenware in Ottawa in 1863, and
in 1890 established the present firm of J. & T. Ballantyne, Coal
Merchants. At one time he was Manager and Director of the Ottawa East
Water Co., was a member of the County Council for nine years, and
Secretary-Treasurer of the Ottawa East Public Schools for fifteen years.
In 1862 Mr. Ballantyne married Mary Foster, daughter of Adam Foster, of
Cumberland, England. Two sons and two daughters have blessed the union.
Mr. Ballantyne is a Protestant in religion, a Liberal in politics, and
he resides at 54 Main Street, Ottawa East, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hudson, Hon. Albert Blellock, LL.B., K.C.=, Attorney-General and
Minister of Telephones and Telegraphs in the government of Manitoba, was
born at Pembroke, Ont., on August 21, 1875, the son of Albert and
Elizabeth Hudson. His parents removing to Manitoba, he was educated at
Portage la Prairie and Manitoba University, Winnipeg, where he took the
degree of LL.B. He was called to the Bar in 1899, and commenced practice
in Winnipeg, where his forensic abilities soon attracted attention. He
is a Bencher of the Law Society and was appointed K.C. in 1914. In that
year he successfully contested South Winnipeg for the Manitoba
Legislature as a Liberal candidate and was re-elected in 1915, in the
contest that resulted in the defeat of the Roblin administration. When
Hon. Mr. Norris was called on to form a government he invited Mr. Hudson
to become Attorney-General, a post he has held ever since, discharging
also the important duties in connection with public control of
telephones and telegraphs. As Attorney-General he had much to do with
the cleaning up of political conditions which had become a public
scandal. He is a member of the Manitoba, Winnipeg Golf and Assiniboia
Curling Clubs, and is a Presbyterian in religion. In 1908 he married
Mary B., daughter of the late William Russell, Crown Timber Agent,
Pembroke, Ont., and resides at 208 Dromore Ave., Winnipeg.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Carson, Hugh=, is one of Ottawa’s most successful merchants and his
firm—Hugh Carson Company, Limited—has a successful branch at Brandon,
Manitoba. Starting out in 1886, at Shelburne, Ontario, as a
harness-maker, in 1890 he went to Ottawa and became connected with the
well known firm of S. & H. Borbridge, Trunk and Harness Manufacturers,
Rideau St. Three years later, in 1893, he went into business for himself
and established a large trade. In 1900 he was burned out, but in 1904,
having secured his present commodious premises, corner Elgin and Queen
Sts., he opened up on a larger scale than ever and the business has
grown to such vast dimensions that orders from all over Canada, and,
since the war began, from Europe, have compelled the engagement of
hundreds of extra hands to cope with the situation. Mr. Carson is
President and Managing Director of the Hugh Carson Company, Limited,
Manufacturers of Harness, Trunks and Valises, 47 Elgin St., Ottawa, and
a director of the following companies: Ottawa Dairy Company; Ottawa
Bakeries, Limited; Laurentian Realty Company, Limited; Canada
Turpentine, Limited; and Ottawa Cartage Company, Limited. He was born at
Orangeville, Ontario, February 8, 1868, and is the son of Gilbert and
Ellen (Little) Carson. For years he was Quartermaster of the 5th
Princess Louise Dragoon Guards and is now Captain. He has been prominent
in all kinds of sports and has been a leading figure in rowing,
yachting, lacrosse, curling and hockey contests. Mr. Carson is a member
of the Laurentian, the Ottawa Hunt, Rivermead Golf, Jovial Fish and Game
and Ottawa Motor Boat Clubs. From 1890 to 1898 he was captain of the
Capital Lacrosse Club, which held the championship for that period. Mr.
Carson attends the Presbyterian Church. His residence is 324 Cooper
Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Woods, Lieutenant-Colonel James W.= (Ottawa, Ont.). Born at Kildare,
Que., April 10th, 1863, son of Russel Woods, a successful farmer and
lumberman, whose ancestors were from Kildare, Ireland, and Anne J.
(Davis) Woods, of Canadian parentage, she being born at Longueuil,
Montreal. Educated at private schools and Montreal College. At an early
age entered service of Rankin, Beattie & Co., Montreal, later served
with A. W. Ogilvie & Company, three years; next associated himself with
Hodgson, Summer & Co., Montreal. Established business on his own
account, 1895, and by his own effort and ability has built up the
largest and most successful contractors’ and lumbermen’s supply house in
Canada. This progressive concern, now known as Woods Mfg. Co., occupies
a large factory, covering many acres, at Hull, Que. Besides constructing
this plant he is also the builder of and owner of the Woods Building,
now occupied by the Government and housing the Militia Department, also
the Canadian building adjoining the same, as well as the Roxborough
Apartments building. All of these splendid structures are of stone and
modern in every respect. Woods Ltd., and Smart-Bag were merged as
Smart-Woods Limited (the name being changed in 1918 to Woods Mfg. Co.,
Ltd.) with Colonel Woods as President, Jan. 1, 1913, with factories at
Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg and Ottawa. Mr. Woods is one of the most
active and progressive manufacturers, and a most substantial
public-spirited and patriotic citizen of the Dominion of Canada. Is
Vice-President, Canadian Manufacturers Association; President, Ashbury
College, Rockliffe; and numerous other corporations. President, Ottawa
Board of Trade, 1907-8, and was active in promoting the welfare of
Ottawa. Chairman of Citizens’ Committee of Finance that raised a fund of
$200,000 for the Y. M. C. A. of Ottawa, and one of the most active
members of that body. President, Carleton General Protestant Hospital;
President, Woods Mfg. Co., Ltd., largest contractors and Lumbermen’s
Supply House in Canada; President, Imperial Realty Co.; President,
Ottawa Uplands, Ltd.; President, Elgin Realty Co.; President, Empire
Cotton Mills, Ltd., Welland; Lieut.-Colonel of Governor-General’s Foot
Guards. Was elected an honorary member of famous Guards’ Club, London,
England, during the time—1909, 1910—he was attached to the Coldstream
Guards, England’s most exclusive military body. Is permanent Chairman of
Finance of the Earl Grey Musical and Dramatic Competition, which is held
in various parts of the Dominion for the purpose of promoting the higher
forms of musical and dramatic art. Is a great lover of art, and has in
his collection at Kildare House, Ottawa, examples of most of the
Barbazon and Dutch schools of art—such men as Corot, Jacques, Daumier,
Mauve, Israels, L’Hermith, Harupignies, etc. Married Ida E. Edwards,
daughter of John C. Edwards, Ottawa, Oct. 18, 1893, and has three sons
and two daughters. The eldest son, Captain J. R. Woods, was the first
colonial to secure a commission in the household Brigade. He was killed
in action in the Great War in the battle of the Somme on the 16th of
September, 1916, receiving honorable mention in the despatches and made
a captain on the field before he was twenty-one years of age. Captain
Woods went through many notable engagements and was on active service
for nineteen months before he met his death so gallantly on the field.
Lieutenant-Colonel Woods belongs to the following Clubs: Ottawa Hunt
(was its first president, H.R.H. The Duke of Connaught being Honorary
President); Rideau Club; Country Club; Mount Royal (Montreal); Toronto
(Toronto); Manitoba (Winnipeg); York Club, Toronto; Windham, London
(Eng.); and numerous others. He is Vice-President of the Red Cross;
President of the British Sailors’ Relief Fund and President of Finance
of the Patriotic Fund. He is a member of the Church of England and
Independent in politics. His principal recreations are golf, fishing and
riding. He has a beautiful summer residence known as “Kildare Lodge,”
St. Patrick, on the lower St. Lawrence.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Harrison, Nathaniel Isles=, Principal Willis Business College, 139½
Sparks Street, Ottawa, Ontario, was born in Pembroke, Ont., July 13,
1877. He is the son of John and Margaret (Isles) Harrison, and was
educated at the Public and High Schools in Pembroke and Renfrew Model
School. He taught school in Renfrew County from 1896 to 1898, when he
engaged in the lumber business in the Ottawa Valley, where he remained
until 1902. In 1903 he accepted a position as teacher in Willis Business
College, and left in 1904 to become Chief Accountant for J. Oliver &
Sons, Ottawa’s extensive furniture manufacturers. In 1906 he went to
British Columbia and became Secretary and Business Manager of the
Cranbrook Electric Light Company, Limited; the Water Supply Company,
Limited, and the Kootenay Telephone Lines, Limited, resigning from
office in 1910, he branched out as auditor, Accountant and liquidator on
his own account, at which he remained until 1912, when he returned to
Ottawa. In June, 1913, he purchased the Willis Business College, of
which he is now President. On January 20, 1908, Mr. Harrison married
Helena Scott, daughter of David Scott, Merrickville, Ontario. He has one
son and two daughters. He is a member of the Canadian Club, Glebe
Curling Club and Kiwanis Club, the Business Men’s Club, and of the A.F.
& A.M. society. In religion he is a Methodist. He is an ardent canoeist.
His recreations are hunting, fishing, curling, canoeing. His address is
131 Sunnyside Avenue, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Berthiaume, Arthur= (Montreal), one of the best known of
French-Canadian publicists and who holds the position of President and
Managing Director of “La Presse,” the most widely circulated newspaper
published in Canada in either the French or English language, was born
in Montreal on April 10, 1874. He is the son of the Hon. Treffle and
Hermina (Gadbois) Berthiaume. He was educated at the Ste. Hyacinthe
Seminary, St. Laurent College and Laval University, where he graduated
with the usual degrees. His father designed him for the Bar and he read
law with Beaudin, Cardinal & Loranger of Montreal. He was called to the
Bar of the province of Quebec in 1906 and for a time practised his
profession as a member of the firm of Beaulieu & Berthiaume. At the same
time he has been connected with “La Presse,” of which Hon. Treffle
Berthiaume was President, his connection having begun in 1900 when the
property changed ownership. In 1906 the subject of this sketch was
appointed General Manager of the newspaper, and in 1915 on the death of
his father succeeded to the Presidency, abandoning the practice of law
to devote his whole attention to “La Presse.” Great as was its position
and influence previously these factors have been greatly extended under
his fostering care. Not only is it the most widely circulated and
influential of French language newspapers in Canada but it has a very
wide following among the many French-Canadians settled in the New
England States. These fields combined give “La Presse” the premier
position in the Canadian newspaper field in the matter of circulation.
The wise and moderate conduct of its columns also give its editorial
utterances great weight with all classes of the community. In politics
Mr. Berthiaume is an Independent and in religion a Roman Catholic. He is
a well known social figure in Montreal and is a member of the following
clubs: St. Denis, Chapleau, National, Athletique Canadien, Automobile
(Director) and Engineers. On September 2, 1902, he married Blanche,
daughter of Nazaire Bourgoin, Montreal and has three sons and one
daughter. His residence is at 197 St. Catherine Road, Outremont,
Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Galbraith, Walter Stuart, M.D., C.M.= (Lethbridge), one of the most
prominent physicians of Alberta, was born at Guelph, Ont., August 1,
1866, the son of the late Francis William and Jane Elizabeth Galbraith.
The father was a well known merchant of that city, and Dr. Galbraith was
educated at the Public and High Schools of Guelph, and went to Alberta
in 1891. Subsequently he entered McGill University, Montreal, from which
he graduated with the above degrees in 1899. He at once commenced
practise in Lethbridge as a member of the firm of Mewburn & Galbraith,
but since 1907 has practised alone and includes among his many
professional activities those of surgeon of the Galt mines. His high
standing among his fellow practitioners was signalized by his election
as President of the Council of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Alberta in 1917; and he has been a Senator of the University of Alberta
since the incorporation of that institution. Dr. Galbraith has also
played a prominent part in municipal affairs, was Mayor of Lethbridge in
1907, and has been a member of the Public School Board for nine years,
holding the post of Chairman in 1912. He is President of the Bow River
Collieries, Ltd., and a Director of the British Canadian Trust Co., Ltd.
In religion he is a Methodist, and is a supporter of Union government;
is a member of the A.F. & A.M. and the Canadian Order of Foresters. He
also belongs to the Chinook Club, Lethbridge, and his recreation is
motoring. On August 6, 1901, he married Matilda S., daughter of Oliver
Gallinger, a farmer of Mediva, Ont., and has four children, Ruth
Eleanor, Francis Oliver, Jean Alexandra and Aileen Stuart (deceased).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Laidlaw, Lorne Nelson=, Barrister, Medicine Hat, Alberta, was born at
Kitchener (then Berlin), Ont., on February 6, 1882, and his parents
subsequently moving to Manitoba, he was educated at Brandon Collegiate
Institute and Brandon College. He was called to the Manitoba Bar 1908,
and practised at Brandon, 1908-10. In 1911 he went to Medicine Hat and
formed the legal firm of Laidlaw & Branchard. Both as a lawyer and a
business man he quickly achieved a prominent place in the community and
in 1914 was elected President of the Medicine Hat Board of Trade. In
religion he is a Presbyterian and in politics a Liberal; is a member of
the Knights of Pythias and of the Cypress Club, Medicine Hat. His
recreations are motoring and shooting. On December 7, 1910, he married
May, the daughter of the late Robert Hall, of Brandon, and has two
children.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wilson, Henry George Wilberforce, K.C.= (Indian Head, Sask.), Barrister
and Solicitor, was born at Arnprior, Ont., on March 31, 1873, the son of
George and Mary Cecilia Wilson. His father was a merchant, and he was
educated at Almonte High School, and later qualified for the law at
Osgoode Hall, Toronto, where he graduated in 1897. He first practised at
Renfrew, Ont., as a member of the firm of Craig and Wilson, but went to
Indian Head, Saskatchewan, in 1900, where he not only engaged in his own
profession but took up farming on an extensive scale. He is in fact one
of the great agricultural leaders of his province, for he owns and
personally farms 2,060 acres in the Indian Head district. These
interests have not prevented him from building up a large legal
practice. He was appointed King’s Counsel on December 31, 1913, is
solicitor for the Town of Indian Head, and also for the rural
municipality of the same name; solicitor for the Bank of Montreal and
the Union Trust Co., Ltd., and also a member of the High School Board of
his town. He belongs to the Masonic Order, to the Indian Head and Union
Clubs, Indian Head, and the Assiniboia Club, Regina. His chief
recreation is motoring. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and in
politics a Liberal. On June 21, 1910, he married Elizabeth Cameron,
daughter of Mr. A. H. Edwards, lumber merchant, of Carleton Place, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Baskerville, William Joseph=, is the son of George Baskerville by his
wife, Mary McDonnell, and was born at Townland, Ballyrushen, Tipperary,
Ireland, October 2nd, 1843. His father was the son of Benjamin
Baskerville, who was descended from an old Norman family which settled
in Ireland about the time of William the Conqueror, in 1066. The family
records were unfortunately destroyed by fire in 1858 and included a
great deal of matter that would have been of interest to the public. His
father, George Baskerville adopted the calling of a farmer in Ireland,
but in 1847 concluded to come to Canada. In the summer of that year he
landed in Bytown, now Ottawa, and engaged in the trading and grocery
business. In the fire of 1858 they lost all their household effects, as
well as whatever savings they had accumulated, and having no insurance,
the family had to start anew in life, and at the time of their father’s
death, in 1875, they were again in comfortable circumstances. Their
mother died in 1867. They had nine of a family. The subject of this
sketch, William Joseph Baskerville, was the fifth son. He received his
early education in the common schools, and later at Ottawa College, now
the University of Ottawa. In 1870 he formed a partnership with his
brothers, Patrick and George, under the firm name and style of P.
Baskerville & Bros., carrying on a retail grocery and liquor business
until the year 1880, when they discontinued the retail, and carried on a
wholesale business only. The business was carried on until the year
1904, when his two brothers having predeceased him, he retired. Since
that he has been engaged in real estate, stocks, and bonds and building
operations. In the year 1880, although still a partner in the firm of P.
Baskerville & Bros., he engaged in the contracting business, along with
James O’Connor and Patrick Cassidy. They were the successful bidders for
the Locks at Saint Anne’s de Bellevue, which work they completed in
1884. He was always a keen admirer of good sport, particularly lacrosse,
and was a Director of the Capital Lacrosse Club from 1892, the year of
their amalgamation with the Ottawas, until 1898. He was also a Director
of the Capital Athletic Association until 1901. He is a shareholder in
the Ottawa Electric Railway, the Ottawa Car Company, Rideau Townsite
Company, Nipissing Mining Company, Mining Corporation of Canada, the
Bytown and Aylmer Union Company, the Northern Life Insurance Company,
the Moose Jaw Electric Railway, the Southern Canada Power Company, Ltd.,
the Canada Cement Company, the Rosemont Realty Company, the British
Columbia Permanent Loan, and is director of the Ottawa Electric Light
Company, the Moose Jaw Electric Railway, the Rideau Townsite Company and
the Rosemont Realty Company. Mr. Baskerville is a Roman Catholic, and in
politics a Liberal-Conservative. He resides at 236 Stewart Street, cor.
Stewart and Chapel Streets, Ottawa, Ontario.




[Illustration: R. H. GALE
Vancouver, B.C.]




=Godfrey, Oswald Julius= (Indian Head, Sask.), Chartered Accountant, was
born at Sedbergh, Yorks, England, on October 7, 1875, the son of Robert
and Margaret Godfrey. His great-grandfather was Julius Cæsar Ibbetson, a
leading painter of the latter years of the eighteenth century, and his
grandfather was Rev. Isaac Green, known to annalists as the closest
friend of the family whose most celebrated member was Samuel Taylor
Coleridge, the poet. His father was a civil engineer by profession and
he was educated at King Edward the Sixth’s School at Birmingham,
England, and later had a thorough training in all branches of
accountancy. He came to Canada in 1903, locating first at Qu’Appelle,
Sask., and later founded the firm now known as Godfrey, Heathcote &
Nicholl, Chartered Accountants, with offices at Indian Head, Medicine
Hat and Prince Albert. Mr. Godfrey is known as an expert throughout
Canada, and was President of the Dominion Association of Chartered
Accountants, 1915-16, and of the Saskatchewan Institute of Chartered
Accountants 1912-13-14. He was also President of the Saskatchewan Union
of Municipalities for three years, 1915-16-17. On the practice and
theory of his profession Mr. Godfrey has written many important
treatises. His published work, “Municipal Finance and Accounting” has
been especially valuable as a text book for the guidance of the growing
municipalities of the West. His recreations are cricket, motoring and
gardening, and he is a member of the Canada Club, Regina, and the Union
Club, Indian Head. He is a member of the A.F. & A.M., and in religion an
Anglican. On July 17, 1905, he married Cecile Maud, daughter of Robert
Challoner, Warwick, England, and is the father of three boys and two
girls.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wright, George= (Toronto), is one of the most widely known of
Canadians, not merely in the hotel trade, with which he is especially
identified, but in business circles generally. He was born in Glasgow,
Scotland, November 19, 1866, the son of William Wright of Barrhead and
Elizabeth (McFayden) Wright of Islay, Scotland, and educated in the
public schools of his native city. At the age of 12 he joined the
British Navy, and at 19 entered the merchant marine as an ordinary
seaman, serving on various seas. He came to Canada from Japan in 1887,
settling at Vancouver, which remained his headquarters for six years,
during which he served as steward with the C.P.R. Coast and Hotel
Service. In 1893 he went to Winnipeg and was there engaged with the
C.P.R., first in the news department and later with the dining car
service until 1900. From 1901 to 1904 he was in charge of the C.P.R.
dining station service at Brandon, Man., which he developed to a high
point of efficiency; and also conducted hotels on his own account at
Macleod, Alta., and Oak Lake, Man. In 1904 he purchased the Hotel
Brunswick, Winnipeg, which he conducted for nearly two years; and in
1905 purchased the Walker House, Toronto, which has ever since been one
of his properties. Later he acquired a large interest in the Grand Union
Hotel, Toronto, and changed its name to the Carls-Rite. Mr. Wright in
addition to conducting the Walker House is Secretary-Treasurer of the
Hotel Carls-Rite Co., Ltd.; President of Wright-Carroll Investments,
Ltd., and Vice-President of Carroll-Wilson, Ltd., Edmonton, Alta. In the
last week of December, 1918, he was elected Vice-President of the
American and Canadian Hotel Keepers Association of the United States and
Canada for the fourth consecutive year. He is also a director of the
Peterson Lake Mining Co., Ltd. Mr. Wright has of late years taken an
active part in public affairs. He was the promoter of the First
Municipal Year Book in Toronto. When in July of 1918 several hundred of
the civic employees of Toronto went on strike he was appointed by the
Ontario Government one of the Royal Commission to inquire into the
grievances and settle the dispute, and was largely effective in reaching
an amicable solution of the difficulty. He also served as a member of
the Canada Food Board from 1917 until the close of the war, and was
able, because of his great practical experience, to render the cause of
food conservation signal service. In 1918 he was appointed a Member of
the Hydro-Electric Commission, a most important executive office. He is
a Conservative in politics and a Presbyterian in religion, and belongs
to the following organizations: Canadian Red Cross (life member),
Overseas Club (life), Navy League (life), St. Andrew’s Society (life),
Caledonia Society (life), Y.M.C.A., Board of Trade, Scarboro Golf,
Toronto Swimming Club (life), and Caer Howell Bowling Club (life). On
March 3, 1897, he married Jessie Oswald, daughter of George Motion of
Nelson, B.C., and has two children, Oswald George, and Jessie Ellen.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackie, George D.=, City Commissioner (Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan), was
born at Perth, Scotland, on March 8, 1878, son of James and Jane Mackie.
Educated at the Perth Academy and the Glasgow Technical College,
Scotland, where he had a distinguished career, obtaining several
degrees. Mr. Mackie was married on September 3, 1902, to the daughter of
John Carnegie, of Edinburgh, Scotland. He is the father of two children,
Douglas and Victor. Prior to coming to Canada, he was Engineer at
Crieff, Scotland, 1900-05; Water Works Engineer of Clydebank Water
Trust, Scotland, 1905-09; The Galt Engineering Company of Winnipeg,
1910-12; City Engineer at Swift Current, Saskatchewan, 1913-14, when he
assumed his present position of City Commissioner of Moose Jaw,
Saskatchewan. Mr. Mackie is a Presbyterian in religion, and a member of
the Prairie Club of Moose Jaw.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Payne, Francis Freeman= (Nelson, B.C.), one of the best known newspaper
men of British Columbia, is a native of Worcestershire, England, where
he was born November 8, 1888, the son of E. R. and Helen Freeman Payne.
He was educated privately and at Bromyard Residential School, and as a
very young man decided to come to America, finally settling in the
growing centre of Nelson, B.C., and later becoming manager of the “Daily
News,” the leading publication of that town, which serves a widely
extended territory. Mr. Payne is widely popular in his district and a
keen, progressive young journalist. On August 2, 1910, he married Ruby
Virginia, daughter of Mr. J. Irving, San Francisco, Cal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chauvin, Hon. T. Hector=, Judge of the Superior Court of Quebec
Province, was born at Terrebonne, Que., on October 9, 1862, the son of
Adolphe Chauvin, merchant, and Luce Limoges, his wife. He was educated
at Montreal College and Laval University and qualified for the Bar,
reading law with the firm of Lacoste, Globensky, Baisillon and Brosseau,
Montreal. On being called to the Bar in 1887, he entered the firm of
Brooke, Chauvin & Devlin, of Hull, Quebec. He was defeated as
Conservative candidate for Labelle in 1908, and a few years later was
appointed to his present position. In September, 1887, he married
Henriette, daughter of Napoleon and Azelie (Papineau) Bourassa, and has
five children, Adine (wife of Mr. W. Shanks), Françoise, Gustave,
Marguerite and Henri. He is a Roman Catholic and resides at 103
Sherbrooke St. East, Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hopkins, Arthur George, D.V.M., B.S.A., B.Agr.= (Surbiton,
Saskatchewan), is one of the great agricultural leaders of that province
and farms 900 acres of his own. He is also a widely-known expert in
veterinary science. He was born in London, Eng., March 9, 1869, the son
of the late George and Sarah (Fairall) Hopkins. His father was
Superintendent of the Foreign Branch, General Post Office, London, and
G. Lionel Hopkins, Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan, is a brother. He
was educated at St. Mark’s College, Chelsea, S.W., Eng.; Ontario
Agricultural College, Guelph, Ont.; Ontario Veterinary College, Toronto;
Iowa State College, Ames, Ia.; and University of Wisconsin, Madison,
Wis. He came to Canada in 1885, as a farm pupil with John Gardhouse &
Sons, Weston, Ont., and went to Manitoba in 1891, where he was in
business at Hartney and Neepawa, prior to locating on his present farm.
He has held many important professional positions at various times. He
was assistant in animal husbandry at the College of Agriculture,
University of Wisconsin, 1889-1901; Editor, “Farmer’s Advocate,”
Winnipeg, 1901-2, and later, in 1904-5-6; was Veterinary Quarantine
Officer for Canada in Great Britain, 1902; Chief Veterinary Inspector
for the Dominion Government, in British Columbia, 1903; and
Saskatchewan, 1908-10. In 1912 he filled the position of Reeve of
Fertile Valley, No. 285, Saskatchewan. He is also the author of
“Veterinary Elements,” a valuable handbook for students and farmers,
which has run through two editions. As a stock breeder he specializes in
Shire horses, Shorthorn cattle and Yorkshire swine. On Shorthorns he is
a well-known authority and has done considerable judging at Stock Shows,
and has also lectured at Farmers’ Institutes and at the University of
Saskatchewan on agricultural subjects. He at one time served in the 45th
Battalion under Col. (now Gen. Sir) Sam Hughes, and holds a commission
as Lieutenant in the Canadian Army Veterinary Corps. He is an Anglican,
a Liberal, a member of the A.F. & A.M., I.O.O.F., and the Saskatchewan
Grain Growers’ Association. He married first (1894) Ellen M. Dewar
(deceased), by whom he had one daughter, Dorothy M.; secondly (1899),
Jean S. Habkirk (deceased), by whom he had Leonard P. and Gladys Ellen
(twins), and George Edward; thirdly (1908), Edith Sealy Jones, by whom
he had five children, Phyllis, Margery, Geoffrey, Audrey and Betty.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Taylor, Hon. George Edward= (Moose Jaw, Sask.), was born near the City
of Winnipeg, Man., December 27, 1878, his parents being George and Mary
A. Taylor, of New Liskeard, Ont. Educated at London, Ont., and Osgoode
Hall, Toronto. Called to the Bar in 1902, created K.C. for the Province
of Saskatchewan, 1913, and appointed Judge of the King’s Bench, Sask.,
on March 2, 1918. Judge Taylor married Mabel Cecilia Ryan, daughter of
the late Charles F. Ryan, on January 1, 1904. He is the father of the
following children: Mabel Cecilia Moore, George Edward S., Glendolen and
Dorothy. His Lordship is a member of the Prairie Club of Moose Jaw and
the Assiniboia of Regina. In religion he is a Presbyterian. He finds
recreation in golf and motoring. Thomas W. Taylor, ex-M.P.P., of
Winnipeg, is an uncle.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cross, Alexander S. G.=, 369 Metcalfe Ave., Westmount, Que., is a
Justice of the King’s Bench for Quebec and was born at Ormstown in that
province, on August 12, 1858. His father was George Cross, a yeoman, and
his mother, prior to her marriage, Miss Barbara Brodie. He was educated
at Stoney Creek High School, Huntingdon Academy and McGill University.
From the latter institution he graduated in Arts in 1879, and in Law in
1881, and holds the degrees of B.A. and B.C.L. He is a prominent member
of the University Club, Montreal, and his chief recreation is
agriculture. He is a Protestant in religion and was married in 1898 to
Anna M., daughter of Mr. James J. Buchanan, yeoman, of Dundee, Que. He
has one son, George E. Cross, born March 14, 1899.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Campbell, Donald Grant, M.D.=, one of the leading physicians of
Montreal, was born in that city on April 21, 1883, the son of Rev.
Robert Campbell, D.D., one of the most widely known of Canadian
clergymen. His mother’s maiden name was Margaret Macdonell. He was
educated in Montreal High School and later entered McGill University,
where he graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1904. Deciding to follow
medicine, he remained another four years at the institution, achieving
the degree of M.D.C.M. in 1908. Ever since he has practised in his
native city and during the war has held a position in the Army Medical
Corps, with the rank of Captain. He was married on April 13, 1914, to
Sophie Edith, daughter of Albert Field, M.D., a well-known physician of
Barbadoes, British West Indies. Like his father, Dr. Campbell is a
Presbyterian in religion and in politics is a Conservative. He resides
at 755 Shuter St., Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cassils, Charles=, 118 Notre Dame St. West, Montreal, one of the
prominent capitalists of that city, was born at Renton, Dumbartonshire,
Scotland, on June 16, 1841, the son of John and Margaret (Murray)
Cassils. After a sound education in his native country he entered the
Glasgow Iron Office in 1853, and after twenty years’ experience in the
iron trade, came to Canada in 1873, becoming a member of the firm of
Cochrane, Cassils & Company, of Montreal, for many years representatives
in Canada of the Carnegie Steel Company, of Pittsburgh. His financial
interests are very wide. He is Vice-President of the Bell Telephone
Company of Canada; Director, Dominion Bridge Company; President,
Canadian Transfer Company; President, Structural Steel Company;
Director, Northern Electric Company; Vice-President, Dominion Bridge
Company; and Director, Windsor Hotel Company. In social organizations he
is prominent and has been President of the Montreal Philharmonic Society
for a considerable period, and is also a past President of St. Andrew’s
Society. He was Chairman of the St. James Club for some time and is also
a member of the Mount Royal, Montreal Hunt, Forest & Stream, Montreal
Jockey and Canada Clubs. He belongs to the Masonic Order, is a
Conservative in politics and a Presbyterian in religion. He first
married, in 1865, Agnes Shearer, of Glasgow, who died in 1868, and in
September, 1876, espoused Ermina Maria, daughter of Senator M. H.
Cochrane, of Compton, Que. His home is at 753 University Street,
Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cousins, George Vipond=, Barrister, Montreal, was born at Ottawa, Ont.,
on January 16, 1885, the son of Charles and Margaret (Vipond) Cousins.
His education in its more important phases was obtained at McGill
University, Montreal, from which he graduated in 1906 and in which he
holds the degrees of B.A., M.A. and B.C.L. Subsequently he took a course
at the University of Wisconsin, at Madison, which was followed by his
appointment as one of the lecturers in history in that justly celebrated
institution. His scholastic career was marked by the attainment of first
rank honors in history, political science and economics. Returning to
Canada he took up the study of law at McGill, obtaining the B.C.L.
degree as above stated, and has since practised in Montreal. He is a
skilled and thoughtful writer and the author of various articles on
economic and legal subjects, and is prominent in the social
organizations of his province. He is a member of the University, Royal
Montreal Golf, Royal St. Lawrence Yacht, and Canada Clubs, Montreal; and
of the Garrison Club, Quebec. During the world war he qualified as a
Captain at the Royal School of Infantry, Halifax, N.S., in order that he
might be able to meet the call of his country. In politics he clings to
the old-fashioned name of Tory, and in religion is a Presbyterian. On
April 16, 1912, he married Geraldine Osborne Chapman, of Amherst, N.S.,
a grand-niece of the late Sir Charles Tupper, Bart., at one time Prime
Minister of Canada, and has two daughters, Ruth Tupper and Beatrice
Vipond Cousins.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Heakes, Francis Riley= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Toronto, July 30,
1858, the youngest son of the late Samuel Heakes, of London, England,
and Elizabeth Isabella Riley, of Birmingham, England. Mr. Heakes’ father
came to Toronto in 1845 and established a retail dry goods business on
King Street, opposite Toronto Street. Mr. F. R. Heakes received his
education in public and private schools of his native city, studied
architecture in the office of the late Wm. Irving, a prominent architect
of his time, and practised his profession privately till 1883, when he
received the appointment of assistant to the late Kivas Tulley,
architect for the Public Works of Ontario and succeeded that gentleman
as Chief Architect for the province in 1896. Since that time a very
large number of Government Buildings have been designed and erected by
him throughout the province, including Court Houses, Hospitals,
Educational and Agricultural Buildings, and recently the new Government
House, which is designed after the French Chateau style, and is a
splendid example of the architecture of the period of Louis XVIth,
harmonizing most admirably with its picturesque environment. “In it,”
writes “Construction,” the architectural journal, in its February
number, 1916, “the architect has produced a gem that will stand as an
enduring monument to his professional skill and artistic taste. Citizens
of Toronto have every reason to be proud of the Official Home they have
erected for the King’s Representative.” Mr. Heakes’ duties are many,
varied and onerous, but he attends to them diligently and with marked
ability. He married Susan Pemberton, the fourth daughter of the late
Thomas Wood, and has three sons and two daughters. Of his sons, Alfred
is a manufacturer, while Lieut. Vernon of the R.A.F., and Sergt. Harold
of the 10th Canadian Siege Battery, have fought for their country and
world liberty in France. Mr. Heakes is a Presbyterian, a member of the
Masonic Fraternity and of St. George’s Society. His residence is No. 489
Euclid Ave.




[Illustration: MAJ. W. E. LINCOLN HUNTER, TORONTO
F. C. SUTHERLAND, TORONTO]




=Wallace, Thomas George= (Woodbridge, Ont.), eldest son of the late Hon.
N. Clarke Wallace, M.P., ex-Controller of Customs, Grand Master
Orangemen of British North America, and Belinda Gilmor (Wallace),
Canadians of Irish descent. Born May 7, 1879, at Ottawa. Educated at
Woodbridge Public School and Weston High School; general merchant and
flour miller. Has had distinguished military career. Gazetted Captain of
the 30th Regiment, Dec. 15, 1897. Resigned commission to go to South
Africa in the Boer War, as private in the Royal Canadian Regiment (1st
Contingent) 1899-1900. Was in first engagement the Canadians took part
in at Sunnyside, 1st January, 1900. Medal with three bars, viz.: Cape
Colony, Paardeberg and Driefontein. Prominent in the Orange Order, being
Grand Director of Ceremonies of the Orangemen of British America.
Anglican, Rector’s Warden of Christ’s Church, Woodbridge. Ranched for
some time at McLeod, in the Province of Alberta. Well-known athlete,
football and lacrosse enthusiast. Was Conservative Candidate Centre York
for the House of Commons in by-election, December, 1907, when defeated
by 26 votes. First elected to Parliament as representative of Centre
York, at the general elections 1908, re-elected by 510 in 1911, and
re-elected at the general elections in 1917 by a majority of 7,300
votes. Member of the Albany Club, Toronto. Captain Wallace is popular
with all classes and a most useful member of the House of Commons.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mondou, Alberic Archie, B.A., LL.B.= (Pierreville, Que.), born February
2, 1872, at St. François du Lac, son of Eusebe Mondou, general merchant
and farmer, St. François du Lac, and Georgianna Desmarais, both French
Canadians; educated at Nicolet College and Laval University, Montreal,
from which he graduated with the degrees of B.A. and LL.B. Married,
September 16, 1895, to Augustine, daughter of Michel Cardin, of Yamaska,
Que. Is a Notary Public by profession. President and General Manager of
the Strathcona Fire Insurance Co.; Vice-President and General Manager of
the Quebec and Western Canada Land Syndicate, Limited; was Local Manager
Provincial Bank of Canada at Pierreville, Que., 1902-1911. He was
elected, May 11, 1897, to the Quebec Legislature for the constituency of
Yamaska and ran for the House of Commons for the same riding in 1900 in
the Conservative interest at the general election, but was defeated; he
was elected at the general election in 1911, retiring in 1917. He is a
Roman Catholic in religion. Mr. Mondou is Independent in politics, he is
a member of the Canadian Club of Montreal, and has long been recognized
as a successful business man of sterling worth, prominently identified
with various large enterprises.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Merner, Jonathan Joseph= (Zurich, Ont.), born in Stanley Township,
County of Huron, April 2, 1864, son of Gottlieb Merner, a Swiss, and
Mary Ann Bleam, an American, a nephew of the late Senator Samuel Merner.
Educated at Public School, Township of Hay, and subsequently went into
the employ of Mr. D. D. Steinbach, General Merchant, at Zurich, where he
acquired a good business training. Mr. Merner later embarked on his own
account as a general merchant in Zurich, where he received his early
mercantile experience and success has crowned his industrial activities
and intelligent efforts. In connection with the business, a large
evaporator and apple jam factory is operated. Mr. Merner also controls
an extensive farm in the fine Township of Hay, and has large real estate
interests in Western Canada. He first entered political life in the year
1911, when he was returned to the House of Commons as a Conservative to
represent the riding of South Huron, and re-elected at the general
elections in Dec. 1917. Mr. Merner, with his practical experience as a
farmer and a merchant, and his large faith in the destinies of the
Dominion, is most highly regarded by his constituents. On Oct. 3, 1900,
he married Edith, daughter of Edward Graham, of Goderich, Ontario, and
has six children, three girls, Minnie, Greta and Beatrice, and three
boys, Edward, Clare and Borden. In religion Mr. Merner is a Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lumsden, John.= Ever active, progress followed the efforts of Alexander
Lumsden, one of the pioneer lumbermen of the Ottawa Valley, and the
father of John Lumsden, his only son, the subject of this sketch. On the
death of his father in 1904, John Lumsden came into possession of large
and rich timber limits in the Temiskaming region and a fleet of steamers
for the transportation of men and supplies to the camps on the edge of
Lake Kippewa. Inheriting his father’s energy and vitality and his
determination to keep ahead of the times, Mr. John Lumsden is ever found
at the helm directing his business and carefully sees that there is no
lagging in the performance or execution of the necessary work. The
lively town of Lumsden Mills, of over 500 inhabitants, lighted by
electricity and with its planing mills, head offices, large general
store, church, school, bakery, lumber, boat works and handsome
homes—the creation of this great lumber industry and owned entirely by
Mr. Lumsden—is nothing but hustle and bustle from morning till night
and the abode of a happy and contented people who take great delight in
watching the wheels of industry spinning and in doing their share
towards the successful termination of each day’s labor. At his mills
between 125,000 and 130,000 feet of lumber and 30,000 laths and pickets
are turned out per day and sent to the piling grounds ready to be
shipped to the markets of the world—to wherever the demand calls for
them. While Mr. Lumsden has all these details and commercial and
financial responsibilities resting upon his shoulders and demanding his
careful administrative and executive attention he can, and does, find
time to make his racing establishments truly representative on the
American turf at Maryland, Saratoga and other places. His horses
represent a big investment—there are between 20 and 30 of
them—two-year-olds, three-year-olds, seasoned campaigners, jumpers,
etc., and most of them are a gilt-edge breeding of British and Irish
Stock and racers of the swiftest class to whom many prizes and honors
have fallen. Mr. Lumsden is President, Dominion Explosives, Ltd., La
Banque Nationale Building, Ottawa; President, Lumsden Lumber Company,
Ltd., Ottawa; Director, Forwarders, Ltd., Kingston; Director, Caledonia
Realties, Ltd., Montreal; Director, Security Life Insurance Company of
Canada; Life Governor, St. Luke’s Hospital, Ottawa, and is closely
associated with many other philanthropic and business interests. He was
born at Ottawa, June 24, 1870, and is the son of the late Alexander
Lumsden, M.P.P., and Margueretta Lumsden, of Scottish descent. He began
his business career in the lumber business with his father and served
apprenticeship as a machinist with the Patterson Law of Ottawa. He was
chief engineer on a lake steamer from 1891 to 1893; was with the Laurie
Engineering Company, Montreal; associated with his father, 1903-1905. In
the latter year he went into business for himself. He established
Dominion Explosives and became President in 1910. He organized the
Lumsden Mining Co., and became President in 1906; organized the Lumsden
Lumber Co. and became President, 1913. He is part owner of the Lumsden
Building, Toronto; sole owner of the town of Lumsden Mills, Township of
Gendreau, Province of Quebec. A member of the Ottawa Board of Trade;
Director, Ottawa Horse Shows; offered building at Lake Temiskaming to
K.E. Memorial Hospital for Consumptives. On May 11, 1905, Mr. Lumsden
married Emily E. MacPherson, daughter of John MacPherson, Pioneer Mill
Builder, Chelsea. He is a member of the following Clubs: Laurentian,
Connaught Park Jockey, Royal Hunt, Rivermead Golf, Ontario (Toronto),
Wabinini Hunting and Fishing, and of the A.F. & A.M. Society. His
recreations are motoring, walking, reading. In politics he is a Liberal.
In religion, a Presbyterian, and he resides at 38 Charles St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McNeeley, John Strachan Lewis=, Police Magistrate, Carleton Place,
Ontario. Is the son of Joseph L. and Susan McNeeley, and is a
barrister-at-law by profession. Born in the Township of Beckurth,
November 28, 1870. Educated at Carleton Place High School and Trinity
University, Toronto, from which latter institution he graduated with the
degree of B.A. in 1893, and received the degree of M.A., 1895. Was
called to the bar in 1897. Married, 1899, to Harriet Helen, daughter of
the late Wm. Frost of Ottawa, and is the father of the following
children: Harriet Helen, Madeline, Isabelle, Hilda, Dorothy and Edna
Marion. He is a member of the Masonic Order and an Oddfellow; in
religion, he is an Anglican. P.M. McNeeley has occupied his present
position as Magistrate for the Town of Carleton Place since 1895. He was
appointed member of the Corporation of Trinity University, Toronto, by
the Anglican Synod of the Diocese of Ottawa in 1905, which position he
held for several years. He was elected member of the Board of Education
of Carleton Place in 1909 and has been a member of the Board ever since,
being chairman in 1910-11. In politics Mr. McNeeley is a Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Weichel, William George= (Waterloo, Ont.), born at Elmira on July 20,
1870, son of Michael Weichel and Margaret Schmidt, the subject of this
sketch is and has been one of the most prominent men in his native
county for several years, and has been connected with its political,
commercial and social progress and activities in a large way. He
received his education at the Public School of Elmira, which place he
left at the age of twenty to enter the employ of Shurly & Dietrich, saw
manufacturers, Galt, where, after gaining a thorough knowledge of the
business, he represented his firm for several years as travelling
salesman. Later he bought out the hardware firm of J. W. Fear & Co. Has
been President of the Board of Trade and President of the Canadian Club,
of Kitchener, and Alderman, Deputy Reeve, and Mayor of the Town of
Waterloo in 1911, in which year he was elected to the House of Commons
as Conservative candidate for the riding of North Waterloo, defeating
Hon. W. L. MacKenzie King, the Minister of Labor, by a majority of 315.
Since his entry into Parliamentary life Mr. Weichel has greatly
distinguished himself as a public speaker, and has been especially
fearless and outspoken in support of the Military Service Act and of the
Union Government. Mr. Weichel, although of German origin, is very loyal
to the country of his birth, and to British institutions. In the general
elections held in 1917 Mr. Weichel was again a candidate, but was
defeated owing to the peculiar war-time conditions existing in the
riding he had so brilliantly and faithfully represented. He has a good
platform presence and speaks with fluency and earnestness in support of
his convictions, doing everything in his power to promote harmony and a
good understanding among his constituents and to secure the successful
termination of the great conflict in favor of the British Empire. Mr.
Weichel married, on August 19, 1896, Jessie R., daughter of Richard
Kinsman, of Galt, and has three daughters, Norine, Minota and Audrey. He
is a member of the Berlin Club and the Waterloo Club. His chief
recreations are lawn bowling and curling. In religion he is a Lutheran.
Progressive, loyal, public spirited, with a high sense of duty, a talent
and taste for public affairs, Mr. Weichel is a credit to his native
county.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McBrien, Frederick George= (Toronto, Ont.), was born at Orangeville, in
Dufferin County, in the year 1887, son of James C. and Abigail McBrien.
He removed to Toronto at an early age, where he attended the public and
high schools, and afterwards embarked in the hardware business,
establishing a large trade, exhibiting much capacity and securing the
confidence of the community by his enterprising qualities and fair
methods. Subsequently he designed and built a large number of residences
and apartment houses. He was elected as alderman of Ward Six in 1910, at
the age of 22, being one of the youngest members of the City Council,
and re-elected in the years 1911, 1912 and 1913. In 1914 he was
nominated for Mayor, and in an election in which he was opposed by three
candidates, ran second, polling nearly 18,000 votes. He retired from
municipal life for two years and was again elected to the City Council
as a representative of Ward Six in 1916-17. Retiring as Alderman for
Ward Six, he was nominated as one of the Representatives of Ward three,
and was elected, and at present is Chairman of the Property Committee.
Alderman McBrien’s municipal career has been a most useful one and he
brings to bear on all civic problems, an analytical mind enriched by
practical experience and a consideration for the taxpayers. He has
specially interested himself in the welfare of the soldiers at the front
and their dependents in his home city. A brother, Major Wm. Carson
McBrien, has been overseas for some time, and won promotion. A good
platform speaker and a keen debater, Alderman McBrien’s sincerity is at
all times convincing. In politics he is a Conservative and is identified
with the Masonic, and Orange Orders and is an Oddfellow. A member of the
Methodist Church. He is also a Justice of the Peace. On Sept. 9, 1912,
Alderman McBrien married Irene Zella, daughter of John Edward Jarrott
and Mrs. Jarrott, of Toronto, and has two children, Frederick George and
Muriel Irene.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Matthews, George Sands= (Brantford, Ontario), born at Lindsay, Ontario,
February 17, 1867; son of George and Ann Matthews; educated at Lindsay
Public and High Schools, and graduate of Woodstock College, 1884.
Married June 25, 1895, to Frances, daughter of Rev. Frederick Ratcliff.
The union has been blessed by four children: George F., James J.,
Margaret R., and Howard S. Mr. Matthews has devoted his energies to
mercantile life and is identified with many large well-known industrial
enterprises, among which may be mentioned: Matthews-Blackwell, Ltd., of
which he is a Director, and was Manager at Brantford from 1903 to 1914;
Vice-President of the Brantford Roofing Co., Treasurer of Niagara Silk
Co., Ltd. Mr. Matthews was President of the Brantford Board of Trade in
the year 1911, and Chairman of the Brantford Board Park Commission,
1910-1914. He is Vice-President of the Brantford Industrial Realty Co.
and is financially interested in eight of the city of Brantford’s
leading industries. He took a prominent interest in military matters for
over 20 years, 1885 to 1906, joining as a private in the 57th Battalion,
Peterboro Rangers, in which he rose to the rank of Captain. He is a
member of the National Club, Toronto, and the Brantford Club in his home
city. In religion he is a Baptist, and in politics an Independent
Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marcile, Joseph Edmond= (Acton Vale, Que.), son of Vital Marcile and
Elizabeth Jacques, his wife. Born at Contrecœur, County of Verchères,
Que. Educated at Actonia High School and Academy, Que. Married first,
Sept. 7, 1880, to Melvina Masse, who died March 2, 1884; secondly, Sept.
9, 1884, to Gracia Courville. Began his mercantile life as a clerk in a
general store, from 1872-85, and was a dry goods merchant from
1885-1914, in which latter year he sold out his business and became a
gentleman farmer and manufacturer, and is at present a shareholder in
the Acton Biscuit Co., Quebec. Has been Councillor, Mayor and Chairman
of the School Board of Acton Vale. First elected to the House of Commons
as the Liberal Representative for the County of Bagot at a by-election
caused by the death of a sitting member, M. Dupont, when he received
1,431 votes as against 1,384 cast for his opponent, M. Brodeur.
Re-elected by the general elections in 1900 by a majority of 156 over
Honorable L. O. Taillon, and re-elected in 1904, 1908, 1911 and 1917. Is
the father of the following children: Charlotte, Berthe, Albert,
Therese, Alice, Gaston, Contran, Philippe, Gertrude, Marie Ange, Gerard,
and Yolande. He is a member of the following societies: Alliance
Nationale, Artisans Canadien Français, St. Joseph. Two of Mr. Marcile’s
sons, Gaston and Philippe, are at the front in the 150th Regiment. In
religion, the member for Bagot is a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Doherty, Hon. Charles Joseph, K.C., D.C.L., LL.D.=, son of the late
Hon. Marcus Doherty, a Judge of the Supreme Court for the Province of
Quebec and Elizabeth (O’Halloran) Doherty, born at Montreal, May 11,
1855. Educated at St. Mary’s (Jesuit) College and McGill University,
Montreal, from which latter institution he graduated with the degree of
B.C.L., and took the Elizabeth Torrance Gold Medal, 1876, D.C.L., 1893,
LL.D., Ottawa University, 1895. Married, June, 1888, Catherine Lucy, the
daughter of Edmund Barnard, K.C., Montreal. Admitted as Advocate, 1887,
and appointed K.C. under Lord Lansdowne in 1887; ably practised his
profession in Montreal where he became one of the leaders of the Bar;
successfully pleaded before the Privy Council in England; was for many
years Professor of Civil and International Law, McGill University; was
President University Literary Society; appointed Judge of the Superior
Court for the Province of Quebec which office he filled from October
1891, to November, 1906, when he retired. Was a candidate for the
representation of Montreal West in the Quebec Legislature, December,
1881, and candidate for the representation of Montreal Centre in Quebec
Legislature in October, 1886. Defeated both times. First elected to the
House of Commons for St. Ann’s division, Montreal, in the Conservative
interests, and at the General elections in 1908; re-elected, 1911, and
again in 1917. Sworn in as member of the Privy Council for Canada and
appointed Minister of Justice, October 10, 1911. After accepting office
was re-elected by acclamation. Presented with a life-size portrait in
oils by the Montreal Bar, 1907; elected a Governor of Laval University,
1903; elected Director of La Banque Provinciale, 1907; elected a
Director of Montreal City and District Savings Bank, 1908; elected
Director Prudential Trust Company, 1911; elected a Director of the
Capital Life Assurance Company, 1911; elected President Canadian
Securities Corporation, 1910; President St. Patrick’s Society, Montreal,
1903-04; also Director International Truth Society, and a Trustee of St.
Patrick’s Orphans’ Asylum, Montreal. As a young man was President of the
Shamrock Lacrosse Club and the Shamrock Amateur Athletic Association;
formerly President Irish National League, Montreal. A supporter of Home
Rule for Ireland; was Captain in the 65th Mount Royal Rifles and
retired, retaining rank in 1887, after serving through the North-west
Rebellion. He is the father of the following children: Kathleen, Eileen
Margaret, Elizabeth and Marcus. A Member of the following clubs: Mount
Royal, St. James, University Club, Montreal, Rideau Club, Ottawa,
Country Club, Golf Club, Ottawa, Catholic Club, New York. The Minister
of Justice is recognized by men of all shades of political opinion as an
honorable man of exceptional ability and energy, and is greatly esteemed
by all classes for his splendid character, his capacity, probity, worth,
and public spirit.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Starr, J. R. L.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born October 5, 1865, and after
receiving a thorough primary and Collegiate education at the Collegiate
Institutes of Collingwood and Whitby, matriculated in 1883. He then
entered Victoria University, where he obtained honors in classics the
first two years, and in philosophy the last two years. In 1887 the Alma
Mater conferred upon him the degree of B.A., and in 1890 the degree of
LL.B. The same year he was admitted to the Bar, having been articled to
Mr. W. H. P. Clement, of the well-known firm of McCarthy, Osler, Hoskin
& Creelman, where he remained for one year, and was for a like period of
time associated with Mr. Clement. Mr. Starr then embarked in the active
individual practice of his profession until 1895, when he formed a
co-partnership under the firm name of Thorne, Warren & Starr which firm
continued until 1900, when the present well-known partnership of Masten,
Starr & Spence was formed. Mr. Starr numbers among his large and
constantly increasing clientele some of the leading corporations of the
city, his firm being solicitors for the Bank of Nova Scotia and other
large corporations. Mr. Starr is a member of the National Club and
Orange Society, and is well-known in Conservative political circles. Mr.
Starr, in addition to the arduous duties of his profession, for many
years found time to devote much of his energy to public affairs, sitting
on the Board of Education for seven years and being twice elected as a
member of the City Council. While a member of these important bodies he
was prominent in the agitation for better play grounds for the children
of the city, and was largely instrumental in bringing about the
betterment and enlargement of such grounds. Mr. Starr is always in
earnest in the conduct of his business, and amongst the profession has
an enviable reputation for honesty and straightforwardness. These
qualities make the practice of his profession with his fellow-lawyers
particularly agreeable and friendly, and he is frequently able to settle
difficult matters where others might fail. He is better known as a
“settler” of law suits than as a counsel. He is a prominent Methodist
and very active in church work. In politics he is a staunch Conservative
and a possible future member of Parliament.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacAulay, Brock=, was born in Southampton, Ont., March 14, 1871. He is
a son of Donald MacAulay and Annie McLeod, of Stornoway, Scotland. He is
a merchant in Southampton and also interested in two fishing tugs which
fish out of that harbor. In the realm of sport the name of Brock
MacAulay is known from one end of Canada to the other. His two great
pastimes are bowling and curling. In years gone by he and his great rink
of curlers have brought honor and fame to Southampton. No big bonspiel
was complete without these hardy men from the Bruce Peninsula, and they
demonstrated, under the guidance of Brock MacAulay, that they knew the
roarin’ game to perfection. When they were not winners, they were
runners up, and seldom have they returned home without annexing a good
share of the trophies. In bowling it was the same, and they also brought
the name of their town to the fore. Brock MacAulay in both games, is a
skip of rare judgment, and it is in the tight places that his brilliancy
shines. He seldom fails to draw to the T or kitty when it is required of
him. He is a good sportsman, and win or lose he has always been noted
for his great good nature. In private he is a good story teller and an
interesting companion. He is a member of St. Lawrence Lodge, No. 131,
A.F. & A.M., of Southampton, the Sons of Scotland, and the I.O.F. He is
a Presbyterian in religion and a Liberal in politics. He married Miss
Jean Webster, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Webster, of Lion’s Head.
They have one daughter, Helen, and one son, Douglas.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Paquet, Eugene, M.D.=, born at Agaipt, Lotbiniere County, Que., October
23, 1867, son of François Paquet, farmer, and his wife, Clarisse
Bergeron (French-Canadians). Educated at Seminary, Quebec, and Laval
University, from which he graduated with the degree of M.D. Received his
degree in 1892, passing with great distinction. He has practised
medicine at St. Aubert, L’Islet County, since graduation. Elected to the
House of Commons at the general election of 1894, re-elected in 1908 and
1911. A Roman Catholic in religion and a Conservative. A frequent
contributor to “Le Peuple de Montmagny.” Married May 30, 1893, to Elise
Lafrance at Quebec, a daughter of Victor Lafrance of that city, and is
the father of one child, Lucienne Paquet, born Nov. 23, 1894.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=St. Jean, Ulric= (Contrecœur, Que.), is the son of the late Antoine St.
Jean and was born on April 22, 1869, at Contrecœur. Educated at the
Model School of his native place where he was for five years President
of the Commissioners of Schools. Always took an active part in the
political life of his County before his appointment as Registrar in
June, 1914, being President of the Liberal Club twice, for Vercheres
County. Married Marie Joseph Guyon, daughter of Ludger Guyon, and is the
father of the following children: Jeanne, Annette Simone, Gilberte
Etiennette. Mr. St. Jean is a member of the Board of Trade in Montreal
and in religion is a Roman Catholic.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cash, Edward L., M.D.= (Yorkton, Sask.), son of David Cash (English)
and Elizabeth Eckardt, his wife (Canadian), born December 26, 1849, at
Markham Village, Ont., where he attended the Public and High Schools,
afterwards the Victoria University, Cobourg, graduating with the degree
of M.D. in the year 1871, and being licensed by the Ontario College of
Physicians and Surgeons the same year. Married, January 10, 1898, Mary
B. Simpson, daughter of Wm. Simpson. Resided for some years, 1871-1896,
in the United States, and was elected County Clerk of the District Court
for Rock County, Nebraska. Commenced the practice of medicine in Yorkton
in 1897, and soon established a large practice, where he was elected to
the House of Commons at the general election for McKenzie as a Liberal
in the general elections of 1908-1911. He is a Congregationalist in
religion. Dr. Cash is the father of three children, i.e., Abbie Ruth,
Nellie Katherine, and David E. L. He is a member of the Masonic Order,
an Oddfellow, A.O.U.W., K.O.T.M., and also of the Canadian Club and
Yorkton Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sine, Frederick= (Sydenham, Ont.), was born at Madoc, Ont., January 24,
1877, and is the son of George William Sine. Educated at the Collegiate
Institute of Collingwood and Meaford High School, and Queen’s
University, Kingston, from which latter institution he graduated with
first-class honors in Chemistry and Physics, and also received the
degree of M.A. in 1906; also took the degree of B.Sc. in Geology and
Mineralogy at the School of Mining, Kingston, 1908. While at Queen’s
University he was Demonstrator in Chemistry. Mr. Sine taught Public
Schools in Grey County and Hawkesbury, and High Schools at Hawkesbury,
Dundas and Sydenham. He married Annie, daughter of James Watson, of
Dundas, Ont. In religion, he is a member of the Methodist Church, and
politically, is a Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Labelle, Alfred Eugene=, Brigadier-General, Managing Director of the
St. Lawrence Flour Mills Co., Montreal, Que. Started in the milling
business as Secretary to W. W. Ogilvie (the late Canadian Flour King) in
1884, and rose to the position of local Manager at Montreal, for the
Ogilvie Mills Co., from which he retired in 1910 to form the present
company, of which he is Managing Director. General Labelle served as a
Lieutenant in the North-West Campaign of 1885, was in command of the
65th Regiment for two terms, 1896-1912, in command of the 12th Infantry
Regiment, 1912-1916; in command of the Canadian Bisley Team, 1908;
promoted to the rank of Brigadier-General, 1916; and chairman of the
Council of the Dominion Rifle Association, 1916-17. He has been
decorated by the French Government a Commander of the Legion of Honour,
and also wears the North-West Rebellion Medal and the long service and
Diamond Jubilee Decorations. General Labelle has been President of the
Montreal Chambre de Commerce, Director of the Montreal Com. Exchange,
and several Companies, and a Commissioner of the Harbor of Montreal
since 1913. He was born at Montreal, August 23, 1866, the son of Hospie
Labelle and Leocadie Masson, receiving his education in government
schools and Bishop’s Academy. He married Amelie, daughter of Judge L. W.
Sicotte, Montreal, April 30, 1890, by whom he has five sons and one
daughter. He is a member of the following clubs: St. James, St. Denis,
Montreal, Canadian and Chapleau, all of Montreal. By religion General
Labelle is a Catholic, and a Conservative in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Weir, William M.=, President of the Canada Foundries & Forgings, Ltd.,
Westmount, Que., was born in Quebec City, July 26, 1873, the son of Mary
A. McGoldrick and W. E. Weir, Quebec, and graduated from Ottawa
University. He is a Director of the following companies: Canada
Foundries & Forgings, Ltd.; Carriage Factories, Ltd.; J. H. McKay Co.,
Ltd.; Eastern Canada Fisheries, Ltd., and Ateras Wharf & Warehousing
Co., Ltd., Havana, Cuba. On November 25, 1903, Mr. Weir married Florence
E., daughter of J. J. Weville, Ottawa, Ont., and has seven children,
Mary Doris, William Dermand, Marion Lucille, Irene Grace, Florence
Elizabeth, Joseph Harrison, and Margaret Ruth. Mr. Weir is a Captain in
the 55th Regt. Irish Canadian Rangers, and a member of the St. James and
Royal St. Lawrence Yacht Clubs, Montreal, also of the Welland and
Brockville Clubs. He is a Roman Catholic in religion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackenzie, Hugh Blair= (Westmount, Que.), General Manager of the Bank
of British North America, began his banking career with the Canadian
Bank of Commerce, at Brantford, Ont., in 1884, and in 1887 joined the
forces of the Bank of British North America at Brantford; was
transferred from there to St. John, Que., and then to Montreal, where he
became Secretary to the General Manager in 1893. He was appointed
Accountant in London, Ont., in 1894, and Assistant Inspector in 1895,
which position he held until 1903, when he became Chief Inspector,
acting in this capacity until he was appointed Manager at Victoria,
B.C., in 1905. He became Superintendent of Central Branches at Winnipeg,
in 1907, removing to Montreal in 1909, to the position of Superintendent
of Branches there, and held this post until 1912, when he was appointed
to his present office as General Manager. He was born at Ingersoll,
Ont., December 14, 1867, the son of Venerable Archdeacon C. C.
Mackenzie, D.C.L., late rector of Grace Church, Brantford, Ont., and
Helen (Boomer) Mackenzie, and is a brother of Prof. M. A. Mackenzie, of
Toronto University. His earlier education took place in the Public
School at Kincardine, Ont., going from there to the Collegiate Institute
at Brantford, and then to Trinity College, Port Hope, Ont. On October
11, 1902, Mr. Mackenzie married Maude Marion Weir, daughter of the late
Oswald Weir, a banker, of Brantford, Ont., and has three children, Amy
Maxwell, born October 10, 1903; Maxwell Hibbard Weir, born June 30,
1907, and Malcolm Blair, born April 19, 1913. He is a member of the
Anglican Church and of the Mount Royal Club, Montreal. For recreation he
takes an active interest in golf, being a member of the Royal Montreal
and Kanawaki Golf Clubs.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McKay, Honorable James= (Regina, Sask.), one of the Judges of the
Supreme Court of the Province of Saskatchewan. Before his elevation to
the bench in 1915, his lordship was a prominent barrister at Prince
Albert, Sask., and Public Administrator and Official Guardian of the
Judicial District of Saskatchewan. Registrar of the Diocese of
Saskatchewan and Solicitor for the same; Director Prince Albert Victoria
Hospital. Was born in Manitoba, 1862, son of Wm. McKay, Factor in Hudson
Bay Company. Married 1900, Florence, daughter of J. Lestock Reid.
Educated at St. John’s College, Manitoba. Winner of Dufferin Medal for
Ancient and Modern History; University Medal in Classics. Graduated at
the University of Manitoba (B.A. Honor Classics). Called to the Bar of
Manitoba, 1886, and to the North-West Territories Bar, 1887; practised
at Prince Albert, Sask., until elevation to the bench. Was Crown
Prosecutor for Saskatchewan, 1888-1897; appointed Q.C. in 1894; has been
Councillor for Prince Albert. Actively engaged with the Militia and took
part in the suppressing of North-West Rebellion in 1885, doing special
duty with French’s Scouts. Candidate for the Liberal Conservatives,
Dominion General Election, 1896, when defeated by Sir Wilfrid Laurier,
elected as member of the House of Commons for the Constituency of Prince
Albert in 1911, at the General Elections, which seat he resigned on
being appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court of Saskatchewan, being
succeeded by Lt.-Col. Samuel James Donaldson, who was elected to fill
the vacancy by acclamation. His lordship has one daughter, Marion. He is
a member of the Church of England and a Free Mason, and a Forester.
Recreations, shooting, riding, tennis and bowling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hannon, James Willson= (Regina, Saskatchewan), son of Rev. Jas. Hannon,
D.D., a prominent clergyman of the Methodist Church, and Sarah Margaret
Willson; was born at Hamilton, Ontario, October 11, 1870. Educated at
Provincial, Public and High Schools and matriculated with honors in
Classics at Toronto University; subsequently studied law, and was called
to the bar at Osgoode Hall, Toronto. In his earlier years he taught in
Ontario rural schools, but went West in 1898, and has since been largely
identified with the history and progress of Saskatchewan; being
successively Crown Prosecutor of the Old Judicial District of that
Province; Agent of Dominion Lands, and Crown Timber Agent at Prince
Albert, Saskatchewan; and Registrar of Land Titles at Battleford,
Saskatchewan, leaving the latter place in 1909, having been appointed
District Judge at Regina, the Provincial Capital. Judge Hannon married
Emma Orilla, daughter of Charles Campbell Woods, of Toronto, on July 25,
1900. He is a member of the Board of Governors of Regina College, and
also of the Police Commission of that city, and a member of the I.O.F.
In religion Judge Hannon is a Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Leblanc, Sir Pierre-Evariste, K.C.= (Quebec, Que.), Lieutenant-Governor
of the Province of Quebec, comes of an historic family which was among
those driven from Acadia, Nova Scotia, and settled at L’Isle Jesus,
Laval County, Que. He is the son of Joseph Leblanc and Adele Belanger,
born at St. Martin, August 10, 1853, and educated in the Academy of that
place and Normal School of Jacques-Cartier. The present
Lieutenant-Governor was called to the Bar in 1879, and was for several
years a teacher. In 1893 he was created King’s Counsel by Lord Stanley,
of Preston, and was a member of the Provincial Legislature of Quebec
from 1882 to 1908, during which time he was speaker of the Assembly
under the de Boucherville, Taillon and Flynn Governments. His Honor was
appointed Lieutenant-Governor of the province in 1915, and K.C.M.G.,
June 3, 1916. He married Herminie, daughter of Theodore Beaudry and
Catharine Vallee, January 12, 1886, by whom he has three
children—Lieutenant Beaudry Leblanc, C.E.F., Mrs. Juliette L. De Costa,
Buenos Ayres, and Mrs. Arthur Perodeau, Montreal. He is a member of the
Garrison Club, Quebec; Mount Royal, Montreal Hunt, and St. James Clubs,
all of Montreal. In religion His Honor is a Roman Catholic, and in
politics a Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Stewart, Dougald, B.A., M.D., M.P.= (Lunenburg Co., N.S.), born
December 5, 1862, at Upper Musquodoboit, Halifax County, Nova Scotia,
son of John Sprott Stewart, a Scotch-Canadian, and Sarah J. Archibald,
an English-Canadian. Educated at Pictou Academy, Dalhousie College,
University of New York, Degree B.A., 1886, M.D., 1892. Married, October
18, 1892, to Dora Helma, daughter of William T. Kelley, of Shelburne,
N.S.; has two children, Evelyn Jean and Dorothy. On graduation as a
Medical Doctor, he settled in Bridgewater, in 1892, where he has since
had a large practice, was elected member of the Bridgewater Town Council
in 1901, and was mayor for four successive terms, 1907-1910, was a
member of the Board of Trade and elected President in 1910, which office
he held for several terms. In 1911, Doctor Stewart was selected as the
Conservative Candidate for the County of Lunenburg, N.S., in the House
of Commons, and was returned. In his college days, the doctor was
prominent in athletics. He is identified with several fraternal
organizations and societies and is at present Grand Master I.O.O.F. for
the Maritime Provinces. A Presbyterian in religion, and a member of St.
John’s Church, Bridgewater.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Demers, Joseph=, born November 11, 1861, at St. Julie, County of
Megantic, Province of Quebec. Son of Edouard Demers, carriage maker, and
Olympe Demers, both French-Canadians. Educated at St. Julie. The subject
of this sketch is emphatically a self-made man and has been the
architect of his own fortune. He started clerking in 1877 with Georges
Turcotte, of St. Julie, and remained with him until 1883, when he
decided to locate at Thetford Mines, which was then only a small village
with a few houses and which has since grown into a thriving centre. In
this place Mr. Demers started a general store and has been very
successful. He was Councillor from 1890 till 1893, Mayor from 1893 to
1895, and Alderman from 1903 to 1905. First elected to the Quebec
Legislature as a Liberal representative for the County of Megantic at
the general elections on May 15, 1912, when he defeated B. H.
Pennington, the former member, by a majority of 401 votes, and continued
to represent the county until 1916. He is a director and promoter of the
Compagnie Hydraulique of St. François. Married September 30, 1885, to
Mary, daughter of Louis Roberge, merchant, of St. Julie, and is the
father of the following children: Leonard, Honore, Jean, Marie Ann,
Antoinette and Gabrielle. Is a member of the Canadian Club and the City
Club, and also of the Knights of Columbus. In religion is a Roman
Catholic.




[Illustration: SIR LOMER GOUIN
Quebec]




=McLean, The Hon. Daniel, M.L.A.=, of Orangedale, Inverness County, Nova
Scotia, is a Presbyterian, a Liberal and a Mason. Born at Whycocomah,
March 22, 1864, he received a good education in the public schools of
his district. He is a son of Donald and Sarah McLean, and a nephew of
the late Hon. James Macdonald, M.P.P. Donald McLean was a farmer and the
Hon. Daniel is a general merchant. From 1894 to 1897 he was a member of
the municipal council. On October 4, 1894, the Hon. Mr. McLean married
Ella C. McPhie, daughter of Angus McPhie, a farmer and blacksmith, of
West Bay, Inverness. They have four daughters, Maud, Ella, Margaret, and
Irma.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Vance, His Honor George Montgomery=, Senior Judge of the County of
Simcoe, is a son of William and Elizabeth Vance, of Millbrook, Ont., and
was born in the township of Cavan, County of Durham, on October 4, 1866.
Educated at the Millbrook High School and Osgoode Hall. Studied law in
the office of W. L. Walsh, K.C., Orangeville, now Honorable Justice
Walsh of the Province of Alberta. Called to the Bar in the fall of 1893,
and immediately commenced the practice of law in the Village of
Shelburne, in the County of Dufferin, which he continued with marked
success until 1913, when he was appointed Senior County Judge and Judge
of the Surrogate Court of the County of Simcoe. Before his elevation to
the Bench His Honor took a large interest in the affairs of the Village
of Shelburne and the County of Dufferin both municipally and
politically. He was Reeve and Chairman of the School Board, and took a
large interest in its social and political life. When at the Bar Judge
Vance enjoyed a large practice and was solicitor for several
corporations and townships, and also the village of Shelburne, and has
always taken a prominent part in advocating all educational and
patriotic movements and those calculated to stimulate a strong national
sentiment. A man of large practical experience and a sound lawyer, His
Honor is a fluent and convincing speaker, and his judgments have been
characterized by sound reason and a large vein of common sense. He is an
ardent motorist and has owned and driven a car for several years. He was
married July 2, 1894, to Mary S., daughter of Peter Johnston, and is the
father of two daughters, Lois and Ruth. He is a member of the Anglican
Church. Residence, Barrie, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Power, William=, son of William Power and B. Fitzgerald, his wife, both
Irish, was born in the parish of Sillery, Quebec, February 21, 1849,
educated at the Parochial schools of his native parish. Mr. Power
married July 4, 1881, Susan Winnifred, daughter of James Rockett, Que.,
and has five sons and two daughters. He is a member of the Roman
Catholic Church, and belongs to the Knights of Columbus and the Garrison
Club, and the Fish, Game and Yacht Club of Quebec. He is ex-President of
the Board of Trade of the City of Quebec, President of the La Fontaine
Lumber Company, and Vice-President of the River Ouelle Pulp and Lumber
Company and a member of the firm of W. & J. Sharplen. First elected for
the Constituency of Quebec West in the House of Commons, January 15,
1902, to replace Hon. Mr. Dobell, who died in England. Re-elected at the
general elections of 1904. Defeated in 1908 and again elected at the
general elections in 1911.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Proulx, Edmond, M.P.= for Prescott, son of the late Isidore Proulx, who
was M.P. for Prescott County from 1891 till his death, July 28, 1904,
and Philomene Lalande, his wife, both French-Canadians. Born at St.
Hermas, in the County of Two Mountains, Que., on the 21st of May, 1875.
Educated at Bourget College, Rigaud, Que., St. Michael’s College,
Toronto, Ottawa University, and the Law School, Osgoode Hall, Toronto.
Was married January 2, 1907, to Madame Elliott Fraser (_née_ Renee
Audette), daughter of Randolph Audette, of the City of Quebec, wholesale
merchant, and President of La Banque Nationale, and is the father of two
sons, Henri and Marcel, and two daughters, Therese and Cecile. Is a
Public School Trustee of the town of L’Orignal, a member of the
C.M.B.A., Artisans and C.F., and Union St. Joseph of Canada. Has been
Reeve of the town of L’Orignal, and Vice-President of The Ontario
General Reform Association; first elected to the House of Commons as
member for the County of Prescott at the general elections 1904, and
subsequently at the general elections of 1908, 1911 and 1917. Is a
Liberal in politics. In religion Mr. Proulx is a Roman Catholic. He is
very popular among all classes of the community and has a splendid
command of both the English and French languages.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Donogh, John Ormsby=, Lumber merchant, Toronto. Was born at Toronto on
the 25th of March, 1854, son of William Donogh and Elizabeth Hayward,
his wife; was educated at the public schools in the Township of Mono and
afterwards in the City of Toronto. Mr. Donogh has been long recognized
as one of the pioneer lumber merchants of the City of Toronto, and for
many years carried on business with Joseph Oliver, formerly Mayor of the
City of Toronto, the firm name being “Donogh & Oliver.” He was
instrumental in organizing and promoting of the Methodist Union of
Toronto and was President for four years. The Union takes charge of all
missionary and church extension work in the provincial capital. For many
years Mr. Donogh has been prominent in the I.O.O.F. and has been past
Grand Master for many years, and at present is Grand Treasurer of the
Order. He was married on Sept. 21, 1874, to Miss Wordley; and is a
member of the National Club of Toronto, a Mason, and an Oddfellow. He is
a man with a large viewpoint and of sterling integrity, and has in the
past supported the Liberal Party. His recreation is golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jones, James William= (Kelowna, B.C.), is the son of James and Tryphena
Searles, both Canadians. Was born at Utica, Ont., on September 21, 1869,
educated at the High Schools of Uxbridge and Port Perry, and was a
general merchant in Grenfell, 1894 to 1906. Moved to Kelowna, B.C.,
1907, where he took an active interest in developing a large tract of
irrigated lands in the Okanagan Valley, at Kelowna. Is
Secretary-Treasurer of Central Okanagan Land & Orchard Company of
Kelowna, he is also prominent in mercantile life, being President of
Lawson’s Limited, dry goods and furnishings, also President of McKenzie
Trading Company of Kelowna. Was Mayor of Kelowna for five years,
1912-1917, inclusive, and was elected at the last election as
Conservative member in the British Columbia Legislature for South
Okanagan. Mr. Jones married in 1893, Adam M., daughter of M. T. Bird, of
Grenfell, Sask., and is the father of four children: Ethelwyn, Clarence,
Vivian and Nellie. He is a member of the Masonic Order and also of the
Independent Order of Foresters. In religion he is a Methodist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Watson, Sir David, K.C.B. and Brigadier-General= (Quebec City),
promoted to take command of the 4th Canadian Division of the forces at
the front in April, 1916, is a native of the city of Quebec, having been
born in that city on February 7, 1869. He is the only son of Mr. William
Watson, his mother’s maiden name having been Miss Jean Grant, daughter
of one of Quebec’s well-known merchants of Lower Town. From school and
after some preliminary training in municipal work, he passed into the
“Chronicle” office, when Mr. John J. Foote was manager and proprietor of
the paper, and there worked his way up through the various departments
of journalism, until he finally became the managing director of the
establishment. He has held the office of President of the Quebec Press
Association, and visited London for a first time as a delegate to the
Imperial Press Congress, held in that city in 1908, and a third time as
commander of the 8th Royal Rifles during the royal celebration of 1901.
In the military life of Quebec he has been interested for over twenty
years, and during that time was given promotion step by step until he
was in command of his battalion as its Colonel, a position which he had
held for two or three years before the European War broke out. Having
been selected to take charge of the 2nd Battalion in the 1st Brigade of
the 1st Canadian Division, in August, 1914, he proceeded from the
Valcartier Camp with troops in charge, for their further training at
Salisbury Plains; and, after spending the early winter months there, he
proceeded to the front in January, 1915. He was by this time a Colonel
in full rank. At the seat of war he was continuously engaged as a
commanding officer all during the campaigning up to the summer of 1917,
having taken part with his Division in the operations of Neuve Chapelle,
in March, 1915, as well as in the second battle of Ypres in April, in
the fight at Festubert in May, and that of Givenchy in June. In
recognition of his skill and prudence in these engagements he was
promoted to command the 5th Brigade of the 2nd Canadian Division in the
month of August following, and forthwith as a Brigadier-General, he led
his Brigade in the successive engagements of Wytschaete, Kemmel, and St.
Eloi, during the spring of 1916. Subsequently he was placed in charge of
the 4th Canadian Division and made extended raids in the Ypres salient
and at St. Eloi, and thereafter, for forty-nine days without
intermission, he and his Brigade shared in the exciting engagements
along the River Somme. No less than three attacks were made by General
Watson and his Division, one on the 11th of October, another on the 22nd
of that month, and one on the 18th of November, 1916, all of these
accumulating renown by their intrepid approach on the enemy. Nor was the
commander’s bravery overlooked by the War Office, since General Watson
has come in for special mention in the despatches exchanged between the
general Field Staff and the War Department no less than four times. He
was awarded the high honor of Commander of the Bath, and in 1918 was
further honored by a Knighthood in that order. The record of the
General’s active service at the front is a fitting complement to a
career of over twenty years’ experience in military operations, from the
days of his entering the 8th Royal Rifles, made up of his Quebec
fellow-citizens, to the time of his being a General in full command of
the battlefields of Europe. His career savors of romance. A newspaper
employee, a prominent business man in his native city, a volunteer of
the ranks, a captain, a major, a colonel, and at last a general, form
the grades of a ladder overcome step by step which his fellow-Canadians
cannot but contemplate with pride. It was taken for granted that in the
event of Sir Arthur Currie’s transfer to another command Sir David would
succeed him as Commander-in-Chief of the Canadian army in France.
General Watson married Miss Mary Browning, of Quebec, on September 11,
1893, and has a family of three daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Thompson, Alfred= (Dawson City, Yukon Territory), Physician and
Surgeon, son of James A. Thompson and Jane Thompson, both Canadians.
Born June 6, 1869, at Nine-Mile River, Hants County, Nova Scotia.
Educated at Public School by private tutor, and graduated from Dalhousie
University, Halifax, N.S., with degree of M.D.C.M., in 1898. Married
Elsie Miller, daughter of Jacob Miller, of Elmsdale, Nova Scotia, March
7, 1894. Went to Klondyke in 1899 and began practice of his profession;
elected to Yukon Council in 1902. First elected to the House of Commons
at the general elections of 1904, as an Independent. This was the second
election held for the House of Commons in the Yukon, when Dr. Thompson
was opposed by F. T. Congdon, K.C., who resigned the Governorship of the
Territory to contest the seat. Dr. Thompson resigned his seat on the
Yukon Council at the same time. The vote stood: Thompson 2,113, Congdon
1,495, a majority for Dr. Thompson of 618. Nomination was held on
November 18, election on December 16, and the return was received at
Ottawa on March 13, 1915. Retired at end of Parliamentary term and
resumed practice; again elected to House of Commons in 1911 at the
general elections, over his former opponent, F. T. Congdon, K.C., by a
majority of over 450, and again returned at the last general elections
held in the Yukon Territory, which were deferred until December 31,
1917. Dr. Thompson’s election was due to the vote of the soldiers
overseas which he received as the Unionist Candidate. Is a member of the
Masonic Order and of the Zero Club, Dawson, Yukon Territory, and is a
Presbyterian. Father of two children, Alfreda, born December 30, 1904,
and Norman, born August 5, 1909. Dr. Thompson is a supporter of the
Unionist Government and a dominant force in the Yukon Territory, where
he has resided for upwards of eighteen years, and has done much to
promote the growing importance of the district.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Struthers, James Douglas, M.D.= (Tiverton, Ont.), first became a member
of his father’s family on April 7, 1886, in the County of Bruce, near
the village of Underwood. His parents are Mr. and Mrs. James Struthers,
of Port Elgin, who for many years were residents of Bruce Township, and
whose farm was one of the best, the owner having brought his splendid
Scotch knowledge into one of the finest settlements in the Dominion,
where success and shrewd business ability crowned his labors. This son
of worthy parents had a longing for knowledge and professional life, and
as a youth was studious in S.S. No. 8, Bruce, having his thirst for
knowledge awakened and developed along proper lines. His next step was
to the High School in Port Elgin, from which he successfully
matriculated. He then went to business college for half a year, which
was followed by duties in railroad office work. While thus employed he
decided that his life work would be that of a doctor. He attended
Toronto University and was awarded the degree of Bachelor of Medicine in
1911. Of a likeable and charming disposition he was ever a favorite at
college, and was honored by his fellow students in the University by
being made Treasurer of the “At Home” Committee of the year ’11. His
Scotch ancestry and faithful application to his profession have made him
friends, and few young men have reached the splendid position he now
occupies. He came back home and settled in the village of Tiverton,
where his practice is large and continually growing. Success has crowned
his ambition, which was to be able to relieve the sufferings of
humanity, and his splendid abilities are often called for in
consultation with his surrounding fellow practitioners, all of whom
esteem him most highly. Determination and decision are two faculties he
possesses. Added to these are a bright and sunny disposition, with a
broad and charitable outlook on life which make for him friends of a
lasting character. He is a member of Tiverton Masonic Lodge, No. 341,
A.F. & A.M., the I.O.O.F., and the C.O.F. In religion he is a
Presbyterian and in politics a Liberal. His friends truly say of him:
“You were aye leal and true, Jamie.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kastner, Gideon=, of Wiarton, Ontario, son of John Kastner and Margaret
Litt, of Alsace-Lorraine, was born July 8, 1865, in Perth County, Ont.
He received his education in the public and high schools of that county.
At twenty years of age he went to Wiarton, where he engaged in the
lumbering business, which was a thriving industry at that time. He also
followed contracting, building piers and public wharves. In business he
has been exceptionally successful. He had a liking for municipal
politics, and first served in the town council in 1895. He was elected
Reeve of Wiarton in 1910-11, and again in 1915-16-17-18. At the January
meeting of the County Council of Bruce in 1918 he was elected to the
honorable position of warden. His popularity is not solely due to his
genial good nature, but to the fact that he is a keen business man and
takes a deep interest in every enterprise he is connected with. He
served as President of the Wiarton Board of Trade for many years. He has
been Chairman of the Board of Managers of St. Paul’s Presbyterian Church
for a number of years. When the recruiting campaign for the 160th Bruce
Battalion was in full swing Gideon Kastner was one of its whirlwind
supporters. He probably got his enthusiastic military ardour from his
grandfather who served with Napoleon through many campaigns. He is a
loyal supporter of all patriotic movements, lending his energy to every
cause that tends to win the war. His great pastime is bowling. In
politics he is a Liberal. He married Annie Symon, of Wiarton. They have
one son and four daughters, and their home in Wiarton is one of the most
hospitable in the county.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sayles, Edwin Roy=, Editor and proprietor of “The Port Elgin Times,” is
one of the leading men to-day publishing a country newspaper. He was
born in Norfolk County on April 21, 1875. His education was secured in
the public and advanced schools of Courtland and the City of Brantford.
In the latter place he resided for many years. Choosing newspaper work
as his career, he joined the staff of the “Brantford Expositor,” on
which paper he remained for many years. Later he became business manager
of the “Brantford Courier,” and at the time he purchased the “Port Elgin
Times” held this position. On taking possession of the “Times” he at
once put his splendid business ability into the enterprise and
established it upon sound business principles. Under him the “Times” has
become one of the brightest country weeklies in Ontario. He has ideas
which he is not afraid to put forward, and his paper is ever for the
uplift and moral reform of the community which he so ably serves. He is
a splendid platform man, speaking with ease and fluency. He has given
much of his time to the Canadian Press Association, and for three years,
1914-15-16, was chairman of the weekly section of that body. He has also
been on the executive Board of that body for a number of years. He is
Past President of the Bruce County Press Association, and has done much
to improve the standing of the country publisher and place his business
upon the high plane it to-day occupies. He is a member of Port Elgin
Lodge, No. 429, A.F. & A.M., the C.O.F., and the A.O.F. In religion he
is a Baptist, taking a deep interest in the work of that body. In
politics he is a Liberal, with a slight tendency toward radicalism.
Though of many activities he finds time for public service, as has been
evidenced by his arduous work in recruiting and patriotic efforts, which
has claimed so much of the time of busy men. He takes an interest in the
boy scout movement. His pastimes are bowling, shooting, and motoring. He
married Miss M. Galbraith, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Galbraith, of
Middlesex County. They have one daughter, Eleanor Jean.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Honeywell, Major Frederick Henry, B.A.=, is a prominent Ottawa
barrister and military man who, during the late war, distinguished
himself by serving his country at the front. He was born in Carleton
County, Ont., on Dec. 12, 1877, son of Elkanah and Marie (Baldwin)
Honeywell, and received his education at the public schools of
Westboro’, Carleton County, at Ottawa Collegiate Institute and at
Toronto University. He qualified for the law and after being called to
the Bar established himself in practice at Ottawa, where he is head of
the firm of Honeywell, Caldwell & Wilson, Barristers and Solicitors,
Central Chambers. The firm has a large connection in the adjacent
county, where Major Honeywell still maintains his residence. He has
served as Reeve of Nepean township and as Warden of the County of
Carleton. He has always taken a keen interest in military affairs, and
at the time the war broke out held the commission of Major in the 5th
Princess Louise Dragoon Guards, Ottawa. Offering himself for service
overseas he was appointed Major of the 8th Canadian Mounted Rifles in
the Canadian Expeditionary Force, in which capacity he went to the
front. He was later attached to the 26th Battalion of the British
Expeditionary Force in France, on active service, and participated in
several noted engagements. He is essentially an outdoor man and his
recreations include curling, skating, ski-ing, golf, motoring and motor
boating. He is a Liberal in politics, a Protestant in religion and a
member of the A.F. & A.M. and I.O.F. His residence is at Woodruff,
Carleton County, Ont.




[Illustration: D. M. FINNIE
Ottawa]




=Wainwright, Arnold, K.C., B.C.L.=, one of the leading barristers and
publicists of Montreal was born in that city on June 13, 1879, the son
of William and Mary Emily (Arnold) Wainwright. His education was
unusually complete. After a course at Montreal Collegiate Institute he
entered McGill University, from which he graduated in 1890 with the
degree of B.A. and honors and medal in mental and moral philosophy. This
was supplemented by a course in law and in 1902 he obtained the degree
of B.C.L. with a medal. Subsequently he took a post-graduate course at
the University of Montpelier, France. He was called to the bar in 1902
and is now a member of the firm of Davidson, Wainwright, Alexander &
Elder, Advocates, Transportation Building, Montreal. In 1912 he was
created King’s Counsel on attaining the requisite ten years’ service at
the bar. He was elected President of the Junior Bar Association of
Montreal in 1910 and a member of the Council of the Montreal Bar for
1911-12. In addition to being recognized as a brilliant speaker both in
the forensic and political arenas, Mr. Wainwright is a recognized
authority on the academic side of his profession and is Lecturer on the
Laws of Evidence and the Laws of Persons in the legal faculty of McGill
University. In politics he is a Liberal and was a member of the Council
of the Montreal Reform Club, 1910-11. He is an Anglican in religion and
a member of the following clubs: St. James’, University, Beaconsfield
Golf, Country, Canada, and Reform. In 1913 he married Norah, daughter of
William Prentice, Montreal, and resides at 4 Seaforth Ave. in that city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bates, Joseph Lever=, an Ottawa business man of widely extended
interests, was born at Easton’s Corners, Ont., in 1850, the son of
Nathaniel Bates. He was educated in the public schools of his district
and afterward engaged in the granite business. In 1907 he founded the
International Land and Lumber Company, 283-285 Bank Street, Ottawa, of
which he is President. His other interests include the Presidency of the
British Canadian Industrial Co., Ltd., which maintains offices in
London, England, as well as in this country. He is a member of the
Canadian Club, Ottawa, and of the Masonic Order. In politics he is a
Liberal and in religion a Methodist. On December 21, 1875, he married
Juliet, daughter of Mr. C. J. Lighthall of Montana, and has three sons.
His residence is at 50 McLaren Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McConnell, Richard George=, Deputy Minister of Mines, and Director of
the Geographical Survey for Canada, was born at Chatham, Quebec, March
26, 1857, the son of Andrew and Martha (Bradford) McConnell. He was
educated at the Caribou Academy and at McGill University, from which he
graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1879, taking first class honors in
Natural Science. On graduation he immediately went to the Canadian West
as assistant to the famous Canadian geologist, Dr. G. N. Dawson, whose
name is immortalized in Dawson City, the capital of the Yukon Territory.
Upon his return to the East in 1881 Mr. McConnell entered the service of
the Canadian Geological Survey and made many explorations in behalf of
the government which resulted in valuable discoveries in Western Canada,
British Columbia and the Yukon. In 1887 and 1888 he headed one of the
most extensive exploratory expeditions on record, traversing almost the
whole country drained by the Stikine, Liard, Mackenzie, Porcupine, Yukon
and Lewis Rivers. The results of his investigations are to be found in
many reports and articles on the Geological and Mineral Resources of
Western Canada. On this subject he is recognized in professional circles
throughout the world as the chief living authority. In fact it is
doubtful whether any man, past or present has acquired such an intimate
first-hand knowledge of the great Sub-Arctic areas of Western Canada. As
a geologist his fame is international, and he is a prominent member of
the Geological Society of America as well as of the Royal Society of
Canada. His recreations are curling and golf and he is a member of the
Ottawa Golf Club. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and was married in
November, 1898, to Jeannie, daughter of E. H. Botterell, Montreal. His
family consists of one son and one daughter, and his home is at
“Edgehill,” Rockliffe, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Currie, General Sir Arthur William, C.B., G.C.M.G.=, Commander-in-chief
of the Canadian Army on the Western front during the latter stages of
the great war, was born at the village of Napperton, Middlesex County,
Ontario, December 5, 1875, the son of William Garner and Jane Currie. He
was educated at the public school of his district and later at Strathroy
Collegiate Institute. Going to British Columbia in 1893 when but
eighteen years of age he first engaged in school teaching at Sidney,
B.C. Later he located in Victoria, B.C., and entered on a business
career. At the time the war broke out he was the head of the firm of
Currie & Power, one of the leading real estate concerns of Vancouver
Island. Nearest to his heart, however, were military pursuits, and he
early identified himself with the 5th Canadian Garrison Artillery, in
which he served fourteen years, rising ultimately to the rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel. With him, however, military activity was not merely
a case of dress parades, but a real pursuit. He devoted himself
seriously to the study of modern tactics, not only in connection with
his own arm of the service but infantry as well. He used his influence
to encourage rifle shooting, and from 1907 onward was President of the
British Columbia Rifle Association. On the outbreak of the war followed
by the decision of the Canadian Government to send an Expeditionary
Force to the front, Col. Currie was recognized as one of the most
efficient volunteer officers in this country, and when Sir Sam Hughes
telegraphed him asking him to accept a command he did not hesitate to
offer his services. He was assigned to the command of the Vancouver
Highland Battalion, which trained at Valcartier Camp, and went overseas
in the late autumn of 1914 to complete its training on Salisbury Plain.
The regiment was one of the first Canadian units sent to France, and in
the terrible fighting at St. Julien and Langemarck in connection with
the second battle of Ypres, April, 1915, had its baptism of blood. This
was the engagement of which Viscount French reported to the War Office
“The Canadians saved the day.” In this severe test Colonel Currie won a
reputation for leadership and courage of the highest order which has
distinguished him ever since. He received enthusiastic praise from
General Alderson, the Imperial officer then in command of the Canadian
division, and on the latter’s recommendation was accorded the coveted
D.S.O. and given command of a brigade. His service as brigade commander
proved so completely successful that his work won the attention of the
British Headquarters Staff, and when a reorganization of commands ensued
as a result of the arrival of two new Canadian divisions in the field,
he was elevated to the rank of Major-General and placed in charge of the
First Division of the Canadian Army. In this post he commanded his
division at the Battle of Hooge, when it resisted the full force of the
German assault in what was described as “this particular hell of Hooge.”
His cool and brilliant handling of what was admittedly a critical
situation for all forces on the bloody Ypres salient won him the
unstinted praise of his immediate chief-in-command, General Sir Julian
Byng, and all the other British military experts. The correspondent of
the London “Times” reported that nothing finer was ever seen in warfare
than the manner in which the lines over Maple Cape, Observatory Ridge
and Armagh Wood were held by the troops under General Currie’s command.
Sir Julian Byng in his report said “I am proud of the Canadian troops
under my command. Their behaviour has been magnificent. I have never
known fiercer or more deadly barrage, nor have I seen any troops fight
with more earnestness, courage and cheerfulness.” He especially praised
General Currie’s counter attack with the Canadian division at 1.30 on
the morning of June 13, 1916, on a front of 500 yards extending from
Sanctuary Wood to Hill 60, when heavy losses were inflicted on the
Germans and prisoners taken. The spring of 1917 was marked by glorious
achievement on the part of the Canadian troops, including the captures
of Messines Ridge and Vimy Ridge, and finally attaining the investment
of Lens. In the midst of the spring campaign Sir Julian Byng was shifted
to the command of a British Army. General Currie was at once recognized
as his logical successor and became the Chief-in-Command of the Canadian
Army in the field with four divisions under him. The victory of Vimy
which was heralded throughout the world as a great military achievement,
was generally credited to General Currie’s masterly powers of
preparation and organization. It was in recognition of these services
that His Majesty King George knighted him on the field of Vimy as a
member of the Order of St. Michael and St. George. Earlier still he had
been made a Companion of the Bath. It was on June 19, 1917, that he
assumed the chief command, and one of his first achievements was the
capture of Hill 70 on his own initiative, rendering the important mining
city of Lens, which had been in German occupation for nearly three
years, untenable for military uses by the enemy. General Currie could
have occupied Lens any time during the summer of 1917 that it was deemed
desirable, but owing to the belief of the French Government that its
capture would only result in further destruction, without military
advantage, the word to advance was withheld. Instead, during the autumn
of 1917 General Currie and his army were assigned by Sir Douglas Haig to
one of the most terrible tasks that was ever allotted to a military
force. It was that of taking Passchendaele Ridge in Flanders with a view
to getting to Roulers and cutting off the U-Boat bases of Zeebrugge and
Ostend. Sir Douglas Haig assigned the task to the Canadians because he
believed that under the command of General Currie they had developed
into the best “shock” troops in the world. The Germans on the other hand
believed that Passchendaele Ridge was impregnable, and many military
experts agreed with them; but the U-Boat menace was such that the
attempt was deemed to be justified by necessity. Before the attack
General Currie personally addressed his men, and did not disguise what
they had to face, but so fired them with the spirit of victory that
despite terrible losses they carried the Ridge. It was one of the
tragedies of the war that the Flanders winter closed down so suddenly
that it was impossible to reap the full fruits of victory by advancing
to Roulers. By spring the situation had been absolutely changed by the
great German offensive of March, 1918, and Passchendaele was temporarily
abandoned. This circumstance did not alter the greatness of the original
achievement, attained in obedience to the orders of the Headquarters
command. In the final stages of the war which gave the Allies victory
the Canadian army under General Currie played a role of immortal lustre.
They entered in the fighting in full force on August 8, 1918, and from
thence onward until the signing of the armistice on November 11 victory
after victory crowned their banners. The greatest of their achievements
was perhaps the breaking of the Drocourt-Queant Switch Line, a part of
the great “Hindenburg” defence system, which the Germans had also
boasted was impregnable. When General Currie achieved this victory and
opened the road to Cambrai it was at once recognized by war experts, and
even by German critics, that Marshal Foch’s strategy could succeed in a
much shorter period than had been anticipated if such efforts could be
repeated on other parts of the Allied front. As everyone knows this
prognostication was not falsified. Before the war was over General
Currie and his army had to their credit the capture of Cambrai and of
Valenciennes, two of the most vital points in the German resistance. Two
hours before the armistice was signed General Currie rode as a conqueror
into Mons, the point where the old “contemptibles” of the original
British Army had first shown their prowess against the Germans in 1914.
During the cleaning-up operations following the war, his administrative
abilities have proven most valuable. On New Year’s Day, 1919, his
services were further recognized by bestowing on him the honor of Grand
Cross of St. Michael and St. George, an order in which he was already a
Knight. It must not be forgotten also that in the critical period when
Canada’s maintenance of her forces in France was in doubt, General
Currie’s voice had great weight in determining the action of the people
of this country. He strongly urged on Sir Robert Borden and other
ministers that this country should do everything in its power to help
win the war and meet the condition caused by the falling off of
enlistments, a condition which was threatening the dissolution of his
ever-victorious army. The result was the decision of the Canadian
Government to adopt the policy of conscription. During the election
campaign that ensued he sent the following message to the Canadian
people on behalf of himself and his staff: “We sincerely sympathize with
endeavors to arouse our countrymen to the necessity of remaining united
and firm in their determination to furnish troops in the field all
necessary support. We deeply deplore the fact that the wisdom of doing
so has become a subject for debate and controversy by those at home. If
support is now withheld or even delayed it means that additional burdens
will have to be borne by men already doing the seemingly impossible.”
This message coming from the most eminent of Canadian soldiers and one
who in private life had been a political opponent of the Borden
administration, could not fail to bring thousands of electors to a sense
of their duty to the soldier in the field. There have been rumors that
an effort would be made to induce General Currie to enter Canadian
politics as a Liberal leader on his return from the front, but so far he
has refused to assent to any such proposals. He is an Anglican in
religion and was married in 1901 to Miss L. S. Chaworth-Masters of
Victoria, B.C., by whom he has one daughter. A quiet man of iron
determination and marvellous powers of organization, he is, however,
certain to play a prominent role in the life of Canada in future,
whatever path he may elect to follow.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Girard, A. D.=, one of the leading advocates of St. John’s, Quebec, was
born at Ste. Hyacinthe in that province on May 10, 1841, the son of
Michel and Sophie (Cheicoine) Girard. He was educated at Ste. Hyacinthe
College and at St. Mary’s College, Montreal. He qualified for the law
and was called to the Quebec bar (of which he is now one of the honored
veterans) on April 4, 1864. From that year until 1879 he practised alone
at Waterloo, Quebec, and in the latter year removed to St. John’s where
he has ever since resided. Until 1911 he practised by himself but then
took a partner, and the firm of Girard & Demers, which has offices on
St. John’s Street in above named city, is well known throughout the
district. Until his retirement from public life a few years ago Mr.
Girard was a prominent figure in Quebec politics and a supporter of the
Conservative party. He was the candidate of that party for the
Legislature as early as 1875, in the riding of Sheppard. In the
elections of both 1900 and 1904 he contested St. John’s in the same
interest. His counsel has been much sought by the younger politicians of
the day. In religion he is a Roman Catholic and was married on February
13, 1877, to Cordelli, daughter of F. X. Bousquet of Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wilson, Peter Edward, B.A., LL.B.=, Barrister-at-law, Prince George,
B.C., was born at Bond Head, Ont., August 28, 1871, the son of Charles
Wilson, farmer, and Rachel, his wife. He was educated at Brampton High
School, Toronto University and Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and after being
called to the bar, went to British Columbia in 1896, first practising at
Nelson. In 1905 he was appointed judge of the County Court of East
Kootenay, a post which he held with honor to himself and to his office
until 1912, when he resigned to resume practice at Fort George, B.C.,
where he has ever since resided. He is City Solicitor of that place and
has also filled the offices of President of the Board of Trade and
Chairman of the School Board. During 1917-8 he was a member of the
Exemption Tribunal under the Military Service Act, for the district of
Fort George. He is an Anglican in religion and Independent in politics.
His recreations are gardening and curling. On Dec. 10, 1896, he married
Christine, daughter of George Brown, a gentleman of Maidenhead, Eng., by
whom he has seven children.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mann, Alexander Robert=, 3690 Selkirk Ave., Shaughnessy Heights,
Vancouver, B.C., one of the most prominent business men of the Pacific
Coast and a brother of the famous Canadian railroad magnate, Sir Donald
Mann, is a native of Halton County, Ontario. He was born in the Village
of Acton on July 29, 1861, the son of Hugh and Helen (Macdonell) Mann,
his father being a farmer. He was educated in the public and high
schools of his native place, and had practical experience on the farm
before going to Winnipeg in 1879, where he took up railroading.
Subsequently he engaged in the lumber business at Fort Frances, Ont.,
and in 1890 graduated into railroad construction. Among the various
western lines which he took part in building were the Long Lake branch,
C.P.R. (1890); Calgary and Edmonton Railway (1892-3); Soo Line,
Saskatchewan (1892-3); Cusp and Slocan Railway, B.C. (1893-4); Columbia
& Western Railway (1898); Rainy River Branch, C.N.R. (1899-1901);
Neepawa to McCreary section, C.N.R. (1903-4); Greenway Branch, C.N.R.
(1903-4); James Bay road, Toronto to Sudbury (1904-6); Goose Lake line
C.N.R. (1906-7). From 1895 to 1897 he also handled ore in the Slocan
silver region. From 1898 to 1904 he operated under his own name as a
railway contractor and in the latter year formed the Northern
Construction Company of Vancouver, of which he is still President. He is
also President of the Dominion Products, Ltd., and the Canadian Kelp
Company, Ltd., of Vancouver and a Director of the Winnipeg Aqueduct Co.
He is recognized throughout Canada as a type of the sound, constructive
business man, to which this country owes its rapid development during
the past quarter of a century. He is a member of the Vancouver Club, the
Albany Club (Toronto), and the Carleton Club (Winnipeg), and his chief
recreation is golf. He is a Presbyterian in religion and on June 19,
1908, married Jennie, the daughter of Robert Malton, Owen Sound, Ont.,
by whom he has two daughters.




[Illustration: W. J. BASKERVILLE
Ottawa]




=Cartwright, Lt.-Col. Robert, C.M.G.=, one of the most prominent
officers in the Canadian permanent forces, and who, at the time of
writing, is stationed at Military Headquarters, Belmont House, Victoria,
B.C., is a son of the eminent Canadian statesman, the late Sir Richard
Cartwright, K.C.M.G., and was born at Kingston, Ont., Nov. 4, 1860. He
was educated at the Royal Military College, Kingston, in 1881, entered
the service of the Canadian Militia, has been stationed at many of the
military districts throughout Canada, and has steadily risen in rank.
Col. Cartwright is widely known as an efficient, painstaking and
resourceful officer and has seen considerable service. He holds the
North-West Medal, earned in the rising of 1885, and the South African
Medal with four clasps. When the South African war broke out in 1899, he
was Assistant Adjutant-General at Headquarters, Ottawa, and relinquished
his appointment to go as a member of the Canadian contingent. Later he
was given the honor of Companion of St. Michael and St. George. He
established and was commandant of the Canadian School of Musketry, at
Rockliffe, near Ottawa, the value of which has been proven as a training
school for Canadian officers in the present war. Col. Cartwright’s own
duties during the latter years of the war have been those of Musketry
Officer of M.D. No. 11, Victoria, B.C. In addition to his military
activities, he is a successful fruit farmer, and his recreations are
skating, riding, motoring and sailing. He is a Liberal in politics and a
man of advanced opinions, being a member of the Single Tax Association,
the Anti-Poverty League, as well as of the Army and Navy Veterans, and
the Rideau Club, Ottawa. He is an Anglican in religion and was married
on Sept. 20, 1885, to Ivy Marion, daughter of Benjamin Canning Davy,
Kingston, Ont., by whom he has had three children, Marion, Vida Lois and
Francis (deceased in early childhood).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marshall, Lieut.-Colonel Noel G. L.= (Toronto, Ont.), Merchant, is one
of those “British Born” who have carved out for themselves successful
careers in Canada, although, since he was but four years old at the time
of his parents’ removal to this country, his view-point is essentially
Canadian. Born in London, December 30, 1852, the son of Kenric R. and
Charlotte A. Marshall, he was educated in the Public Schools of Toronto
and entered the service of L. Coffee & Company at the age of fifteen.
Subsequently he was employed by George Chaffey Bros., Coal Merchants,
and in 1879 purchased an interest in the C. J. Smith Coal Company. In
1888, Noel Marshall, in company with Sir William Mackenzie, bought out
the entire business and three years later changed the corporate name to
that of The Standard Fuel Company. For the past sixteen years he has
represented the Toronto Board of Trade at the Canadian National
Exhibition, of which he is now Honorary President. Among other business
connections, Mr. Marshall is President of the Faramel Company, Ltd., of
Toronto; and the Dominion Automobile Company, Ltd.; Vice-President of
the Imperial Guarantee and Accident Company; of the Chartered Trust &
Executor Company; Director of the Sterling Bank, Western Canada Flour
Mills Company, Ltd.; Canada Northern Prairie Lands Company, Ltd. Noel
Marshall was a member of the Toronto Board of Education, 1890-91; member
of the Toronto Board of Trade since 1899, and a member of the Council of
that organization for several terms. He was created Knight of Grace of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in 1915, and was gazetted Honorary
Lieut.-Colonel in the same year. He is at present Chairman of the
Central Council and Executive Committee, Canadian Red Cross Society;
President of the Open-Air Horse Parade Association; Vice-President of
the National Chorus and Provincial Council, Canadian Boy Scouts; member
of the Ontario Parole Commission; Treasurer, Laymen’s Missionary
Movement of the Church of England; Governor of the Western Hospital,
Toronto; Vice-President of the Hospital for Incurables; member of the
Board, Children’s Aid Society, Orphan Boys’ Home, Working Boys’ Home,
British Welcome League, Imperial Home Re-union, Imperial Daughters of
the Empire, Women’s Welcome Hostel, Georgina Houses, and Bishop Strachan
School. Colonel Marshall married Harriette Isabel, daughter of John
Hogg, M.P., York Mills, Ont., in 1879, who died on December 4, 1904. He
has two sons. Col. Kenric R., D.S.O., and Noel Clifford. He is a member
of the York, National, Albany, Granite and Royal Canadian Yacht Clubs,
all of Toronto. He is a Conservative in politics and an Anglican in
religion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Turnbull, Walter Renwick= (Brantford, Ont.), President of the Turnbull
Cutcliffe Hardware Company, Ltd., was born in Brantford Township, the
son of William Turnbull, his father being a farmer and for many years
the Secretary-Treasurer of the Brant Mutual Fire Insurance Company. He
has served six years as Alderman of the City of Brantford and is
Chairman of the Brantford Municipal Railway Commission. Mr. Turnbull
married Alice Ada, daughter of Wm. Buck, Stove Manufacturer, Brantford,
on December 3, 1890; he has one son—William Archibald. His recreations
are bowling and motoring, being a member of the Brantford Social and
Bowling Club. He is a member of the A.F. & A.M. and a life member of
Doric and Ozias Masonic Lodges. Mr. Turnbull is a Liberal and a
Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McClennaghan, Stewart.= Who is there in Ottawa that has not heard of,
or does not know, Stewart McClennaghan? Yes! who does not know him? No
one in the city, or for that matter for many miles of country
surrounding the Capital of the Dominion, can be found that does not know
the President and General-Manager of the famous 2 Macs, Limited, dealers
in fine tailoring, hats, furnishings, clothing and boots and shoes, for
men and boys, with entrances on Sparks, Bank and Queen Streets, at the
busy Corner—corner of Sparks and Bank Streets, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Not only is he well known: he is also one of the most popular business
men, social companion, lover of sports, and general good fellow with all
his friends, acquaintances and customers to be found in any community,
and his success in life, and his popularity, are what have sprung from
his open, genial and straightforward conduct towards and with all who
have had the good fortune to come in contact with him ever since he
arrived in Ottawa in 1879 when he became an apprentice in the dry goods
business in which line he served for ten years. Mr. McClennaghan has
held almost every public office in the gift of the citizens of
Ottawa—Public School Trustee, member of the Collegiate Institute Board,
Controller of the City of Ottawa, Chairman of the Carnegie Library
Board, President of the Central Canada Exhibition Association, Justice
of the Peace, Member of the Board of Trade, Chairman of the Boxing
Committee of the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Club, Vice-President of the
Sportsmen’s Patriotic Association, President of the Liberal Conservative
Association, Promoter of the Connaught Park Jockey Club and a member of
the Original Committee who started the Prescott and Ottawa Highway
Scheme which to-day is receiving such prominent attention from all
lovers of good roads and from the Ontario Government—and could have
held them all and been elected to others of equal or even more
importance had he so desired. Whenever he was put forward as a candidate
for any office—public, political, educational, sporting or social, his
election was assured, and when he consented at a most critical time in
the history of Ottawa’s Municipal Administration, to be a candidate for
Controller he polled the largest majority ever secured by any man
running for public office in the city. In addition Mr. McClennaghan is
profoundly patriotic and public spirited and ever since the war started
has been active, energetic and generous in helping forward Canada’s
effort. His son, Lieut. Stewart Lyon McClennaghan served in France with
distinction in the Royal Flying Corps, and his nephew, Lieut. Vivian S.
C. McClennaghan of the Canadian Engineers, son of Mr. James McClennaghan
of the Marine Dept., has been awarded the Military Cross for bravery
while in charge of an important tract which was being heavily shelled
and bombed and completed his task though twice buried by shell fire. In
1889 Mr. Stewart McClennaghan formed a partnership with the late Mr. M.
D. MacKay as merchant tailors under the name of the 2 Macs—McClennaghan
& MacKay. Three years later, in 1892, Mr. McClennaghan bought out Mr.
MacKay and continued in the business until 1904 when he organized a
joint stock company under the name of the 2 Macs, Limited, he becoming
President and Managing-Director. To-day the business is recognized as
one of the largest outfitting establishments in Canada, handling
everything in boys’ and men’s wear, and occupying some 5,000 square feet
of floor space, with a frontage of 100 feet on Bank Street, 66 feet on
Sparks Street, and 33 feet on Queen Street, with the prospects in
evidence that considerably more space will shortly be necessary if the
business continues to expand as it has during the past decade. From 1900
to 1908 Mr. McClennaghan was a member of the Public School Board and was
chairman for two years, and from 1908 to 1911 he was a member of the
Ottawa Collegiate Institute Board from which he resigned to run for
Controller of the City of Ottawa, as above stated. During the existence
of the City’s Publicity Board Mr. McClennaghan was Chairman. Mr.
McClennaghan is Chairman of the Carnegie Library Board and has been a
member of the Board for many years. He is President of the Central
Canada Exhibition Association. His first year of office, 1917,
terminated with the Exhibition showing the largest receipts ever
obtained in the history of the Association. He is a Justice of the Peace
for the City of Ottawa and for the County of Carleton. He is a member of
the Council of the Board of Trade, and has been a member of the Board
for years. In amateur sports Mr. McClennaghan has been prominently
identified for many years. In 1890 he won the gold medal presented by
the Ottawa Amateur Association for the one mile snow shoe championship
of the city. He was President of the Ottawa Bicycle Club and a member of
their racing team. He was Chairman of the Board Committee of the Ottawa
Athletic Club for several years. He is one of the promoters of the
Connaught Park Jockey Club, became Vice-President, and is now Chairman
of the Management Committee. He is Vice-President of the Sportsmen’s
Patriotic Association, and it is he who is responsible for and was one
of the original Committee who started the Prescott and Ottawa Highway
Scheme. From 1916 to 1918 Mr. McClennaghan was President of the Ottawa
Liberal Conservative (now Unionist) Association. Mr. Stewart
McClennaghan is the son of William John (Contractor) and Sarah (Boyd)
McClennaghan and a nephew of Mr. N. K. Boyd, ex.-M.P. for MacDonald,
Manitoba. He was born at Oxford Mills, Ontario, July 14, 1866, and he
was educated at the Ottawa Public Schools. August 19, 1895, he married
Matilda A. Lyon, daughter of the late John G. and Victoria Lyon, of
Ottawa. The union has been blessed with two sons and five
daughters—Lieut. Stewart Lyon, Nora Boyd, Hilda Brook, Ruth Hasley,
Helen Read, Hugh John, Doris Victoria. He is a member of the following
Clubs: Laurentian, Rivermead Golf, Victoria Yacht, Abitibi Fish and
Game, and of the following Societies: Masonic, Oddfellows, Foresters and
Workmen. In religion he is Anglican and in politics Conservative. For
recreation he indulges in golf, hunting and yachting. His military
career was spent in the ranks of the Princess Louise Dragoon Guards. His
place of residence is 330 Cooper Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Buchanan, William A., M.P.= (Lethbridge, Alta.), Publisher, was born in
Fraserville, Peterboro County, Ont., July 2, 1876; the son of Rev. Wm.
Buchanan. His earlier education took place in the Public and High
Schools of Trenton, Brighton and Norwood, Ont. He first became
interested in newspaper work in Peterboro, Ont., and later was News
Editor of the “Evening Telegram,” Toronto, removing from there to accept
the position of managing director of the St. Thomas Journal; remaining
in that position until 1905, when he decided to try his fortune in the
West, locating at Lethbridge, Alberta, where he established and became
publisher of the “Lethbridge Herald,” first as a weekly and, in 1907,
changed it to a daily. For two years he was President of the Alberta and
Eastern British Columbia Press Association, and Director of the Western
Associated Press. He entered politics in 1909, in the Liberal interests,
and was elected as the first member to represent Lethbridge City in the
Alberta Legislature, and became a member of the Rutherford Government in
the fall of the same year. In 1911 he resigned, over a difference of
opinion on a railway bargain, and then contested the Constituency of
Medicine Hat for the House of Commons, defeating the late member, C. A.
McGrath (Conservative) by a majority of 1,500. Mr. Buchanan was a member
of the Special House of Commons Committee on old age pensions and on
redistribution. In the general elections of 1917 he was a candidate as a
Unionist Liberal, and was elected by a majority of several thousand. He
is now Unionist Whip for Alberta. In 1918 he was a member of the party
of Canadian Journalists invited to visit the Western front and Great
Britain. During the war he was actively engaged in patriotic movements,
more especially the Patriotic Fund and Belgian Relief Fund. While living
in Ontario, Mr. Buchanan took a great interest in military affairs and
became Quartermaster of the 25th Regiment, at St. Thomas. He is
interested in all kinds of sports and takes a keen pleasure in golf; was
Secretary and Treasurer of the Ontario Hockey Association during John
Ross Robertson’s Presidency, and was the first Chairman of the Board of
Governors of the Alberta Amateur Athletic Association; is a member of
the Chinook and the Country Clubs of Lethbridge; Ontario Club, Toronto,
and the Laurentian Club, Ottawa. For two years he was President of the
Canadian Club, of Lethbridge. Mr. Buchanan married Alma Maude Freeman,
daughter of Edwin B. Freeman, of Burlington, Ont., and has one son,
Donald W., born April 9, 1908. He is a member of the Methodist Church.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Williams, Herbert Hale=, head of the firm of H. H. Williams & Co.,
Toronto, Ont. The name of H. H. Williams is a familiar one in the
Canadian real estate field. For many years now his firm, that of H. H.
Williams & Co., with headquarters in Toronto, Canada, has occupied a
prominent place among the old-established and conservative real estate
businesses of the Dominion. Mr. Williams himself, who is the active head
of the firm, is a native of Toronto. Born on September 21, 1862, he
received his education in the local public schools and the Toronto
Grammar School. For a short time after matriculating from the latter
institution, he studied law in the office of George Morphy, but
presently relinquished the idea of becoming a lawyer in favor of
following a mercantile career. His first employment was obtained in the
office of Taylor Bros., paper manufacturers, Toronto, where for two
years he filled the position of book-keeper. Then he turned his
attention to the lumber business, in the prosecution of which he met
with much success. He succeeded in developing an extensive connection
with the railroads of the country, furnishing them with the timber and
manufactured lumber needed in construction and also built up a
considerable export trade to the United States in clear lumber. In 1886
Mr. Williams withdrew from the lumber business and entered the real
estate field. He founded the firm of H. H. Williams & Co. and began
those operations which have subsequently established his reputation as a
sane, far-sighted and reliable dealer. To give some idea of the extent
and importance of the undertakings which Mr. Williams has handled during
the past few years in Toronto, mention might be made of the following
large transactions, all of which were carried through in their entirety
by the firm of H. H. Williams & Co.: The purchase for the Canadian
Pacific Railway Company of the right-of-way along the Esplanade; the
purchase, also for the C.P.R., of the old Government House property on
King Street, together with three blocks of land extending from Simcoe
Street to Spadina Avenue, south of King Street, in connection with the
establishment of freight terminals; the purchase of the two blocks
bounded by Yonge, Carlton, Church and Alexander Streets, which with
subsidiary properties involved an investment of over five million
dollars; the purchase, on behalf of the Dominion Government, of
properties required for a new general post office, a new railway postal
station and an enlarged customs house; and the purchase of the two
blocks bounded by Yonge, College, Teraulay and Hayter Streets,
comprising nine acres of land in the very heart of Toronto and forming
one of the most important retail locations in the city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Deroche, William Paschal= (Napanee, Ont.), Local Registrar of the
Supreme Court of Ontario, is the son of Paschal and Elizabeth Jane
Deroche, and married on January 1, 1919, Helen Aylesworth Asselstine,
daughter of the late Benjamin Asselstine, of Kingston, Ont. He was born
at Newburgh, Ont., on August 27, 1854, and educated at Newburgh Academy.
After graduation, Mr. Deroche taught school at Deseronto (then Mill
Point) and other places for five years successfully, and began the study
of law in 1878 with his brother, the late H. M. Deroche, K.C., and Judge
Madden, at Napanee, and also with the well-known firm of Beatty,
Blackstock & Co., at Toronto. He was appointed local Registrar of the
Supreme Court of Ontario, Clerk of the County Court and Registrar of the
Surrogate Court in June, 1887, and has been a member of the Public
Library Board in Napanee for several years. Outside of these offices,
however, Mr. Deroche has sought no public honors, devoting his entire
energies and finding his best reward in discharging them to the
satisfaction of the public and the members of his chosen profession. He
is a member of the Anglican Church and a Liberal in politics. Judge
Deroche, W. D. M. Shorey, Barrister, both of Belleville, Ont.; Col.
Alex. P. Deroche, Director of Works and Buildings at Ottawa; and H. M.
P. Deroche, Barrister, of Melville, Sask., are all nephews of Mr.
Deroche. With the possible exception of Chief Justice Sir Glenholme
Falconbridge, of Toronto, all the Judges of the High Court who were on
the Bench when Mr. Deroche was appointed to his present position, are
dead. His brother, H. M. Deroche, K.C., died March 10, 1916.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Forster, J. W. L.=, Artist (Toronto, Ont.), was born at Norval, Ont.,
and was educated at the Brampton Grammar School. Of him, an eminent
public man gives us the following: “Canada, though in some senses a
young country, has already produced a group of noted artists, whose
depiction of her landscape and life is helping to make the Dominion
known throughout the world. Among the leaders in this group is John
Wycliffe Lowes Forster, than whom none of our artists has done so much
for our national portraiture. Not only has he painted more of our public
men than any of his contemporaries, but he is the only Canadian artist
who has devoted his whole genius to the painting of portraits. If all
Mr. Forster’s portraits of famous Canadians, which hang in public
buildings and noted homes, were gathered together, they would in
themselves constitute a large national portrait gallery, and this
gallery would be quite representative of the great leaders in all walks
of life. Among our statesmen—Sir John A. Macdonald, Sir Wilfrid
Laurier, Alexander Mackenzie, John Sandfield Macdonald, Sir John
Thompson, Robert Baldwin, Wm. Lyon Mackenzie, William S. Fielding, Sir
George Ross and Sir James P. Whitney, constitute a comprehensive group.
In divinity, such noted personalities as Punshon, Cavan, Carman, Primate
Archbishop Machray, Primate Archbishop Sweatman, Bishop O’Connor,
Milligan, Kellog, Maclaren; in the Judiciary—Chancellors Moss, Boyd,
Meredith and Mulock; in University life—Paxton Young, Geikie, Nelles,
Burwash, Rand, Wallace, Loudon and Galbraith; among noted military
men—Wolfe, Brock, Roberts, Denison, Merritt and Otter; in other
walks—Strathcona, Goldwin Smith, General Booth, Egerton Ryerson, Sir
Sandford Fleming, Senator Cox, Senator Jaffray, MacKenzie King, Sir
Gilbert Parker and George Brown are representative of a brilliant galaxy
preserved to posterity by Forster’s indefatigable genius. Added to his
Canadian clientele, Mr. Forster has in recent years painted many
distinguished portrait subjects in the United States. Born in Halton
County in the middle of the Nineteenth century, of cultivated English
stock, he was reared, like other men of genius, amid the simpler
pursuits of country life, and his pictures are therefore remarkable for
subtle insight into character, and have at the same time the refined
atmosphere of old world culture.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Englehart, Joel Lewis= (Toronto, Ont.), Chairman of the Temiskaming and
Northern Ontario Railway (owned by the Province of Ontario), is the son
of Joel and Hannah Englehart, and was born on November 2, 1847, in
Cleveland, Ohio, and received his education there. He arrived in Canada
in January, 1869, and soon afterward engaged in the oil business in
London, Ont., becoming a producer, then a refiner and exporter, with
offices in New York, and in 1881, when only thirty-four years of age,
became Vice-President of the Imperial Oil Co., which position he still
holds. In 1882 he removed to Petrolea, where he became, and still is,
President of the Crown Savings & Loan Company, of Petrolea, and he is
also Vice-President of the London & Western Trusts Co.; Director of the
Bank of Toronto; ex-Governor of Toronto University and President of the
Petrolea Liberal-Conservative Association, in addition to having many
other business interests. In 1891 Mr. Englehart married Charlotte
Eleanor, daughter of the late Thomas Thompson, of Adelaide, Ont., who
died in 1908, and in whose memory he founded the Charlotte Eleanor
Hospital in Petrolea in 1910, which is on the site of his old homestead
and surrounded by thirty-five acres of land. In 1909 he gave an X-Ray
equipment to St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, and in the following year
a chime of eleven bells, one of the finest in the Province, to Christ
Church, Petrolea, and it is safe to assume that his private generosity
has more than kept pace with his public benefactions. In March, 1905,
Mr. Englehart was appointed Chairman of the Temiskaming & Northern
Ontario Railway Commission and his success in developing what he is
pleased to call “Greater Ontario” has amply justified the late Sir James
Whitney’s choice in placing him in this responsible position. He has
been accustomed to business on a large scale, involving powers of
comprehension, quick perception and careful calculation, and on his
appointment, turned his ability and experience to good account in the
service of the Province. He is very much interested in the extension of
the road and the development of the vast farming, timber and mining
country it serves, as may be judged from the fact that only eleven times
during the twelve years he has been Chairman of the Commission has he
missed his monthly trip over the road, and only once has he taken a
month’s holiday. He believes that “Greater Ontario” is the biggest asset
Canada has and is firmly convinced that no spot on the continent affords
such opportunity for success as the territory traversed by the T. & N.O.
Railway System and that to which it has not yet extended. In support of
this claim, Mr. Englehart refers to a series of articles published in
the “Globe” of August, 1916, which has previously been somewhat
critical, written by that paper’s farming editor, and giving statistics
to show that the production both in roots and grain per acre in “Greater
Ontario” was far in excess of the best returns in the older sections of
the Province. Mr. Englehart is both the apostle and the prophet of the
North, enthusiastically proclaiming its unrivalled potential
possibilities, and as he is better informed on the subject than any
other man, his statements may be accepted at face value. Mr. Englehart
is an Episcopalian in religion and a Mason. His clubs are the New York,
Toronto, Albany, Empire, Toronto Hunt and Ontario Jockey, and the
London, of London, Ont. Genial, a versatile and convincing
conversationalist, alert and strong willed, he works actively in the
immense field he supervises and takes keen pleasure in its development.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacKenzie, John Angus=, who was born at Guelph, Ontario, October 20,
1878, was educated at the Public and High Schools, Harriston, and the
Model School, Guelph, Ontario, and taught school at Hanover, Ontario,
from 1897 to 1898. From 1899 to 1901 he was assistant to C. M. Hayes,
General Manager of the Grand Trunk Railway, Montreal. Arriving in Ottawa
in the latter year he started in business for himself, and to-day is
President of MacKenzie Limited, Manufacturers of Railway and Lumbermen’s
Supplies, 132 to 136 Lyon Street, Ottawa, whose trade extends throughout
Canada and to other parts of the world. From 1903 to 1907 Mr. MacKenzie
served as Lieutenant of Company A, Governor-General’s Foot Guards. His
brother, James David MacKenzie was killed on September 28, 1918, while
fighting at the front in the great World War. Twice before he had been
wounded and had just returned to the front in France when he met his
death. Two brothers, W. M. and Thomas, served King and Country, the
former being gassed and wounded, and a sister, Margaret, served as a
nurse at the Orpington Hospital, England. Mr. MacKenzie in 1901 married
Jean Andrew, daughter of Archibald Andrew, one of Ottawa’s most charming
vocalists, as a result of which he has one son and one daughter. Mr.
MacKenzie’s father and mother, Kenneth and Mary MacKenzie, reside on
Melgund Avenue, Ottawa. Mr. MacKenzie is a Liberal in politics, and for
years was Secretary of Ottawa Reform Association. He is a member of the
A.F. & A.M. Society. His recreations are fishing and tennis, and his
place of residence 229 Clemow Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Harkin, James B.=, is one of those successful journalists who have been
selected by the Dominion Government to occupy important positions in the
service of Canada. In appointing Mr. Harkin to the responsible position
of Commissioner of Dominion Parks, the Government of Canada made a happy
selection, and his work in connection with the Government-owned Parks of
Canada—in his descriptive and handsomely printed and illustrated
publications, in his general ability for such work and in his careful
and personal attention to their care and improvement—is well seen in
the vast improvements that have taken place and in the publicity that
they have had. When Hon. Sir Clifford Sifton was Minister of Interior in
1903, he selected Mr. Harkin as his Private Secretary, which office he
held with that distinguished gentleman until the latter resigned his
portfolio in 1905. Hon. Frank Oliver, succeeding Sir Clifford as
Minister of Interior, retained the services of Mr. Harkin until 1911,
when he appointed him to his present position, viz., Commissioner of
Dominion Parks. If anything, Mr. Harkin has proven more competent in his
present position than he was when occupying the position of private
secretary, and that is saying something. Mr. Harkin was born at Vankleek
Hill, Ont., January 30, 1875, and received his education in the Public
School, Vankleek Hill, and at the High School, Marquette, Michigan. He
became connected with the newspaper work in Montreal in 1892 and served
on the staff of the Ottawa “Journal” from 1893 to 1900. Mr. Harkin is
the son of William and Eliza (McDonnell) Harkin, is a member of the
Ottawa Civil Service and the Rivermead Golf Clubs. He is a Roman
Catholic in religion and resides at 138 Lewis Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ewart, David=, Chief Architect of the Department of Public Works,
Ottawa, was born at Penicuik, near Edinburgh, Scotland, on February 18,
1843. He was educated in his native place and at the Edinburgh School of
Art, where he obtained a thorough grounding in architecture. In 1871,
four years after the establishment of Canadian Confederation, he was
appointed Assistant Engineer and Architect of the Department of Public
Works for Canada, and took up his residence in Ottawa. In 1897 he was
promoted to the position of Chief Architect. In the early days of his
service he had charge of the completion of the main tower of the
beautiful Parliament Buildings at Ottawa, which were destroyed by fire
during the great war. He also took charge of the erection of the
Canadian buildings at the Paris Exposition, the Chicago World’s Fair and
at other famous international expositions. He was decorated by the
French Government, and in 1903 was honored by the King with the Imperial
Service Order. He was appointed a Member of the Board of Assessors in
connection with additions to the Parliament Buildings at Ottawa in 1906,
and was elected a Councillor of the Royal Architects Institute of Canada
in 1909. In government circles he is looked on as one of the Nestors of
the civil service. In May, 1877, he married Margaret Segsworth, daughter
of Segsworth Simpson, Barnsley, Yorkshire, England, and resides at 135
Cameron Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Armstrong, Samuel, M.P.P.= (Parry Sound, Ont.), one of the early
pioneers of the District of Muskoka and Parry Sound, having settled in
Muskoka in 1862, and Parry Sound in January, 1867. Many miles of the old
Colonization Roads were made by him for the Government in Parry Sound
District. He was interested in lumbering and saw mills, also railroad
contracting, besides keeping a general store at McKellar, Ont., until
elected M.P.P. for Parry Sound District, December 26, 1886. In May,
1895, he was appointed Sheriff of Parry Sound, which office he still
holds; acted as reeve for McKellar Township for twelve years, and is a
member of the Orange Order and Royal Templars. His parents were Samuel
and Harriett Hughes Armstrong and he was born in Ireland, town of New
Ross, County of Wexford, February 24, 1844, and educated at the Public
Schools of Thorold and Toronto. He was married to Catharine Taylor,
daughter of John and Elizabeth Taylor, Lanark County, Ont., and has five
children—Harriett Elizabeth, John Egbert, Frank, Milton Taylor and Mary
Emma Winnifred. In politics he styles himself an Independent, is a
member of the Methodist Church and a delegate to the Toronto and
Winnipeg Conferences.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McNeil, Most Reverend Neil= (Toronto, Ont.), Archbishop of Toronto
since 1912, when he was transferred from the Archbishopric of Vancouver,
B.C., to which he was appointed in January, 1910, was born at Mabou,
N.S., November 23, 1851, the son of Malcolm McNeil and Ellen Meagher. He
was educated at St. Francis Xavier College, Antigonish, N.S.; in 1873 he
entered the College of the Propaganda in Rome, where he remained for six
and a half years. He was ordained Priest in 1879, in the Basilica of
John Latern by the late Cardinal Patrizzi, and in the same year received
the degrees of Doctor of Philosophy and Doctor of Divinity, afterwards
making a post-graduate course of one year in the University of
Marseilles, France. He joined the staff of St. Francis Xavier College in
1880, and was Rector of the College from 1884 to 1891. He became Bishop
of Nilopolis and Vicar Apostolic of St. George’s, west coast of
Newfoundland, being consecrated at St. Ninan’s Cathedral, Antigonish,
1895. During the war Archbishop McNeil especially endeared himself to
all classes of the community by his active support of all patriotic
enterprises, no matter what their religious complexion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Harris, William Gean= (Toronto), is one of the pioneers and leaders of
the metal industry in Canada. He was born in the Muskoka district of
Ontario on February 17, 1862, the son of William Gean and Mary (Hunter)
Harris. He was educated in the Toronto public schools and at the age of
18 started his present business in a small way. It has now developed
into the Canada Metal Manufacturing Company, Ltd., and is engaged in
smelting ores, making lead pipe, rolling sheet lead, and the manufacture
of brass bullets and shells. Its wares are known throughout the Dominion
of Canada, the result of 30 years of constant expansion and progressive
methods. The Harris organization is now recognized as one of the
indispensable factors in Canadian industry of the most diverse aspects.
In building up this great industry Mr. Harris has for a considerable
number of years been blessed with the active assistance of his son. By
instinct a captain of industry his chief recreation in leisure hours is
the study of the betterment of conditions relating to business in all
its phases. Mr. Harris is a member of the A.F. & A.M., I.O.F., A.O.F.,
S.O.E., a Conservative in politics and a Methodist in religion. In 1887
he married Ada Florence Grove, daughter of George Grove of England, and
has one son and one daughter. Mr. Harris’s business address is Fraser
Ave., Toronto, and his home is at 408 Indian Road in that city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=MacDonald, Donald D.= (Toronto, Ont.), Public School Principal, son of
John F. MacDonald and Jean Smith, was born at Bowmanville, Durham
County, Ont., on July 24, 1874, and received his education at the Clark
Union Public School, the Bowmanville High School, the Toronto Normal
School and the Hamilton Normal College. He subsequently took the
University course in Arts extra-murally and graduated with B.A. degree
in 1915. He married Laura Stewart, daughter of John Stewart, of Toronto,
and to them was born one son, Donald Stewart. Mr. MacDonald was one of a
family of five boys, four of whom entered the teaching profession for a
time, and one of whom, Dr. N. S. MacDonald, B.A., in addition to
himself, is still in the profession as one of the Public School
Inspectors of Toronto. He enjoyed the advantage of being brought up in
the country, the public school which he first attended being two miles
distant from his home. When but a lad he determined to follow the
vocation of teaching and trained himself to this end. He secured his
Primary and Second-Class Teaching Certificates at the Bowmanville High
School, and at once embarked upon his career as a teacher, taking charge
of the public school at Providence, three miles out of Bowmanville, for
three years. He then entered the course at the Toronto Normal School,
achieving high academic progress and graduating with honors in 1897. For
the succeeding three years Mr. MacDonald taught at Audley, near
Pickering, after which, in order to complete his training, he returned
to the Bowmanville High School for two years and secured his Senior
Leaving Certificate. Having subsequently taught in Barrie for four
months, he was appointed vice-Principal of Annette Street School, West
Toronto, and three and one-half years later became its principal. During
the three years he occupied this position, prior to the annexation of
the Town of West Toronto to the city of Toronto, Mr. MacDonald passed
the Normal College examination extra-murally, obtaining a first-class
professional certificate. He was then transferred to the Niagara Street
School, Toronto, of which he was Principal for over two years, when he
was promoted to the Principalship of McMurrich School, in which position
he served for 6½ years. Still carrying on his extensive studies, Mr.
MacDonald graduated extra-murally in Arts from the Western University,
and is now qualifying for the degree of D.Paed. In September, 1918, he
became Principal of the Orde Street Model School, the new practice
school for Normal School students. Apart from his educational
activities, Mr. MacDonald has taken considerable interest in public
affairs. He has been a member of the session of Victoria Presbyterian
Church for some years. He was the Master of Victoria Lodge, in 1917,
A.F. & A.M., No. 474, G.R.C. He is also a member of Shekinah Chapter of
Royal Arch Masons. Mr. MacDonald’s parents were both Scottish. In
politics he is a Conservative. Mr. MacDonald’s life thus far has been
much devoted to study along with his regular educational duties.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pardoe, Avern= (Toronto, Ont.), Librarian of the Ontario Legislature,
spent ten years, after leaving King Edward VI’s Collegiate Grammar
School, Stratford-upon-Avon, where he was educated, in a law office of
that place; afterwards doing a little amateur journalistic work in
England and leaving for Canada in 1872, where he took up land near
Cecebe Lake, in Chapman Township, Parry Sound District. The following
year he engaged in journalism in Chicago, but returned to Canada in
1875, upon invitation to join the staff of the Toronto “Globe,” from
which he resigned on Mr. Gordon Brown’s retirement in 1883. Being
invited back by the new editor, Mr. John Cameron, he acted under him as
Managing Editor until 1889, when he retired from journalism to engage in
real estate. On the collapse of realty values in Toronto in 1894, he
entered the service of the Ontario Government and received his present
appointment four years later. He is a member of the Church of England,
of the A.F. & A.M., Royal Arch and Scottish Rite, 32. Mr. Pardoe was
born at Stratford-upon-Avon, Eng., June 26, 1845, the son of William and
Harriette Pardoe, and married Mary, the daughter of Daniel P. Sprague,
State Senator, Andover, Conn., in 1876, by whom he has four surviving
children—Ellen Edith, Avern, William Sprague and Eunice Scoville
Nicholls.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Davis, Aubrey=, Manufacturer (Newmarket, Ont.), and Captain 220th
Battalion, C.E.F., has been a member of the Committee of One Hundred and
a strong advocate of Local Option for many years. The son of the Hon. E.
J. and Margaret Johnston Davis, he holds office as Vice-President of the
Davis Leather Company, Limited, of which his father is President. Mr.
Davis was born at King, York County, February 2, 1878, and was educated
at Aurora High School and Toronto Business College. September 2, 1902,
he married Etta, daughter of Richard Pettit, of Appin, Ont., by whom he
has one son, Bruce Pettit Davis. He is a member of the National Club, as
also of Rameses Temple, Mystic Shrine. In politics he is a Liberal and
in religion a Methodist.




[Illustration: Col. Wm. Hutchison, Ottawa
Col. A. T. Shillington, Ottawa.]




=Dowling, John S.= (Brantford, Ont.), Manufacturer, was born at Bolton,
Ont., May 16, 1875, the son of Bryan Dowling, a railroader, and Sarah A.
Dowling. His early education began at the Bolton Public School and then
at the Toronto Technical School. Settling in Brantford, he soon became
interested in the welfare of that city and became Alderman in 1915 and
was re-elected in 1916 and 1917, was chairman of the Railway Committee
and Chairman of Finance in 1916 and 1917. He is President of the
well-known firm of John S. Dowling & Company, Ltd. Mr. Dowling takes a
keen interest in all kinds of sports, especially lacrosse, hockey,
bowling and tennis, and was one of Canada’s star lacrosse players,
helping Brantford win many games during the years 1902 to 1905. Was
prominent player of Tecumseh and Toronto Lacrosse Clubs prior to going
to Brantford, and was selected by latter club to tour Great Britain in
1902, which played throughout England and Ireland. Is chairman of
Brantford Branch of Soldiers’ Aid Commission, having organized the first
commission in Canada, which later became part of Provincial Soldiers’
Aid Commission, when latter was created. Under his chairmanship
Brantford has the name of being the best organized branch in the
Province. He is Rotary President of the Dufferin Bowling Club and a
member of the Heather Bowling Club. Is a Mason and also a member of the
Canadian Order of Foresters. On August 23, 1904, he married the daughter
of Neil Macmillan, a journalist, of Glasgow, Scotland, and has had four
of a family—Ian Macmillan, born June 3, 1907; Margaret Faith, born May
28, 1910, died May 27, 1912; Kathleen Patricia, born March 15, 1913, and
Phyllis Trimble, born October 13, 1914. Mr. Dowling belongs to the
Presbyterian Church and is a Conservative in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Notman, John Charles= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born at Thorold,
Ont., on January 4, 1866. Son of John and Barbara (Ogilvie) Notman.
Educated at the Public Schools, St. Catharines, and in 1881, entered the
office of the Welland Vale Manufacturing Co. In 1901 he was appointed as
Manager of the McKinnon Dash Co., manufacturers of saddlery, carriage
hardware and malleable iron castings, St. Catharines. He is
Vice-President of the St. Catharines Steel and Metal Co. Since 1910 he
has been Water Commissioner of the city. As a clubman he is well known
in many cities, and he is a member of the St. Catharines City Golf Club;
Laurentian Club, Ottawa; and the Niagara Club, Niagara Falls, N.Y. In
religion he is a Presbyterian and a Conservative in politics. In 1896 he
married Clara Louise, daughter of James Seymour, and has one son.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Paton, Hugh= (Montreal, Que.), is President of The Shedden Forwarding
Co., Ltd., Montreal; Director, Royal Bank of Canada; Bell Telephone Co.;
Sincennes McNaughton Line, Ltd.; Northern Electric Co., Ltd.; Canadian
Express Co.; Canadian Transfer Co.; Montreal Trust Co. Born at
Johnstone, Renfrewshire, Scotland, October 5, 1852, the son of William
and Mary (Shedden) Paton, he came to Canada in 1871, after an early
education at Paisley Grammar School, Scotland, and joined his uncle, the
late John Shedden, a prominent railway contractor of Toronto. Mr.
Shedden was formerly President of the Toronto & Nipissing Railway and
built the Union Station, Toronto, in addition to other public works. In
1873, Mr. Paton removed to Montreal and took up his present business
under the name of The Shedden Forwarding Co., Ltd., marrying Isabella,
daughter of the late Andrew Robertson, in 1884. His recreations are the
turf, farming and travelling, and he has won three Queen’s Plates and
one Hunt Cup. He is a governor of Montreal General, Notre Dame and
Western Hospitals; was Honorary Secretary-Treasurer, 1879-1886, and
Master of the Montreal Hunt, 1887; Honorary Secretary for two years of
the Montreal Tandem Club; Honorary Treasurer for several years of the
Province of Quebec Turf Club, Mount Royal Club, and member of the St.
James’ Club, Montreal; Royal Montreal Golf Club; Montreal Racquet Club;
Forest and Stream Club, Montreal; Canada Club, Montreal; Montreal Jockey
Club; Toronto Club, Toronto; Manitoba Club, Winnipeg; Manhattan Club,
New York; Royal Automobile Club and Junior Athenæum Club, London, Eng.
Residence, 507 Sherbrooke St. West, Montreal; summer Residence, “The
Island,” Bord-à-Plouffe, Que.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McGiverin, Harold Buchanan= (Ottawa, Ont.), Barrister and Solicitor,
was elected to the House of Commons for Ottawa in 1908, and chosen as
Liberal Whip for Ontario in the following year, but was defeated in the
elections of 1911. Called to the Bar of Ontario in 1893, he is a member
of the firm of McGiverin, Haydon & Ebbs, and has been Counsel for the
Great Northern Railway in Canada, also for the Bank of Nova Scotia at
Ottawa. In spite of a distinguished professional career, however, it is
as a sportsman that Mr. McGiverin is most widely known, being an
authority on football and cricket. He represented Canada in
International Cricket for years; has been captain of the Canadian Team
for five years and President of the Ottawa Cricket Club for several
years; also President of the Canadian Cricket Association. He was
Captain and later President of the Ottawa Football Club, (“Rough
Riders”), Champions of Canada, and was appointed Canadian Member of the
Olympic Games Committee in 1908. His clubs are: Rideau, Ottawa Golf,
Ottawa Country and Connaught Park Jockey, all of Ottawa; the Pilgrim, of
Philadelphia; also the Marylebone Cricket Club of London, Eng., and Free
Forresters. Mr. McGiverin was born in Hamilton, Ont., August 4, 1870,
the son of Lieut.-Colonel William McGiverin, formerly M.P. for Lincoln,
and Emma (Counsell) McGiverin. He was educated in Public and Private
Schools, also at Upper Canada College and Osgoode Hall. He married Alice
Maude, daughter of Hon. C. H. Mackintosh, late Lieutenant-Governor of
the North-West Territories, September, 1898, and has one son, H. M.
McGiverin, Cadet Royal Air Force, 1918. He is an Anglican in religion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ingersoll, James Hamilton, K.C.= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born in
the Garden City on October 8, 1858. Son of James Hamilton and Frances E.
(Jacobs) Ingersoll. Educated at the Public and High Schools of his
native city and at Upper Canada College, Toronto. He studied law in the
office of the late J. C. Rykert, K.C., M.P. Was called to the Bar of
Ontario in 1883. Mr. Ingersoll is recognized as one of the most
prominent barristers of the Niagara Peninsula, and enjoys a large and
lucrative practice and represents many important interests. He is senior
member of the firm of Ingersoll and Kingstone, which has offices at 24
James St., St. Catharines. He was created a King’s Counsel in 1908. He
has many important interests outside his practice and is Vice-President
of the Security Loan and Savings Co., Ltd., and a Director of the
Suspension Bridge Company, Niagara Falls. In religion he is an Anglican,
and a Conservative in politics. He is a member of the Masonic Order. He
was first married in 1889 to Florence N. Fowler, and secondly, in 1910,
to Harriet Mary Martin. He has two daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ellis, John F.= (Toronto, Ont.), born at Mount Pleasant, Ont., on
November 9th, 1845. Son of John R. Ellis and Janet Carlyle, niece of the
famous Thomas Carlyle. Educated at local Grammar School and Toronto
Normal School. Entered into business with John R. Barber in 1876, Paper
Dealers and Envelope Manufacturers, which concern became subsequently
known as the Barber-Ellis Limited, 71 Wellington Street West, Toronto,
having branches at Winnipeg, Calgary and Vancouver, with the
manufacturing plant at the city of Brantford, Ont. One of the
Vice-Presidents of the Canadian Reconstruction Association. Was
President of the Toronto Board of Trade 1902-1904; President of the
Canadian Manufacturers Association 1898-1900. President of the National
Club, 1901-1902; President, Caledon Fishing Club 1903-1905;
Vice-President, Local Branch, Ontario Fish and Game Protective
Association; one of the Founders of the Commercial Travellers’
Association; Delegate to the Sixth Imperial Trade Congress, London,
England, July, 1906; presented to King Edward, 1906. He is a member of
the National Club, Royal Canadian Yacht Club and Caledon Fishing Club.
Mr. Ellis is a supporter of the Union Government. In religion he is a
Methodist. He has given freely of his time and ability to the
advancement of his home city. Married Emma Maughan, June 7th, 1877,
daughter of Nicholas Maughan, Toronto Assessment Commissioner; has three
sons.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McKeon, P. J., Very Reverend Dean=, Rector of St. Peter’s Cathedral,
London, Ont., one of the best loved clergymen of the Roman Catholic
Church in this country, was born at Merlin, Ont., the son of James and
Ann (Finn) McKeon. He was educated for the priesthood at the widely
known seminary of the Basilian Order, Assumption College, Sandwich,
Ont., whose graduates have rendered unselfish Christian service in many
parts of the world. Father McKeon was Rector of St. Mary’s Church,
London, Ont., for twelve years prior to his elevation as Dean and Rector
of St. Peter’s Cathedral, and during that time established a reputation
for kindliness, piety and zeal in all good works that was recognized by
all classes of the community. He has held the responsibilities of the
Chancellorship of the diocese since August, 1899, being appointed to
that position by the late Archbishop McEvoy when he became Bishop of
London. He is known also as one of the best organizers in the diocese of
London. He willingly participates in the civic activities of his chosen
city, and is a member of the local Canadian Club, the London Board of
Trade and of the Knights of Columbus.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=James, Edgar Augustus=, a Consulting Engineer, was born in the County
of York, at Thornhill, Ont., August 25, 1874, eldest son of David James
and Francis M. Jackson. Both parents were also born in York County. His
father, a nephew of the late Senator David Reesor, is a successful York
County farmer, who has taken an active part in Grange and Farmers’
institute work. He represented the Township of Markham in the York
County Council for some twelve years, and was for some twenty years
Engineer for the Township of Markham. Educated at the Langstaff Public
School, the Newmarket High and Model Schools, and the Toronto Normal
School, the subject of this sketch taught public school at Don, Ont.,
for two years, after which he entered the Faculty of Applied Science of
the University of Toronto, securing the degree of B.A.Sc. in 1904, and
the professional degree of C.E. in 1913. As a student he was active in
the work of the Engineering Society of the Faculty, and was the
President of the organization in the years 1903-4. For the period of
1906 to 1914 he sat on the Senate of the University of Toronto as one of
the elected representatives of the Graduates. On December 1, 1910, he
was married to Mary Kate Smith, daughter of William Henry Smith, who for
fifty years was Principal of the Public Schools, Port Dover, Ont. His
professional experience includes two years on road work and drainage
work in Western Canada, and four years on railway construction work with
the Canadian Pacific Railway. In 1908 he was appointed Managing Editor
of the “Canadian Engineer,” which publication, under his direction, was
developed into the leading Canadian Engineering Weekly. Since giving up
active journalistic work he has been a frequent contributor to the
technical press. In 1911 he resigned to take the position of Chief
Engineer of the Toronto & York Roads Commission, an organization charged
with the improvement of some two hundred and fifty miles of leading
roads radiating from Toronto. In the Fall of the same year he became a
member of the newly organized firm of Consulting Engineers, James,
Loudon & Hertzberg, Ltd., which firm has had charge of important
engineering works in connection with buildings, bridges, roads,
waterworks, sewerage and railways, together with industrial plants.
Moving up through the junior classes, he became, in 1914, a full member
of the Engineering Institute of Canada, having been made, in 1913, a
full member of the American Society of Civil Engineers. He was a member
of the original committee of six who met for the purpose of
re-organizing the Engineers’ Club as a Social and Technical Club, and
was a member of its first Board of Directors. He is also a member of the
Ontario Club; the York Pioneer and Historical Society and a life member
of the Ontario Historical Society; a P.M. of Patterson Lodge A.F. &
A.M.; P.Z. Victoria Chapter, R.A.M., and a member of Cyrene Preceptory
and Rameses Temple. In July, 1918, he was appointed D.D.G.M. for Toronto
Centre District No. 116 A.F. & A.M., G.R.C. He is also a P.C.R. of Court
Union, A.O.F. In religion both families are Methodist, as is the subject
of this sketch.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Finnie, David Maclachan.= The Bank of Ottawa, now amalgamated with the
Bank of Nova Scotia, was established in December 1874, with headquarters
in the Victoria Chambers, Cor. Wellington and O’Connor streets, Ottawa.
Its authorized capital was $500,000 and its paid-up capital $343,875. An
unique happening is connected with the founding of this bank, viz., that
some twelve days before the head office in Ottawa was opened and ready
for business, a branch office was established in Arnprior under the
management of Mr. David Maclachan Finnie, who was then a young man of 25
years and who in 1903, 29 years later, became Assistant General Manager
and in 1916, General Manager, which position he held up to the time,
April 30th, 1919, of its amalgamation with the Bank of Nova Scotia. Mr.
Finnie was, therefore, the first manager of the Bank of Ottawa to do
business with the public in its solitary branch in Arnprior in 1874,
when authorized capital of the bank was $500,000, and the last General
Manager of the bank in 1919, when its Capital was $4,000,000; when its
reserve fund was $4,750,000; when its branches numbered 95; when it had
contributed 228 members of its staff to the great cause of liberty in
the world’s great war; when its total assets were $70,243,000, and its
liabilities $60,539,000, showing a surplus of just under $10,000,000;
and when it was paying the shareholders over 12 per cent. on the par
value of the stock. The Bank of Ottawa, from the start, established a
high character which it always retained. Its management had a reputation
invariably for generous dealings with its clients and never more than of
the late years; and to Mr. Finnie’s affable manner, generous, yet wise,
consideration of its clients’ requirements and his undoubted ability
both as a banker and as a financier, the success achieved by the bank
was considerably attributable. Mr. David Maclachan Finnie was born at
Peterhead, Scotland, July 10th, 1849. He is the son of Robert and Mary
(Smith) Finnie, and was educated in the Parish School, Peterhead. At an
early age he acquired a business and banking experience in the office of
A. & W. Boyd, Solicitors and Agents in the Union Bank of Scotland,
Peterhead; in the office of Secretary, West of Scotland Wholesale
Grocers Association; in the Bank of British North America, London,
England; Montreal, Hamilton and Arnprior. He is a Director of the Home
Building & Savings Association; was elected Vice-President of the Ottawa
Board of Trade in 1909; is Vice-President of the County of Carleton
Protestant Hospital, and in 1919 was elected by acclamation to the
Presidency of the Royal Ottawa Golf Club. At the opening campaign on
behalf of the Canadian Patriotic Fund, Ottawa Branch, he was elected
Honorary Treasurer, and has remained in that position ever since. There
was subscribed over $2,000,000, nearly all of which has been paid in. In
1875 Mr. Finnie married Caroline Nicholson Sterling, daughter of George
Sterling of Hamilton, Ontario. He was President of the Rideau Club for
1911-12-13, and is a member of the Country, Ottawa Golf, Ottawa Hunt
Clubs. In religion Mr. Finnie is an Anglican. His residence is 329
Chapel Street, Ottawa, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Boudreau, L. N. H. Rodolphe=, who from 1889 to 1907 was Private
Secretary to the late Right Hon. Sir Wilfrid Laurier, is a son of the
late Dr. J. B. Boudreau of Doucet’s Landing, Quebec, and Sarah (Fortier)
Boudreau. He was born at St. Gregoire, Quebec, Sept. 19th, 1865, and was
educated at Nicolet College and Laval University. In 1893 he married
Annie, daughter of Thomas Wensley, Ottawa. He accompanied Sir Wilfrid to
Washington and to London and Paris on official missions. He entered the
Civil Service in 1896, was appointed Assistant Clerk of the Privy
Council in 1900, and Clerk of the Privy Council on May 6th, 1907.
January 1st, 1918, he was knighted a Companion of St. Michael and St.
George. In religion Mr. Boudreau is a Roman Catholic. He resides at 198
Stewart Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Arkell, Thomas Reginald, B.S.A.= (Toronto Ont.), is recognized as one
of the leading live stock experts of Canada, though still young in
years. He was born at Arkell, Wellington County, Ont., on March 30th,
1888, the son of Henry and Jessie (Macfarlane) Arkell. He had an early
insight into the practical side of his chosen profession from his
father, who was a prominent sheep-raiser, and had resolved to give his
son a thorough education in the scientific side of the business. The
subject of this sketch was educated at the public schools of Arkell and
Guelph, Guelph Collegiate Institute and the University of Toronto. In
1908 he graduated with the degree of Bachelor of Scientific Agriculture,
standing highest in his class for general proficiency and capturing the
Governor-General’s medal. He first went into journalism and in the year
of his graduation was appointed agricultural editor of the “Canadian
Citizen,” Ottawa; and later served for some months as Associate Editor
of “The Canadian Farm,” Toronto. In 1909 he was appointed Professor of
Animal Husbandry at the New Hampshire State College and animal
Husbandman of the Experimental Station in connection with that
institution. In 1912 he returned to Canada to accept the appointment of
Chief of the Sheep and Goat Division of the Live Stock Branch in the
Federal Department of Agriculture. In 1918 he was appointed Manager of
the Canadian Co-operative Wool Growers, Limited, an association designed
to benefit wool production in Canada from every point of view. He is
widely known in connection with this basic industry and is the author of
numerous papers and pamphlets relating to sheep-breeding and the
inheritance of bovine characteristics. He is a member of the University
Club, Ottawa, and of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. In 1911 he married Mabel Helen, daughter of William Mahaffey of
Dover, New Hampshire, and has one daughter, Eleanor Kathleen. He resides
at 70 Beaty Avenue, Toronto.




[Illustration: HON. GEO. P. GRAHAM
Brockville]




=Gartshore, Lieut.-Col. William Moir=, is one of the best known
industrial leaders of Canada, and is Vice-President and General Manager
of the McClary Manufacturing Co. of London, Ont. His Company is one of
the Canadian pioneer concerns in the manufacture of stoves and furnaces,
and has branches at Montreal, Toronto, Winnipeg, Vancouver, St. John,
Hamilton, Calgary, Saskatoon and Edmonton. Col. Gartshore was born at
Dundas, Ont., April 3rd, 1853, the son of John and Margaret (Moir)
Gartshore. The late Mr. John Gartshore was during his lifetime a
prominent manufacturer of marine machinery, engines, boilers, etc., and
the subject of this sketch was educated in the public and grammar
schools of Dundas and at Dr. Tassie’s famous academy at Galt, Ontario.
In 1873 he joined the staff of the London Car Wheel Company and in 1876
entered the employ of the McClary Manufacturing Company with which he
has ever since been connected. Since 1890 he has filled the dual office
of Vice-President and General Manager. His other business interests
include a directorship of Ontario Loan and Debenture Co., London. Since
early manhood he has taken an active interest in military matters and
holds a first-class cavalry certificate. He entered the militia as a
volunteer in 1871 and during the North-West Rebellion of 1885 served as
Junior Major of the 7th Fusiliers, London, for which he wears the
campaign medal. He was made major in 1884 and in 1892 became Lieut.-Col.
in command of 1st Regiment of Cavalry, “Hussars,” London. He is now on
its reserve of officers. Col. Gartshore has also held many important
public offices. He was Provincial Vice-President of the Canadian
Manufacturers Association, 1908, and Vice-President for Canada in the
same organization, 1914-15. He is President and was formerly for some
years a director of London Fair Association; Chairman of the Victoria
Hospital Trust; President of the St. John’s Ambulance Association,
London; President of the Child Welfare Association, London. During his
many journeys to the motherland he was in 1886 presented to the late
King Edward VII when Prince of Wales, and in 1905 after he came to the
throne. In response to the wishes of his fellow citizens he stood for
Mayor of London in 1916 and was elected. Col. Gartshore is a member of
the following Clubs: London, London Hunt, and National (Toronto). He is
also a member of St. Andrew’s Society and his recreations are riding,
cricket and baseball. In politics he is a Liberal-Unionist and in
religion a Presbyterian. He was married on Dec. 26th, 1876, to
Catherine, daughter of Mr. John McClary, the head of the company with
which he is identified, and has one daughter, Mrs. Edna Cleghorn.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=White, John T.=, Solicitor to the Treasury for the Province of Ontario,
is a native of Belleville, Ont., where he was born on July 3rd, 1875. He
was educated at the public and High Schools of his native town and later
qualified for the law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto. On being called to the
bar of this province in 1894 he practised for a time in Toronto. A few
years ago he was appointed Solicitor to the Treasury for Ontario, a post
requiring great judgment and knowledge of general conditions. Among the
duties it embraces is that of collecting the succession duties on the
estates of deceased persons, the collection of the Corporations Tax, the
Provincial War Tax, and other sources of Provincial revenue. In the long
and delicate negotiations which are sometimes necessary in arriving at a
fair valuation, Mr. White has shown himself very shrewd and tactful and
has been able to largely augment the revenues of the province without
making unfair exactions. When the Ontario Government decided a year or
so after the late war began to impose a tax on amusements, Mr. White was
also placed in charge of the administration of the new law, a task
involving great problems of detail which he has successfully
accomplished. He is an Anglican in religion and a Conservative in
politics and resides at the Albany Club, of which he is a member, as
also of the Royal Canadian Yacht Club, the Rosedale Golf, and the
Mississauga Golf and Country Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pugh, Thomas James=, one of the successful business men of Toronto, was
born in Kidderminster, England, January 8th, 1871, the son of Charles
and Sarah Pugh. He received his first education in public schools in
England, which on his coming to Canada as a boy, was continued by
courses in the public and High Schools here. On leaving school he
adopted commercial pursuits in which he prospered and was finally
enabled to establish himself as a manufacturer of novelties. He is the
President of the Pugh Specialty Company, Ltd., with factories at 38 to
42 Clifford Street, and the wares of his company are well known to the
trade throughout Canada. He is a member of the Canadian Manufacturers
Association and of the Toronto Board of Trade. He is a Presbyterian in
religion and a member of the Masonic order. In politics he is a
Liberal-Unionist. In 1908 he married Miss Alice Maude Collier, daughter
of M. Collier, of Hillsburg, Ont., and resides at 87 Erskine Avenue,
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sutherland, Thomas Fraser, B.Sc., E.M.=, Chief Inspector of Mines for
the Province of Ontario is recognized in his own and other countries as
one of the leading mining engineers of Canada. He is the son of Rev. J.
M. Sutherland, B.A., a prominent Presbyterian clergyman of the Maritime
Provinces, and was born at Pugwash, Nova Scotia, on Feb. 23rd, 1879. His
professional education was received at Queen’s University, Kingston,
Ont., from which he graduated in 1904 as a fully qualified Mining
Engineer with the degree of Bachelor of Science. On graduation he went
to British Columbia and worked in various gold camps of that province
and also of Alaska as a practical miner, assayer, operator and
prospector. For two years he acted as Western representative of a
prominent New York mining firm with important interests in British
Columbia. After six years’ experience on the Pacific coast he returned
to the East in 1910 and was engaged by the Ontario Bureau of Mines in
1911 as Assistant Inspector at Cobalt, Ont., the centre of one of the
great silver districts of the world. Subsequently in 1913 he became
Chief Inspector, and in 1916 was attached as expert to the Royal Ontario
Nickel Commission to enquire into various problems in connection with
that important industry. His duties in this capacity required him to
visit the famous nickel mines of the French colony of New Caledonia,
which are second only to those of Northern Ontario in extent, and also
the nickel fields of Tasmania. In connection with his investigations and
other official duties he is the author of various reports to the Ontario
Government, which are documents of value to those interested in the
mining industry, and is also a contributor to technical journals in
connection with his profession. He is a member of the Canadian Mining
Institute and in religion is a Presbyterian. In 1908 he married Miss
Ethel Young and has three children, Jack Fraser, Gordon McRae, and
Margaret Jean. His home is at 133 St. Leonard’s Ave., Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=David, Hon. Laurent Olivier=, City Clerk of Montreal since 1892 and for
years prominent in the public life of Quebec, is one of the
distinguished figures in the Senate of Canada. He is a son of the late
Mayor Stanislas David, a farmer and officer of the Canadian Militia, and
Elizabeth Tremblay, his wife. Senator David was born at
Sault-au-Recollect, P.Q., on March 24th, 1840, and educated at Ste.
Therese College, Quebec. He took up the study of law and while yet a
student became identified with journalism as one of the founders of the
newspaper “Le Colonisateur.” In 1870 he in company with M. Mousseau and
Desbarats founded “L’Opinion Publique” an illustrated weekly, of which
he became chief editor, and resigned as such because he refused to take
the responsibility of approving the Pacific scandal. In 1874 he founded
in company with C. Beausoliel, M.P., and edited “Le Bien Public” and
later published “La Tribune.” In the seventies he began to win fame as
the author of many essays and books on French Canadian history, on which
he is perhaps the greatest living authority. These include “Les
Patriotes de 1837-8”; “Portraits et Biographies”; “Histoire du Canada
depuis l’Union”; “Histoire du Canada depuis la Confederation”; “le
Drapeau de Carillon,” a patriotic drama; “Les Deux Papineau”; “Mes
Contemporains,” (memoirs); “Souvenirs et Biographies”; “Laurier et son
temps”; “Melanges Historiques et Litteraires”; “Le Clergé Canadien, sa
mission et son oeuvre,” and other works. For a short time he filled the
position of translator to the Quebec Legislature, which he resigned in
1878 and subsequently practised law in Montreal. In 1892 he became City
Clerk of Montreal and helped to revise the new charter of that city,
drafted in 1898. He served as President of the great French-Canadian
patriotic Society of St. Jean Baptiste in 1887-8, and his pen and tongue
have always been active in movements for Canadian unity and for the
intellectual advancement of his own people. He was one of the important
delegates to the Convention of the French-Canadian people at Nashua, New
Hampshire, in 1888, and was one of the prime movers in securing the
erection of the Monument National at Montreal and also that for a
monument to Montcalm in France. Originally a Conservative in politics he
left that party to join L’Union Nationale, in the sixties, an
organization formed to oppose Confederation. Later his ideas on that
subject mellowed and Confederation having become an accomplished fact,
he threw in his lot with the newly-formed Liberal party of Dorion,
Holton and Laflamme. His independence of spirit was shown, however, in
the fact that he favored the policy of protection for native industries
in opposition to his party friends. Because of his attitude on that
question he was obliged to discontinue the publication of the “Bien
Public.” From the first entry of Sir Wilfrid Laurier into politics he
became his friend, counsellor and supporter, and during the lifetime of
that statesman no living man enjoyed more of the confidence of the
Liberal chieftain. His entry into politics ante-dated that of his friend
by a few years for he was an unsuccessful candidate for the Quebec
Legislature in Hochelaga in 1867 and later in 1875. From 1886 to 1890 he
represented Montreal East in that body, when he voluntarily retired,
owing to differences with Hon. Honore Mercier, Liberal Leader in the
Legislature. He had several bills adopted by the Legislature in order to
improve the condition of the workingman, and especially to prevent the
seizure of his furniture and wages. He was twice an unsuccessful
candidate for the House of Commons, first in Hochelaga at the general
elections of 1878 and in Montreal East at the general elections of 1891.
He in 1903 was called to the Senate of Canada by the Governor-General,
the Earl of Minto, on the advice of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, and is
recognized as one of the sagest and most able debaters in that body. He
had earlier declined appointment as Lieutenant-Governor of the Northwest
Territories, though pressed to accept by Sir Wilfrid. He is prominently
identified with welfare movements like the society for the Protection of
women and children, Quebec; and the Anti-Alcoholic League, Montreal. He
is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada and a Knight of the Legion of
Honor of France (to which he was appointed in 1911.) His attachment to
the British flag as well as to the interests of his own people has been
the theme of many of his utterances. He is a Roman Catholic and was
twice married; first in 1886 to Albina Chenet (died July, 1887);
secondly to Ludivine Garceau (died, February, 1915). He has had one son
and nine daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nanton, Sir Augustus Meredith, K.B.=, of Winnipeg, is one of the
leading financiers of the Canadian West and has been for a considerable
number of years senior Winnipeg partner in the noted firm of Osler,
Hammond & Nanton, Investment Brokers and Financial agents of Toronto and
Winnipeg. He was born at Toronto, May 7th, 1860, the son of Augustus
Nanton, Barrister, and came from a family that dated from the early
settlement of that city. He was educated in Toronto and as a young man
was sent to Winnipeg to take charge of the Western business of Osler &
Hammond in which he became a partner. He has long been intimately
connected with the financial life of Manitoba and the West, and his
widespread interests are indicated by the fact that he is Vice-President
of the Great West Life Assurance Co., Vice-President of the Osler &
Hammond Trust Company; President, Winnipeg Electric Co.; Director and
Chairman of the Canadian Committee of the Hudson’s Bay Company; Director
of the Canadian Pacific Railway Co.; Director of the Dominion Bank;
Director of the Northern Trusts Company; Director, Manitoba Bridge &
Iron Works; Director of the Cockshutt Plow Company; Director of the
Ogilvie Flour Mills Company; Director of the Canadian Starch Company;
and Director of the Guarantee Company of North America. Few men have
been so closely identified with the commercial and industrial
development of Canada, particularly that section of it in which he
resides; and when on June 4th, 1917, he was created a Knight Bachelor,
the honor was universally regarded as well-bestowed. Knight of Grace of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem (July, 1914). In connection with the
Victory Loans of 1917 and 1918, Sir Augustus rendered signal service to
the Government of Canada, by organizing their flotation in the West,
with magnificent results. He is a member of the following Clubs:
Manitoba (Winnipeg); St. Charles Country; Winnipeg Hunt; Mount Royal
(Montreal); York and Toronto in the latter named city; and Rideau
(Ottawa). He is a Conservative in politics and an Anglican in religion.
He is married and has three sons and three daughters, and resides at 229
Rosyln Road, Winnipeg.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rogers, Albert S.= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in North York in 1860, the
son of the late Samuel Rogers, founder of the Queen City Oil Co., Ltd.,
and was educated at the Newmarket High School. He married Mary E.,
daughter of Joseph E. Elsworth, of New York City, by whom he has two
sons—J. D. Elsworth and Edward S., and one daughter, Katherine.
Interested in petroleum and natural gas, Mr. Rogers was Vice-President
and General Manager of the Queen City Oil Co., Ltd., of Toronto—merged
into the Imperial Oil Company in 1912—before retiring from active
business. He is Director of the Imperial Oil Co., Ltd., and
Vice-President of Harris & Company, Woollen Manufacturers, Rockwood. Mr.
Rogers is also Chairman and Treasurer of the Board of Management of
Pickering College, Newmarket, near which he owns and operates a farm
that affords a country outlook to the students. He is a member of the
National Club and Lambton Golf and Country Club, of Toronto, as also of
the Toronto Board of Trade and the York Pioneers. In religion he belongs
to the Society of Friends.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Scott, F. Stewart, M.P.= (Galt, Ont.), born August 23rd, 1879 at Galt,
Ont. Son of Frank A. Scott and Mary Stewart, both Canadians. Parents are
of Scotch parentage. Educated at Galt Public and High Schools. Married
in April, 1904 to Minnie L., daughter of William Weir, of Galt, Ont.,
and has three children, Kathleen, Stewart A., and Isobel Scott. He is a
successful manufacturer and public spirited citizen. He is president of
the Getty & Scott Limited, Boot and Shoe Manufacturers; President of
Scott-Chamberlain Limited, Ontario; and President of the Shoe
Manufacturers’ Association of Canada. Was a member of the Galt Municipal
Council for seven years, serving two years as Mayor. He is a member of
The Business Men’s Club and Waterloo County Golf Club. In religion he is
a Presbyterian. Was first elected to the House of Commons in 1915 as
Conservative member for South Waterloo and re-elected at the general
elections in 1917. The member for South Waterloo is a man of many
activities and large commercial interests in which he displays marked
energy. He is a good platform speaker and is recognized as one of the
most progressive and popular citizens of his home city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dollard, Rev. James B.=, is one of the most distinguished lyric poets
of the day, whose residence in this country must be regarded as
fortunate for the cause of Canadian letters, though he is not a native
of this country. He was born in Kilkenny County, Ireland, on August
30th, 1872, the son of Michael Dollard a farmer and Anastasia (Quinn)
Dollard. He was not without Canadian connections, however, since a grand
uncle, Bishop Dollard of Fredericton, N.B., had had a distinguished
career in the Roman Catholic Church in this country. His early education
was received in Kilkenny and he later qualified for admission to the
priesthood at the Grand Seminary, Montreal, Canada. He holds the
scholastic degrees of Bachelor of Theology, Bachelor of Canon Law, and
Doctor of Letters (Laval University). He was ordained as a priest in
1896 and his later years have been spent in the city of Toronto, where
he is now parish priest of St. Monica’s Church, 44 Broadway Avenue.
Despite the duties of a hard-working clergyman, zealous for the welfare
of his parish, he has employed his limited leisure in literary activity
which has won him fame on both sides of the Atlantic. He has published
three volumes of poems and one book of short stories. His literary work
is nearly all Irish in theme and inspiration; for he has never forgotten
the happy days he spent as a lad in the beautiful isle that holds the
enduring love of so many patriots, whose duties have called them far
from its shores. The growth of his fame as a lyric poet is the more
notable in that he is of modest, retiring nature and has never sought
publicity of any kind. Irish legend and Irish scenery are woven by him
into the most delicate and rhythmical verse—verse that is instinct with
music, and alive with lovely imagery. One tribute to him from the pen of
the late Joyce Kilmer, himself a poet of distinction and prior to his
death with the American troops at Chateau Thierry, the literary critic
of the New York “Times,” may be quoted. Of the poem “Fairy Anvils” which
appears in the volume entitled “Irish Lyrics and Ballads,” Kilmer wrote:
“Here is some genuine Celtic magic—a beautiful blend of melody and
fancy. It should be set to music—the words almost carry a tune with
them—and sung by John McCormack.” The same tribute could be paid to
many other lyrics by Father Dollard. He is a member of the Poetry
Society of America and of the Arts and Letters Club, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, Edward Blake=, Scotch origin, born at Lanark, Ont., February
27th, 1877; youngest son of Wm. Robertson and Marian Watt. Went with
parents to Manitoba in 1879. Educated at Pilot Mound public and high
schools and Winnipeg Normal Schools. Taught in Manitoba public schools
for six years. Appointed Chief Clerk for Manitoba in connection with the
decennial census of 1901. Married on December 25th, 1901, Christina
Isola, daughter of Wm. Wrixon. Has one son, Blake Roscoe, born November
2nd, 1902. Resigned from the Dominion service August, 1903, to enter the
employ of Sir Clifford Sifton in a private capacity. Appointed Assistant
Superintendent of Immigration in December, 1904, and Assistant Chief
Controller of Chinese Immigration in October, 1911. In connection with
his official duties he travelled extensively in Canada, United States
and Great Britain. Of him the Manitoba Free Press says: “He has been
recognized for some years as one of the leading authorities on
immigration in the Dominion, while his administrative ability has been
generally acknowledged.” Resigned from the Department of Immigration &
Colonization in February, 1919, to accept a position in Ottawa with the
Canadian Manufacturers Association. Recreations: fishing, hunting and
motor boating. Residence 347b Kenniston Apartments, Ottawa. Clubs:
Laurentian, Canadian and Brittania Boating Club.




[Illustration: LIEUT.-COL. JAMES W. WOODS
Ottawa]




=Chaplin, James D., M.P.= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born at Toronto on
March 20, 1863. Son of William and Harriet Chaplin. Educated at the
Public Schools and St. Catharines Collegiate Institute, and after a
thorough business training became a prominent manufacturer in St.
Catharines. His business interests are very extensive and the companies
with which he is connected are widely known throughout Canada. He is
President of the Welland Vale Manufacturing Company, Ltd., which makes
hand agricultural implements; President of the Chaplin Wheel Company,
Ltd.; President of the Canada Axe and Harvest Tool Company, and
President of the Wallingford Manufacturing Company, Ltd. Despite his
commercial activities he has found time to take a prominent part in
public affairs. He was a municipal councillor for four years, and in the
autumn of 1917 was selected as Unionist candidate for the riding of
Lincoln. At the ensuing Federal elections in December he was elected by
a handsome majority as a supporter of Sir Robert Borden, and is regarded
as one of the ablest members of the Ottawa House. Previously he had been
known as a Conservative and a few years ago was appointed a member of
the Queen Victoria Niagara Falls Park Commission, which has charge of
the Canadian side of that famous international waterway. He is a member
of the A.F. & A.M. and of the St. Catharines Club, and Canada Club,
Montreal. In religion he is a Presbyterian and in 1888 married Edna E.,
daughter of the late Colin Burgess of Toronto, by whom he has one son
and two daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Creelman, Lieut.-Colonel John Jennings, D.S.O.=, Advocate and
barrister, Montreal, is one of the most distinguished, of the Canadian
soldiers who won honors in the late war and also holds high rank in the
legal profession. He was born in Toronto on Feb. 14th, 1881, the son of
the late Adam R. Creelman, K.C. one of the leaders of the Canadian bar,
who became Chief Counsel of the Canadian Pacific Railroad, and one of
the directors of that corporation. His mother was Margaret Jennings,
daughter of the late Rev. Dr. John Jennings of Toronto, one of the best
known pulpit orators of his day. The subject of this sketch was educated
at Upper Canada College, Toronto, and the University of Toronto, from
which he graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1904. Subsequently he
qualified for the law at McGill University, Montreal, and obtained the
degree of B.C.L. in 1907. This was supplemented by a post-graduate
course at the University of Grenoble, France. Subsequently he became a
member of the legal firm of Casgrain, Mitchell, McDougall & Creelman,
and is now in practice alone with offices in the Dominion Express Bldg.,
Montreal. He was also Lecturer on Railway Economics at McGill University
in 1913 and 1914. From early manhood Col. Creelman took an active part
in military affairs and was a member of the Canadian Coronation
Contingent in 1911. He was gazetted a Lieutenant-Colonel of the Canadian
Field Artillery on Oct. 26th, 1912. On the outbreak of the war he at
once placed his services at the disposal of the Government and went
overseas as Lieut.-Colonel, commanding the Second Brigade, C.F.A., and
continued in service until Sept. 9, 1917. During twenty-five months’
service in France he took part in many notable engagements with the
Canadian Expeditionary Force and was twice mentioned in despatches. He
was once officially reported wounded (shell shock) on April 29th, 1915.
His services were recognized by the coveted Distinguished Service Order
and the Russian Order of St. Stanislas (3rd class with swords). A
movement having arisen in Montreal for the betterment of municipal
politics, he was induced in April 1918, to run for the city council and
was elected. He has since proven a very valuable member of that body. In
June, 1918, he was appointed a member of the Protestant Board of School
Commissioners. His business interests are also extensive, and he is a
director of several companies. In religion he is a Presbyterian and in
politics a Liberal, and his recreations are golf, curling and fishing.
He is a member of the following clubs: Mount Royal, University
(Montreal), Royal Montreal Golf, Montreal Thistle (curling), Reform
(Montreal), University (Toronto), and Junior Army and Navy (London,
Eng.). On June 24th, 1908, he married Katherine Melanie Weekes (died
Dec. 13, 1918), daughter of Nicholas Weekes of Galveston, Texas, retired
banker and railway president. He has two children, John Ashmore
Creelman, born 1912, and Katharine Margaret Creelman, born 1918.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Fisher, His Honor Walter George= (Orangeville, Ontario), County Judge
of the County of Dufferin, was born in Township of Tossoronto, County of
Simcoe, and is the son of John Fisher. Educated at Collingwood High
School and McGill University, Montreal. On being called to the Bar in
1886, he at once commenced the practice of his profession at the Town of
Alliston, in partnership with W. A. J. Bell, K.C., and continued to do
with much success until his appointment to the bench in September, 1913.
Judge Fisher took an active part in the municipal politics of his home
town, of which he was Mayor. He married Mary Towler and is the father of
two children, Allan, a member of the Canadian Expeditionary Force at the
front, and Dorothy, at home. Judge Fisher is a member of the Masonic
Order and in religion is a Methodist. He has been prominent in all
movements of a Patriotic and National nature and took a lively interest
in recruiting the battalion which was identified with the County of
Dufferin (the 164th). His services have been in great demand at all
public meetings intended for the purpose of promoting recruiting and the
national welfare. He is also a member of the Canadian Club of
Orangeville. The Judge is an ardent motorist and a keen curler, and a
member of the Orangeville Lawn Bowling Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Burgoyne, William Bartlett= (St. Catharines, Ont.), one of the best
known newspaper editors and publishers of Canada, was born in the city
where he resides, on August 2, 1855, the son of Henry and Martha
Burgoyne. His father was a builder and contractor and the son was
educated at the Public Schools of St. Catharines. Leaving at the age of
12, he shortly afterward entered the printing business, with which he
has now been connected for upwards of 50 years. In January of 1887 he
founded the St. Catharines “Evening Star,” and in 1892 became proprietor
and publisher of the St. Catharines “Daily Standard,” one of the livest
and most influential newspapers to be found in the smaller cities of
Canada. Apart from his journalistic activities Mr. Burgoyne has been a
very active factor in the civic life of his native place. He was
Alderman in 1895-6, 1898, 1900, 1912-3-4-5, Mayor of the city in 1903,
and later, in 1916 and 1917. He was also Chairman of the local
Hydro-Electric Commission, 1916-7, and also of the Local Board of Health
for the same years. He was Chairman of the St. Catharines Roads
Commission, 1918, and a member of the Collegiate Institute Board. In all
efforts in behalf of temperance he has been active for many years. He
was G.W.P. of the Grand Division of Ontario, Sons of Temperance, 1898-9;
M.W.A. of the National Division of North America in the same
organization, 1902-4, and M.W.P. in 1904-6. He represented the National
Division of North America, S. of T. at the fifty-first session of the
National Division of Great Britain and Ireland at Hull, England, June,
1906. His chief hobby is illustrated by the fact that he has been
President of the St. Catharines Horticultural Society for fifteen years
(1904 to 1918) and was the first President of the Ontario Horticultural
Association, 1906-7. He was Chairman of the Daily Newspaper Section of
the Canadian Press Association in 1908; President of St. Catharines
Board of Trade, 1911; and a member of the Executive Council, Associated
Boards of Trade of Ontario, 1914-15. In politics he is a Conservative
and in religion an Anglican. He was lay delegate to the Synod of
Niagara, 1917-19 and is a member of the Standing Committee of that body.
He is a member of many fraternal and benevolent societies, including the
A.F. & A.M., L.O.A.B.A., C.O.C.F., C.O.H.C., and A.O.U.W. On June 16,
1880, he married Mary Lavinia, daughter of George and Margaret E.
Darker, of Thorold, Ont., and has had three children, Clara E., Mary
Estelle (deceased), and Major Henry B. Burgoyne, O.C. of the 71st
Battery, Canadian Field Artillery.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Drysdale, William=, Appraiser with His Majesty’s Customs, Montreal,
Que., was born in that city, April 17th, 1847. His father, Adam
Drysdale, a native of Dunfermline, Scotland, settled in Canada during
the first half of the nineteenth century and for a long period held a
post in the civil service conferred on him by Lord Elgin, during the
period when that celebrated British pro-consul was Governor of the old
Province of United Canada. The father of Adam Drysdale was one of the
first persons to engage in the shipping trade between Canada and
Scotland and was one of the earliest shippers to make use of the Port of
Montreal. The subject of this sketch was educated at Montreal in the
private school of Mr. Hicks (who later became the first principal of the
Normal School in that city), and received a thorough commercial
training. On leaving school he entered the employ of the late John
Dougall, who was at that time publishing the “Weekly Witness” and also
engaged in the book business. The aptitude of young Drysdale was such
that he was almost immediately placed by Mr. Dougall in charge of the
book department. After a short time his services were sought by Mr.
Grafton, another bookseller, with whom he remained as confidential
manager until 1874 when he founded a book business of his own, which
became a celebrated institution in Montreal. Owing to his excellent
training and personal popularity he soon built up a business second to
none in the Dominion. Mr. Drysdale also rendered a public service in
publishing a number of Canadian works which are now of great historic
value. Later he retired from business to accept his present post with
the Customs Service. As a citizen he gave his support to all movements
looking to public betterment, and to philanthropic institutions. He is a
Life Governor of the Boys’ Home and a member of the executive of the
Natural History Society, Prison Aid Association, Charitable Committee of
St. Andrew’s Society Canadian Club, Montreal Art Association, Imperial
Home Re-union Association, Numismatic and Antiquarian Society. He is a
life member of the Mechanics’ Institute, Governor of the Montreal
Dispensary, and one of the most active supporters of the Protestant Home
for the Insane. He has long been a member of the Montreal Board of Trade
and an elder of the Presbyterian Church, who has frequently been
commissioner to the General Assembly. Mr. Drysdale was first married in
1880 to Miss Mary Maltbee Wales, daughter of the late Charles Wales,
merchant of St. Andrew’s East. The first Mrs. Drysdale died in 1891
leaving him two sons, William Flockhart Drysdale, Mechanical Engineer
with the American Locomotive Sales Corporation; and Charles Wales
Drysdale, Geologist to the Dominion Geological Survey, Ottawa. He was
married a second time in 1893 to Miss Mary McIntosh of Sherbrooke, who
died in 1907; and thirdly in 1916 to Miss Jean Parker, daughter of
Archibald Parker of Glasgow, Scotland. He resides at “The Grosvenor,”
756 Sherbrooke St., Montreal. Duncan MacGregor Crerar, a New York poet,
sums up Mr. Drysdale’s character in the following lines:—

        Some are while careful of their own affairs,
          And when successfully amassing wealth,
          Who oft-times will withdraw, as if by stealth
        To render good to others unawares.
        Well known to them the haunts of poverty.
          Clothed are the naked, and the hungry fed,
          Oft take they place beside the patient’s bed
        To cheer sad hours; to soothe keen agony.
        These are earth’s salt—they labor with a mind,
          Distress relieving, lessening human woe;
          In all their actions earnest, gentle, kind,
        Leaving sweet impress whereso’er they go.
        Theirs Heaven’s reward; a crown upon each brow,
        Warm hearted DRYSDALE! such a man art thou!

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Walker, William Simpson, K.C.= (Montreal, Que.), is the son of the late
John and Janet Simpson, Scotland, Ont., and was born in Brantford, Ont.,
April 13, 1849. He was educated at Scotland Grammar School and McGill
University, from which he graduated with the degree of B.C.L. in 1874,
and married Sarah, youngest daughter of the late David Perney,
Waterford, Ont., by whom he has three children, Grace E., Fred. W., now
Vice-President and Managing Director of the Hudson Bay Ins. Co.,
Vancouver, B.C., and Helen E. Walker. In his early years Mr. Walker
taught in the Public Schools of Brant and Norfolk Counties, Ont., and in
the Montreal Academy, also acting as legal reporter for the “Montreal
Herald.” Among other offices held by the subject of this sketch at
various times are those of Secretary of the Royal Commission on the
Paper Combine; Secretary-Treasurer to the Protestant School
Commissioners, Town and Parish of Longueuil, Que.; Secretary of the
McGill University Literary Society; President of the Longueuil Boating
Club; Hon. President of the Longueuil Cricket Club; Member of the
Westmount Lawn Bowling Club; First Vice-President of the Caledonian
Society, Montreal; Treasurer of the Mechanics’ Institute, Montreal; for
many years Secretary of the Young Men’s Reform Association and latterly
of the Reform Club, Montreal; a Freemason of high degree, and a P.D.D.
of both the Independent Order of Foresters and the Canadian Order of
Foresters. A member of the Church of England. Mr. Walker is a Liberal in
politics and an “out and out believer in the late Sir Wilfrid Laurier.”
He was called to the Bar of the Province of Quebec in July, 1874, as an
Advocate and Barrister, having been articled to Sir Charles Davidson,
ex-Chief Justice Province of Quebec, and successfully practising his
profession in the city of Montreal since that time. Has delivered
lectures and read papers before numerous societies in Montreal, amongst
others, upon the following subjects: “Nothing New,” “People I Have Met,”
“Woman as An Inventor,” “Lord Elgin in Canada,” “Scottish Superstition,”
“Scotsman in Canada,” “What We Want,” “The Fathers of Confederation,”
“Masonry and Its Philosophy” and “Universal Language.” In 1897 he was
appointed head of the English Department of Judgments, Superior Court,
and Deputy Prothonotary of the Superior Court, Montreal. Three years
later he was appointed Deputy Registrar of the Exchequer Court by the
Dominion Government, and Commissioner Supreme Court of Canada; was named
King’s Counsel in 1913, in which year he also received the appointment
of Registrar of Deeds for the Western Division of the City of Montreal
(Montreal West) and is, to-day, a Justice of the Peace for the District
of Montreal. Mr. Walker has been in partnership, successively, with the
late Joseph Doutre, Q.C., John A. Perkins, Hon, J. E. Robidoux, Hon. M.
Hutchinson and D. MacMaster, K.C., 90 Arlington Ave., Westmount. “A man
highly respected”—_Montreal Star_.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hopkins, Innes=, 3738 Selkirk Avenue, Shaughnessy Heights, Vancouver,
B.C., Managing Director of the B.C. Marine Limited, one of the oldest
established ship-repairing firms on the Pacific Coast, is a son of John
Castell Hopkins, who was born and educated in Edinburgh, a direct
descendant of Samson Hopkins of Coventry, Co. Warwick, who died in 1662,
and Sir William Hopkins, Knight of Coventry, Isle of Wight, knighted at
Whitehall, 1623—Motto, Suavitate. Aut. Vi.—(other particulars see
“Armory and Lineage of Canada, 1913”). His mother is Trianda Phelia Boyd
Heu de Bourck, daughter of Rev. W. H. Heu de Bourck of Tiverton,
England. The subject of this sketch was born at Douglas, Wellington Co.,
Ont., and was educated in private schools. He has been a resident of
Vancouver since 1914, at which time he became interested in the B.C.
Marine Limited. He is also President of the Vancouver Forge Co. Ltd.; a
member of the Vancouver Board of Trade, Manufacturers Association,
Employers Association of B.C., Vancouver Automobile Club, Vancouver Club
and Terminal City Club, and a member of the Masonic Order. His
recreations are motoring and tennis, and in politics he is a
Conservative. In religion, Mr. Hopkins is an Anglican, and on Feb. 3,
1909, married a daughter of Mr. R. W. F. Martin, broker, of Seattle,
Wash., by whom he has two children, Alice Cecil, born Dec. 13, 1910, and
Robert Innes, born Oct. 19, 1912.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rose, William Oliver, J.P., M.D., M.P.P.= for Nelson in the British
Columbia Legislature, is a native of Lakeville, Prince Edward Island,
where he was born, February 10, 1870, the son of William and Charity
(Baker) Rose. His father was a farmer and he was educated at Prince of
Wales College, Charlottetown, P.E.I., and McGill University, Montreal.
From the latter institution he graduated in 1898 with the degree of
M.D.C.M. and was also Holmes Gold Medallist in this year. For twelve
months he filled the post of Senior House Surgeon at the Royal Victoria
Hospital, Montreal, and in 1899 went to British Columbia as
Superintendent of the Kootenay Lake Hospital at Nelson, B.C. In 1900 he
entered general practice at Nelson as a member of the firm of Rose &
Hall, Physicians and Surgeons, which subsequently, in 1908, became Rose
& Hartin, as at present. He was elected Mayor of his city in 1903 and,
subsequently, in 1907, returned to municipal life as an Alderman, an
office he has filled ever since. At the Provincial Elections of Sept.
14, 1916, he was Conservative candidate for the riding of Nelson, and
carried the constituency. He has been a Justice of the Peace for his
district since 1903 and for a time was Medical Officer of the 102nd
Royal Mounted Rifles. His recreations are motoring and boating, and he
is a member of many fraternal orders including the K.P., L.O.L., S.O.E.,
C.O.F., I.O.F., B.P.O.E., etc. He is a Baptist in religion and on August
28, 1901, married Azza Jean, daughter of John Brownell of Worcester,
Mass. He resides at 907 Vernon St., Nelson, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McQuarrie, William Garland, K.C.=, M.P. for New Westminster, B.C., is
regarded as one of the most able and aggressive of the younger members
of the Canadian House of Commons. He was born at Ottawa, July 26th,
1876, the son of Lachlan and Mary McQuarrie. When he was but a child his
father, who was a prominent contractor, moved to the West, residing
first at Winnipeg and later at New Westminster; and the education of the
subject of this sketch was obtained at the public and high schools of
those cities. Subsequently he studied law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and
was called to the Bar of British Columbia in 1900. He first practised at
Ashcroft, B.C., with Mr. Denis (now Mr. Justice) Murphy, but returning
to New Westminster in 1902, became a member of the firm of Morrison,
Whiteside, McQuarrie & Briggs, of which the senior partner was Mr. (now
Mr. Justice) Morrison. Later the firm became known as Martin, Weart &
McQuarrie, and was headed by Hon. Joseph Martin, K.C., for a time
Premier of British Columbia and afterward a member for St. Pancras in
the British House of Commons. Subsequently Mr. F. C. Wade, K.C., the
present Agent-General of British Columbia in London, became head of the
firm, which was then known as Wade, Whealler, McQuarrie & Martin. In
1912 Mr. McQuarrie founded his present firm which is known as McQuarrie,
Martin, Cassady & Macgowan. Mr. McQuarrie is a well-known expert in
municipal law and is solicitor for the City of New Westminster and for
the municipalities of Burnaby, Coquitlam, Delta, Kent and Surrey. He has
frequently been heard before the Dominion Railway Commission, both in
British Columbia and at Ottawa, and represented New Westminster in the
big litigation over the Coquitlam dam, in which the city’s water supply
was at stake. One of his most notable battles was that in which he
represented his city and other municipalities in a demand on the
Canadian Northern Railway for back taxes, in which nearly a quarter of a
million dollars was involved and in which he was victorious. He has also
figured as counsel in several important murder and treason trials as
Crown Counsel. In the latter capacity he has acted very frequently ever
since 1904 and his abilities as a criminal lawyer have proven
exceptional. In January of the present year (1919) he was created King’s
Counsel by the Oliver Government though an opponent of it in politics.
Mr. McQuarrie is a Conservative Unionist, and was President of the New
Westminster Federal Conservative Association in 1916 and 1917. In the
latter year he accepted the Unionist nomination for New Westminster and
scored a victory at the polls. Since entering the House of Commons he
has made his mark as a sound and effective speaker and is generally
regarded as a coming man in Canadian politics. His chief recreation is
golf and he is a member of the Westminster Club; the Vancouver Club;
Jericho Country Club (Vancouver); Vancouver Golf and Country Club;
Rideau Club, Ottawa; Societies: A.F. & A.M., I.O.O.F., and the Sons of
Scotland. In religion he is a Presbyterian. On Feb. 18th, 1907, married
Elsie Owen, daughter of D. H. Macgowan, Coal Merchant, New Westminster,
B.C. His children are Mary F. C., born July 12th, 1908, and Colin D.,
born Nov. 2nd, 1911. His address is 207 3rd. Ave., New Westminster, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Regan, Frank= (Toronto, Ont.), son of the late Denis H. Regan and Mary
(Hennessy). Born at Murray Township, County of Northumberland, Ont., on
November 27th, 1885. Educated at Trenton High School and Osgoode Hall,
Toronto. On being called to the Bar in 1916, having studied in the law
office of A. Abbott, Trenton, and Corley, Wilkie & Company, Toronto, he
entered into partnership with the late Leon LeVernois, the firm being
known as Regan & LeVernois, which partnership continued until Mr.
LeVernois left to enter a legal firm in Perth, Ont., in 1918, since
which time Mr. Regan has practised on his own account. He is well versed
in commercial law and enjoys a lucrative practice, being solicitor for
several well known corporations. Mr. Regan is a Roman Catholic in
religion and a member of the Knights of Columbus and has long been
identified with the Liberal party. Mr. Regan was a prominent worker in
all patriotic movements during the war and was an active committee man
and canvasser in the Red Cross and Sailors appeals and the Victory Loan
drives. Mr. Regan was a great admirer and a personal friend of the late
Sir Wilfrid Laurier, and was a representative of the Central Liberal
Association at the public funeral of the Great Statesman in February of
1919. He is a member of several Clubs and Secretary of the Central
Liberal Association. Mr. Regan is interested in the Agricultural
industry, his father having been a prominent farmer of Northumberland
County, and finds recreation in motoring, hunting and golf. He is a man
of good address and remarkable energy and is extremely popular among a
very large circle.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hamilton, Ralph Bergen, M.E.= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born at
Toledo, Ohio, on April 11th, 1875, son of John Allen and Harriet Hale
(Rowland) Hamilton. His early education was obtained at the Public
Schools at Saginaw, Mich., and, deciding to acquire a knowledge of
mechanical science he took a course at the Polyteknik, Dresden, Germany.
This was supplemented by an engineering course at Cornell University,
Ithaca, N.Y., from which he graduated in 1896 with the degree of M.E. In
the same year he began his professional career as a draughtsman with the
Buffalo Engineering Co., Buffalo, N.Y., and his successive appointments
have been as follows: Assistant Engineer, Howard Iron Works, Buffalo,
1897-8; Assistant Manager Iroquois Iron Works, Buffalo, 1899-1900;
Acting Manager Packard Electric Co. Ltd., St. Catharines, Ont., 1901;
Secretary-Treasurer and General Manager, 1901, 1912; and the latter year
he became President of the Packard Electric Co., Ltd., retaining the
post of General Manager. He is a former director of the Rochester
“Times” Publishing Co., and also of the McMillan Springs Co. After
coming to St. Catharines to reside he soon began to take part in public
affairs. He was President of the St. Catharines Board of Trade, 1906-7,
and during the recent war was prominent in the promotion of patriotic
objects. He was a member of the Finance Committee of the Patriotic
League, Chairman of the Manufacturers’ Committee of the Recruiting
League, and was appointed by the Imperial Munitions Board, a special
representative on investigation pertaining to the manufacture of
munitions. He is an ex-member of the Executive Board of the Canadian
Manufacturers Association. In addition to the business interests already
mentioned he is President of the Precision Manufacturing Company, St.
Catharines; President of the Cary Safe Co., Buffalo, N.Y., and President
of the Packard Fuse Co., Ltd., St. Catharines, and President of Canadian
Standard Products, Limited, St. Catharines. Mr. Hamilton is a member of
the following Clubs: National, Toronto; University, Buffalo; Alpha Delta
Phi, New York; Ellicott, Buffalo; Little Saguenay Game and Fish Club. He
is also a member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and an
Associate of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. In 1899 he
married Edith Raphael, daughter of Gersham A. Seixas, New York, and has
three sons and one daughter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Connolly, Bernard Gervase, M.B., M.C.P.S.O.=, Gen’l Manager of the
Capital Trust Corporation of Ottawa, and Medical Referee of the Capital
Life Assurance Co., was born in Trenton, Ont., December 5th, 1865,
educated at the Roman Catholic Separate School and the High School and
subsequently graduated with degree of M.B. in 1896 from Toronto
University. He is the son of Bernard and Catharine (Murray) Connolly.
Dr. Connolly started life as a teacher in the Public Schools in Ontario
and later as a teacher in the Institution for the Blind, Brantford,
where he remained for four years. He followed the Medical Profession at
Renfrew for seventeen years, where, despite his large practice, he found
time for various other activities. He was Coroner, served on the
Collegiate Institute Board, Library Board, Hospital Board, and any
movement for the improvement of the community got his ready and hearty
support. Being an enthusiastic Liberal, he was chosen Standard Bearer of
the Reform Party in the Provincial Elections of 1908, when, although
defeated, he polled a large vote. In 1906 and 1907 he was Provincial
Chief Ranger of the Catholic Order of Foresters. He served as Medical
Officer of the 42nd Regiment of Infantry for some years, retiring with
the rank of Captain. Since his arrival in Ottawa and as General Manager
of the Capital Trust Corporation, Dr. Connolly’s career has been
conspicuously successful. Under his capable management the Capital Trust
Corporation has made rapid progress and is to-day one of the leading
financial institutions in the Capital of the Dominion of Canada. In 1900
he married Anna Mary Devine, daughter of Felix Devine of Renfrew. In
religion he is a Roman Catholic; in politics a Liberal, and he resides
at the Roxborough Apartments, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Callahan, John= (Toronto, Ont.), son of Thomas Henry Callahan and
Henrietta (McKanna) of Wooler, Ont., was born at Murray Township, County
of Northumberland, Ont., April 7th, 1891. Educated at the Wooler Public
School, Trenton High School and Osgoode Hall, Toronto. On being called
to the Bar in May, 1916, he entered into partnership with Messrs.
Douglas & Gibson, the firm being known as Douglas, Gibson & Callahan,
which partnership continued until November, 1919, when he commenced
practice on his own account. Mr. Callahan, although under thirty has
already attained an assured position in his chosen profession. He has
paid special attention to Company law and is solicitor for several large
commercial corporations. Mr. Callahan is a Roman Catholic in religion
and has for some years been identified with the Liberal party, taking a
considerable interest in Federal politics. Having a pleasing address and
good platform ability, his services were frequently requisitioned by his
leaders. He is a member of the Ontario Club, Knights of Columbus;
President of The Newman Club and ex-President of the Alumni, President
of Ward Four Liberal Association. Always interested in amateur sports,
Mr. Callahan was prominent in football circles. He finds recreation in
motoring, boating, bowling and golf. Mr. Callahan is related to Senator
McCall of Australia and Mr. Justice Sharp of the Supreme Court of the
State of Michigan, U.S.A.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Crowther, William H.= (Welland, Ont.), was born at Walsall, England,
March 10th, 1868, and educated in the Public Schools of that place. Son
of Job and Sarah Crowther, his father being manager of the Rolling Mills
at Walsall, England. He is one of the most progressive manufacturers of
the City of Welland and also operates a farm. Married in October, 1895,
to Margaret Byers, daughter of Thomas Byers, of Hampden, County of Grey,
Ont. Father of three sons. William Crowther, the eldest, was killed in
action in the Great War on October 31st, 1917, at the age of twenty-one.
As a Lieutenant in the 10th Royal Flying Corps, he was engaged in
photographing and observation work near La Bassee when he was shot down;
Wilfred, in the Royal Air Force, was billeted for France when the
Armistice was signed; Thomas Albert, and a daughter Dora Isabel. Mr.
Crowther is a Presbyterian in religion and a Liberal in Politics and
belongs to the following societies: The Masonic Order, Sons of England,
Ancient Order of United Workmen, Canadian Order of Foresters. He was a
member of the town Council of Welland for twelve years and was Mayor for
Welland for two years, 1909-10. Was an active member of the Patriotic
Campaign Committee during the war and has been largely instrumental in
contributing to the present prosperity of Welland, being Chairman of the
Waterworks and Sewers Committees for two years, in each case. Ex-Mayor
Crowther is recognized as one of Welland’s most public spirited and
enterprising citizens. His recreations are lawn-bowling, he being a
member of the Welland Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Davidson, James Wheeler, F.R.C.S.=, 801 Royal Avenue, Calgary, Alberta,
is one of the contributing causes of the entente cordiale between Canada
and the United States. In other words, he is an American who has “made
good” in Canada, as he has elsewhere. Mr. Davidson was born at Austin,
Minnesota, on June 14, 1872, his father being C. H. Davidson, a
newspaper man, and later, a banker. He was educated at Northwestern
Military Academy, Highland Park, Illinois, where he graduated as Second
Lieutenant in 1891. Mr. Davidson almost immediately embarked on a career
of travel and adventure which was to bring him many honors. He was a
member of the Peary Arctic Expedition of 1893 and 1894, a war
correspondent for the New York Herald with the Chinese army, and later
with the Japanese army during the Japanese-Chinese war of 1895-1896, and
a member of the American foreign service stationed in Formosa, China,
Manchuria, also American Consul-General at Shanghai and a special agent
department of state between years 1896-1906. It was at this time that he
became a member of the “Order of the Rising Sun” (Japanese), an honor
not often accorded to foreigners. He was granted leave by the Department
of State to serve on a special mission for the Russian Communication
Department in Siberia, and was decorated by the Emperor of Japan for
services rendered the Japanese army in the capture of the capital
(Taipehfu) of Formosa. Under the Roosevelt administration he was a
special agent of the Department of State, sent to Manila prior to
Dewey’s expedition to determine probable attitude of Philippine
revolutionary party towards Americans. His knowledge of these countries
enabled him to write an authoritative book on “The Island of Formosa,
Past and Present,” published by MacMillan & Co. He has also been a
contributor to the Century Magazine on Siberia and Manchuria. Mr.
Davidson is now treasurer of the Calgary Colonization Company, and
Manager Beiseker & Davidson Company, of Calgary. He is a member of the
Ranchmen’s Club, Calgary; the Manitoba Club, of Winnipeg; the Royal
Geographical Society; the Explorer’s Club, New York, and the Authors,
London. He is a Protestant in religion, and professes no political
creed. In 1906 he married Mabel Lillian Dow, daughter of George A. Dow,
of San Francisco, president of the George A. Dow Pumping Engine Company.
He has one child, Marjory Dow, born February 10, 1915.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackay, Hon. Col. Alexander Howard=, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, is one of
Canada’s most prominent educationists. Born of Scotch-Canadian parents,
John Mackay and Barbara Maclean, at North Mount Dalhousie, Pictou
County, Nova Scotia, on May 19, 1848, Colonel Mackay early demonstrated
his educational ability. He began his education in the public schools,
then went to Pictou Academy, to Normal College, and to Dalhousie
University, from which he graduated with a B.A. degree in 1873. He
received his degree of B.Sc. at Halifax University in 1880; his LL.D.
from Halifax in 1892, and from St. Francis Xavier University in 1905. In
1882 he married Maude Augusta, daughter of Dr. George Moir Johnstone of
Pictou, N.S., and has two children, George Moir Johnstone and Barbara
Lois, born in 1883 and in 1886 respectively. Colonel Mackay is a life
member of the Royal Colonial Institute, London, England; a member of the
Author’s Club, London, England, and of the Halifax Club, Nova Scotia. He
is also a member of the Royal Society of Canada and of the Biological
and Geographic Boards of Canada. In religion he is a Presbyterian, of
the United Church of Canada, and in politics he is non-partisan, but a
strong Imperialist. He was made an honorary colonel in 1912 and was a
member of the Dominion Cadet Committee which had the honor of
introducing the present military training system into the schools of
Canada in 1908. Colonel Mackay is now superintendent of education for
the province of Nova Scotia. He began as a teacher in the public schools
of Pictou and then became lecturer in biology at the medical college of
Dalhousie University, and his subsequent career is a long list of
educational honors. He is Past President of the Educational Association
of Nova Scotia, of Dominion Educational Association, of Summer School of
Science for Atlantic Provinces, of Nova Scotia Institute of Science, of
Section IV. of the Royal Society of Canada; President of Victoria School
of Art and Design; Vice-President of Simplified Spelling Board; member
of the Geographic Board of Canada; of the Biological Board of Canada,
Governor of Dalhousie University, of Halifax Ladies’ College; Senator of
Presbyterian College; sometime editor of “Dalhousie Gazette,” “Acadia
Scientist,” “Educational Review”; editor of “Journal of Education,”
etc., represented the province of Nova Scotia at the official Imperial
educational conferences of the Education departments of the Empire in
1907 and 1911. Colonel Mackay has written extensively on educational
subjects for a number of important magazines and periodicals.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Whalen, George Frederick= (Vancouver, B.C.), one of the leading figures
in the pulp and paper industry of Canada, was born at Fort William,
Ont., November 13, 1880, the son of Joseph and Alice Whalen. He was
educated in the Separate School and High School of his native city, and
commenced his business career in 1899 as a clerk in the Ontario Bank at
the adjacent town of Port Arthur. After a year’s experience he abandoned
banking for the lumber business, serving as a clerk in the camps of
far-western Ontario from 1900 to 1902, and subsequently a Contractor for
taking out timber from 1902 to 1909. Incidentally he acquired a great
deal of knowledge of the pulp industry, which at that time was beginning
to assume large proportions in Canada, and in 1909 he was appointed
Manager in charge of construction and operation of the Sulphite Mill at
Mill Creek, British Columbia. In that position he remained until 1917
when he became Vice-President and General Manager of the Whalen Pulp &
Paper Mills, Ltd., which has its head offices in the Merchants Bank
Building at Vancouver, B.C., and engages extensively in pulp and lumber
manufacture on the Pacific Coast. The importance of this corporation,
which was organized by the subject of this sketch, may be gauged from
the figures of its capitalization: common stock $8,000,000; preferred
stock (cumulative from January 1, 1918) $2,102,500; Fifteen year Six per
cent. Bonds $2,000,000; Fifteen year Seven per cent. Debenture Stock,
$1,500,000. Though young in years Mr. Whalen is recognized throughout
Canada and the United States as one of the most able and progressive
figures in an industry that enters very largely into the life of every
community. His recreations are golf, fishing, motoring and hunting, and
he is a member of the Vancouver, Shaughnessy Golf, and Burnaby Golf
Clubs. In religion he is a Roman Catholic and on June 1, 1904, married
Mary Geraldine, daughter of Patrick D. Doran, Kingston, Ont. He has
three sons and one daughter, and resides at 1251 King Edward Ave.,
Vancouver, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cousineau, Joseph Philemon, B.A., K.C., LL.D.=, of the firm of
Cousineau and Lacasse, advocates, 90 St. James Street, Montreal, was
born at St. Laurent, Quebec, in 1874, and is one of the many brilliant
Canadians of French affiliations who have done so much to enrich the
legal history of Canada. He is the son of Gervais and Angelique
Cousineau and was educated at Ste. Therese College, and at Laval
University, where he secured his B.A. in 1894, his LL.L. in 1896 and his
LL.D. in 1901. He read law with J. Beauchamp and with C. R. Charles
Bruchesi. He was called to the Quebec Bar in 1896 and was created King’s
Counsel in 1909. Like many of his compatriots Mr. Cousineau united law
and politics. He began his political career as mayor of St. Laurent, an
office he held from 1904 to 1908. In that year he resigned his mayoralty
to become member of the Quebec Legislature for the district of Jacques
Cartier. He was re-elected in 1912 and in 1915 and 1916 was leader of
the opposition at Quebec. His authorship in 1901 of a brilliant thesis
“Des Corporations” was possibly one of the determining influences in his
appointment to the professorship of “Droit Administrative” at Laval
University, a position he has held since 1903. He is also a member of
the Canadian and the Chapleau Clubs. In 1897 Mr. Cousineau married
Helmina, daughter of L. S. Gendron. He has four daughters, Aline,
Gilberte, Jeanne and Gabrielle. In politics he is a Conservative, and in
religion a Roman Catholic. He still maintains the family residence at
St. Laurent.




[Illustration: GEORGE WRIGHT
Toronto]




=Cutten, George Barton=, of Wolfeville, Nova Scotia, president Acadia
University, is one of the interesting Canadians who have won educational
honor in their own country. Dr. Cutten was born at Amherst, Nova Scotia,
on April 11, 1874. His parents were William Herman Cutten and Abbie Ann
Trefry, and their early training was doubtless responsible for their
son’s brilliant career. At twenty-two he won his B.A. degree from
Acadia, the university he was afterwards destined to govern as
president; at twenty-three he was B.A. at Yale, and from then on he won
in rapid succession his M.A. at Acadia, his Ph.D. at Yale, his B.D. at
Yale, his D.D. at Colgate and his LL.D. at Acadia. In 1898 Dr. Cutten
married Minnie W. Brown, daughter of John Ingerson Brown and Sophia
Zwicker of Westfield, Mass., and his four children are Margarita Joy,
born in 1902; Muriel Grace, born in 1904; Claire, born in 1906 and
William Francis, born in 1908. Dr. Cutten is a member of two Greek
letter fraternities, the Phi Sigma Delta, and the Phi Beta Kappa, is a
Baptist in religion and an Independent in politics, but he is not a
Pacifist, for he has held two military commissions—Captain in the 219th
Battalion, and Major in the 246th. Dr. Cutten is the author of a number
of interesting books: “The Psychology of Alcoholism” (Walter Scott
Publishing Company, London), “The Psychological Phenomena of
Christianity,” and “Three Thousand Years of Mental Healing,” both
published by Scribner’s, New York; “The Case of John Kinsel”
(Psychological Review), and “The Christian Life in a Baptist Church”
(Marriott Press, Corning, New York.).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Goring, C. C.=, manufacturer, of 172 Markland Street, Hamilton,
Ontario, is a self-made man, and proud of it. He furnishes one of the
numerous cases we have in Canada of the farmer’s son who gets well up
the ladder by persistent, well-directed efforts along one line of
business. Commencing as an oil salesman on “the road,” Mr. Goring
eventually had charge of the sales force of a large refinery in New York
State. From that he went into the jobbing and export department and
eventually he incorporated a company which has done a successful
business both in the United States and in Canada. He is now president
and managing director of the Ontario Lubricating Company, Limited. Mr.
Goring was born at Homer, Ontario, on March 31, 1878, his parents being
Ransom Goring and Melissa Cushman. He received a Canadian public school
education and went directly from school into business. On January 2,
1907, he married Edith Wildman, daughter of Edwin Wildman, Hamilton,
Ontario. He has two children, Gladys Irene, born February 15, 1909, and
Gordon Hamilton, born January 27, 1915. Mr. Goring is a Protestant, a
Conservative and a Mason.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dinnick, Lieut.-Col. Wilfrid Servington=, one of the leading financiers
and public men of Toronto, was born at Guildford, England, on July 19th,
1874, the son of (Rev.) John Dunn and Charlotte Matilda Dinnick. He was
educated at York School, Brighton, Eng., and came to Canada in 1889. In
that year he obtained a position in the office of the Provincial Loan
Company, Toronto, where he remained for two years, joining the Canadian
Birbeck Investment Security and Savings Co., with which corporation he
remained until 1895. By the time he was twenty-one he had acquired
through his natural aptitude for finance a very complete knowledge of
the Canadian investment field and before he was thirty had become a
prominent figure in Toronto financial circles. He is at present
Vice-President of the Standard Reliance Mortgage Corporation, 84 King
St. East, Toronto; and President of the Sterling Trusts Corporation.
Notable among his business achievements was that of founding and
organizing Lawrence Park, one of the exclusive suburban residential
districts of Toronto, which by virtue of the policy which he adopted in
the matter of planning and building restrictions, is one of the beauty
spots of a city renowned for its palatial homes. His services of a
public character became especially noteworthy during the late war. On
Dec. 21st, 1914, he organized the 109th Regiment in which he holds the
rank of Lieut.-Col. This organization largely through the energetic
methods of Col. Dinnick sent to the front over 200 officers and 5000
men, who served chiefly in the 84th and 169th Overseas Battalions and
seven other quotas also. It also contributed the C.D.F. Battalion for
home defence in Canada. As an organizer of public benefactions Col.
Dinnick also showed indefatigable energy and organizing talent. He was
largely instrumental in securing $2,400,000 for the Toronto and York
Patriotic Fund in 1916; and $3,400,000 for the same object in 1917. He
was also the organizer of the British Red Cross Appeal in 1915 and
raised $550,000, which was increased to $740,000 in 1916. He has
likewise willingly given his services to numerous appeals of a minor
character, and many organizations have profited by his unique abilities
in that field. He has been active in support of schemes of civic
improvement and was the originator of the Back Garden development idea
in Toronto, which has been blessed with excellent results. He is a
Conservative in politics, a member of St. Paul’s (Anglican) Church,
Toronto, and is Honorary Secretary of the Canadian Council of the Pocket
Testament League. His recreations are Motoring and horse-back riding and
he is the President and one of the founders of the Lawrence Park Lawn
Bowling Club. He is also a member of the Albany, National, Toronto Hunt,
Lambton Golf, Rosedale Golf, and Royal Canadian Yacht Clubs, Toronto,
and of the A.F. & A.M. In New York on June 16th, 1905, he married Miss
Alice Louise Conlin and has two sons and two daughters. His residence is
at Bedford Lodge, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ewing, William=, one of the best known of the younger business men of
Montreal, was born in that city on May 4th, 1884, the son of William and
Catherine Kinross Ewing. He was educated at Montreal High School and at
L’Assomption College, L’Assomption, Quebec. On leaving college about
sixteen years ago he joined the business of his father, who had
established the firm of William Ewing & Co., Wholesale Seedsmen, at
Montreal, in 1869. When the firm was re-organized as a joint stock
corporation with the title of the William Ewing Co., Ltd., in 1913, the
subject of this sketch became Secretary-Treasurer and also a Director.
Formerly Mr. Ewing was known on the football field throughout Eastern
Canada and is President of the Interprovincial Rugby Football Union and
also of the Montreal Amateur Athletic Association Football Club. He is
an active member of the M.A.A.A. and also of the Caledonian Society of
Montreal. His recreations are fishing and football and he has also
interested himself in military affairs and holds a commission as
lieutenant in the 1st Regiment, G.G. of C. On July 22nd, 1910, he
married Isabel Swanson Forbes, a daughter of Mr. George E. Forbes of the
well-known firm of Forbes Bros., Wholesale Grocers, Montreal. He has two
children, Isabel Graham, born May 10th, 1912, and William, born Dec.
26th, 1914. In religion he is a Presbyterian and resides at 329
Addington Ave., Notre Dame de Grace, Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Kelso, John Joseph= (Toronto, Ont.), Journalist and Social Worker, has
resided in Toronto since childhood, but was born in Dundalk, Ireland,
March 31, 1864, son of George and Anna Kelso, descendants of Scotch
Covenanters. Took up Journalism in 1886 and was for several years member
of the “Globe” staff. Devoted to philanthropy, has written thousands of
columns on Social Welfare. Organized Toronto Humane Society in 1886-7;
Children’s Fresh Air Fund in 1888; Children’s Aid Society, 1891;
Playgrounds Association, 1908; was mainly responsible for educational
propaganda leading to passing of Children’s Protection Act by Ontario
Government, and under its provision was appointed General Superintendent
of Neglected and Dependent Children, and Inspector of Industrial
Schools. In its initial stages Mr. Kelso had much to do with the
inauguration of the Juvenile Court movement, having addressed the Waif
Saving Congress on the subject at the World’s Fair, Chicago, in October,
1893. He was also one of the first advocates of Widowed Mothers’ Aid and
Workmen’s Compensation Boards. In March, 1898, Mr. Kelso addressed the
Legislature of Manitoba and British Columbia and they unanimously agreed
to adopt the Ontario system of child protection. In 1905 he visited Nova
Scotia with the same successful result; in 1908 Saskatchewan, and in
1913, New Brunswick. All Canada now follows the same methods of carrying
on Child Welfare work, Mr. Kelso having organized over two hundred and
fifty Children’s Aid Societies, in addition to Social Settlements, etc.
Started Canadian Conference of Charities and Correction in 1897 and was
elected Vice-President; was also elected Vice-President of National
(U.S.) Conference of Charities in 1902. Represented Ontario at
Conference on Child Welfare called by President Roosevelt and also at
International Prison Congress held in Washington. These Conferences led
to many present-day reforms. In 1903-5 Mr. Kelso performed notable
service for the Province by emptying the Ontario Reformatory for Boys at
Penetanguishene and the Ontario Refuge for Girls, by providing homes and
situations for all the inmates. These institutions were converted into
Hospitals for the Insane. Is still engaged in the work. Was married,
1901, to Irene Madden Martin, of Nashville, Tenn., and has two children,
a son and daughter. Is Elder and S.S. Superintendent of St. James’
Square Presbyterian Church. He resides at 21 Prince Arthur Ave.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Douglas, William James= (Toronto, Ont.), Journalist, is the General
Manager of the “Mail and Empire,” one of the leading Canadian dailies
and influential exponent of the Liberal-Conservative thought in Ontario.
He is a son of the late James S. Douglas, A.M., M.D., Ph.D., and Frances
Boardman, and was born in Hamilton, N.Y., U.S.A., May 28, 1846. After
education at Milwaukee, Wis., he came to Canada in 1877, where he has
held his present position for many years. Mr. Douglas married Eliza,
daughter of Jeremiah Riordan, Surgeon in the Royal Navy, in 1868, and
has four children—William, James S., Howard R. and Amy Douglas. He was
formerly Vice-President of the National Club, and is a Trustee of the
Toronto General Hospital, and of the Canadian Associated Press, of which
he was a promoter. A Presbyterian in religion and a Conservative in
politics. Mr. Douglas numbers among his clubs the National and Albany of
Toronto, the Rideau of Ottawa, the Caledon Mountain Trout Club and the
Cuckoo Valley Fishing Club. Is a Justice of the Peace for the County of
York.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Delage, Cyrille F.=, Notary Public (Quebec City, Que.), son of J. B.
Delage and Mary E. E. Fraser, was born in the above place, May 1, 1869,
and received his education at Quebec Seminary and Laval University,
Quebec, from which last he graduated with the degrees of L.B., LL.B.,
and LL.D. In 1894, Mr. Delage married Alice, daughter of Telesphore
Boursseau and Celina Genest, by whom he has four children—Paul-Edouard,
Maurice, Emile, and Marguerite. To-day, this distinguished Canadian
holds the following public offices: Superintendent of Public Instruction
for the Province of Quebec; officer d’Acadamie (France); member, Royal
Society of Canada, French Section; Hon. President of the Quebec
Provincial Exhibition Commission; President, Canadian Patriotic Fund,
Quebec Branch; President National War Saving Committee, Quebec Branch;
Honorary President of Society of Education, Canada; President, Catholic
Committee, Council Public Instruction, Quebec; Member Protestant
Committee, Council Public Instruction; and member Conseil des Arts et
Metiers, Quebec. Council of Agriculture. At the time of his appointment
as Superintendent of Public Instruction, the “Quebec Telegraph” said
editorially: “Undoubtedly the Legislature will lose by his disappearance
from it, but the Province will unquestionably be a large gainer by the
transfer of his abilities, experience, and congenial tastes to the
Department of Public Instruction.” A Liberal in politics and a Roman
Catholic in religion, Mr. Delage is a member of the Canadian and
Garrison Clubs of Quebec City, in addition to the Union St. Joseph, St.
Roch; Union St. Joseph, Beauport; Artisans Canadiens-français; Alliance
Nationale; Royal Arcanum, and the Independent Order of Foresters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hocken, Norman Cecil= (Otter Lake Station, Ont.), Lumberman, the son of
Henry Hocken and Lucina Soper, was born in Bowmanville, Ont., November
28, 1880, and educated at the Bowmanville Public School. His father
being in the lumber business, he naturally came much in contact with
that line of business, so deciding to strike out for himself in 1903, he
became connected with the Victoria Harbor Lumber Company, and the
Charlton Sawmill Company, finally going into business for himself and at
the present time is owner of four sawmills and upwards of fifty square
miles of timber limits. In politics he is a Reformer and was nominated
by the Liberal party as their standard-bearer for the constituency of
Parry Sound, for the House of Commons, to represent them at the next
Dominion Election. Mr. Hocken is a member of the Methodist Church, of
the Board of Trade of the City of Toronto, of the Ontario Club, Toronto,
and of the Masonic Order. He married the daughter of James Kydd, and has
five children—Bernice, Melvin, Loydd, Ralph and Robert.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=King, Hon. James H., M.D., C.M., F.A.C.S.=, Physician and Surgeon,
Cranbrook, B.C., President, King Lumber Mills, Ltd., Cranbrook, B.C.
Born Chipman, N.B., January 18, 1872, son of Hon. G. G. and Ester Briggs
King. Educated St. Martin’s Academy and McGill University. Practised
Andover and St. John, N.B., 1895-1898. Came to British Columbia 1898;
practised Cranbrook since. Vice-President Graduates Society, McGill
University, 1908. Attended World Congress of Medicine and Surgery,
Budapest, Hungary, 1909, and on this occasion was presented at the
Austrian Court. Represented Cranbrook, British Columbia Legislature,
1903, 1907; unsuccessful candidate for Kootenay to House of Commons,
1911; elected to British Columbia Parliament, September 14, 1916;
accepted portfolio of Public Works in the new government formed November
29, 1916; one of the original Founders and Governors of the American
College of Surgeons at Chicago, 1913. Married Nellie Sadler, Maple View,
N.B., 1907. Societies: A.F. & A.M., I.O.O.F., K. of P. Liberal, Baptist.
Residence, Victoria, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Oliver, Hon. John= (Victoria, B.C.), son of Robert Oliver, of
Derbyshire, England, and Emma Lomas, his wife, of Staffordshire. Was
born on July 31, 1856, at Hartington, Derbyshire, England. In April,
1870, his parents, with eight children, of whom the subject of this
sketch was the eldest, left the Motherland, and eventually settled on a
farm in Wellington County, Ontario. There he worked on his father’s farm
in the summer and went to the woods in the winter, and, in his spare
time, picked up stone masonry. In 1877, the future premier set out for
Victoria B.C., with only a few dollars in his pocket and no particular
job in sight. Twenty-three years later he returned to the capital as a
member of the Legislature, and forty years afterwards he became head of
the Provincial Government. Shortly after going to British Columbia, Mr.
Oliver took up land in the Delta municipality, and to-day he is the
proprietor of one of the finest farms in the province. Mr. Oliver has
always evinced a genius for public service, and has always taken a keen
and intelligent interest in public questions. He had not been long in
the west before he was elected a member of the Delta Municipal Council,
and was later reeve for several terms. He was first elected to the
British Columbia Legislature at the general elections in 1900, and
re-elected in 1903 and 1907. At the general elections in 1909, as leader
of the Opposition, he contested two constituencies, Victoria and Delta,
and was defeated in both. A similar experience awaited him in 1911, and
again in the campaign in 1912. In 1916, upon the formation of the
Brewster cabinet, he was appointed Minister of Railways and Agriculture.
On the death of Premier Brewster, after one session in office, Mr.
Oliver was called upon by the Lieutenant-Governor to form a Government,
which he did, retaining his former portfolios, besides acting as
Premier. His reputation as a parliamentarian of the first rank was
firmly established by the part he played in the exposure of what was
known as the “Columbia and Western Railway Scandal.” He was chiefly
instrumental in having grants for some 650,000 acres of coal mining land
in the Kootenay district cancelled. Premier Oliver was married on June
20, 1886, to Elizabeth, daughter of William Woodward, of Mud Bay,
British Columbia. He is the father of the following children: Robert,
William Arthur, John Thomas, Charles Edward, Joseph, Elizabeth Alice,
Sarah Ellen, Mildred Emma. Premier Oliver has for years been known as
“Honest John,” and his long record for probity and fair dealing justly
entitles him to this distinction. Although somewhat handicapped in early
life by lack of scholastic training, the Premier was by nature a
student, and he became a wide reader. He is a man of rugged honesty,
industrious and aggressive, and enjoys a measure of public confidence
which is indicated by the title conferred upon him by the people of his
province. The Premier’s candour and courage are recognized as his
greatest assets, while his long association with public affairs and
foremost position in the Liberal party has made his name a household
word in British Columbia. The Premier possesses sufficient property,
acquired by his own industry, to make him independent of political
fortunes. He is undoubtedly one of the most interesting and picturesque
figures in Canadian public life.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ferguson, Hon. George Howard, B.A., LL.B., K.C., M.L.A.= (Toronto,
Ont.), son of Dr. Charles Frederick Ferguson (Scotch), and Elizabeth
Wallace Bell, his wife (Irish). Was born on the 18th day of June, 1870,
at Kemptville, Ont. Educated at Kemptville High School, Toronto
University, and Osgoode Hall Law School, Toronto. Called to the bar in
1894. Married April 14th, 1896, to Ella Cumming, of Buckingham, Quebec.
Was a councillor for three years and a reeve for three years of the
village of Kemptville. His father, Charles F. Ferguson, M.D.,
represented the constituency of North Leeds and Grenville in the House
of Commons from 1893 to 1896, when he retired. First elected to the
Ontario Legislature at the general elections as the member for
Grenville, 1905. Re-elected at the general elections 1908, 1911, 1912
and 1914. A member of the Executive Council of the Hearst Administration
as Minister of Lands, and Forests and Mines, December 22nd, 1914.
Re-elected after assuming the office by acclamation, January 7th, 1915.
He is an Anglican and a member of the Masonic Order; the Odd Fellows;
Independent Order of Foresters; Orangemen and Maccabees. The Honorable
Mr. Ferguson is a man of fine address and good oratorical ability. He is
extremely popular with all members of the Legislature.




[Illustration: Hon. Adelard Turgeon, Quebec.
R. W. Breadner, Quebec.]




=Grant, Gordon=, is the son of Peter Grant, a distinguished Civil
Engineer who was employed on the construction of the Caledonia and Great
North of Scotland Railways, who came to Canada in 1868, and who was from
that date to its completion in 1876, employed on the construction of the
Intercolonial Railway and subsequently on the Canadian Pacific Railway
until its completion in 1885, and Helen (Gordon) Grant. Mr. Grant was
born in Dufftown, Banffshire, Scotland, January 2nd, 1865, and came to
Canada in 1872. He was educated in the Ottawa Business College and the
Ottawa University. In 1882 Mr. Grant was invited to join the staff of
his uncle, the late William B. Grant, C.E., who was then Chief Engineer
of the Great Southern Railway in the Argentina Republic, and remained a
member of his staff for six years, during which time he was employed on
the construction of several hundred miles of railway. In 1887 there was
a severe depression in the public works in that republic and railway
construction came to a stop. Returning to Canada Mr. Grant was employed
on the construction of the Sydney extension of the Intercolonial Railway
until 1890. In July of that year he joined the staff of the late P. A.
Peterson, then Chief Engineer of the Canadian Pacific Railway, and
remained with him until July, 1893, when he accepted a position as
Division Engineer of Construction on the Palm Beach extension of the
Florida East Railway, and remained there until its completion in 1895,
when he joined the Construction Department of the Canadian Pacific
Railway, and was employed on the construction of the Crow’s Nest Pass
and other Western branch lines until 1905, when he joined the staff of
Mr. Hugh D. Lumsden, recently appointed Chief Engineer of the National
Transcontinental Railway Commission. He was appointed Assistant District
Engineer in May, 1906, Inspecting Engineer over the whole line in May,
1907, and on the resignation of Mr. Lumsden in July, 1909, was appointed
by the Government to the position of Chief Engineer and remained in that
position until the completion of the Railway, when he was, in January,
1917, appointed consulting Engineer to the Department of Railways and
Canals, and also had charge of the work of completing the Quebec &
Saguenay Railway from Quebec to Murray Bay, a very difficult piece of
railway construction. In December, 1906, Mr. Grant married Katherine
McCarthy, daughter of William McCarthy, Civil Engineer, and has two sons
and two daughters. Mr. Grant is a member of the Canadian Society of
Civil Engineers, a member of the American Railway Engineers’
Association; and a member of the Rideau, Royal Ottawa Golf and Rivermead
Golf Clubs. In religion Mr. Grant is a Catholic. His residence is 58
Sweetland Ave., Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rawlings, Henry Edward=, of 115 Crescent Street, Montreal, is a
prominent Fidelity and Surety Underwriter in Canada and in the U.S.A.,
and is the President and Managing Director of the Guarantee Company of
North America, the “pioneer company” in its particular field on this
continent. He was born in Montreal on September 25, 1875, the son of
Edward and Lucretia (Carter) Rawlings, and was educated at Lennoxville
Academy and in other institutions. His late father, Edward Rawlings, was
the founder of the Guarantee Company of North America in 1872, and the
son was brought up with a most complete knowledge of its business. He
went to the United States in 1897, and entered various branch offices of
the G.C.N.A. and its affiliated institution, the United States Guarantee
Company of New York. About 1905 he was appointed Vice-President of the
American Company and in 1909 returned to Montreal to assume executive
control of the parent institution, the Guarantee Company of North
America. At this time he took the title of Assistant-Manager and on the
demise of his father succeeded him in the positions, President and
Managing Director. He was also appointed to succeed the elder Rawlings
as a Director on the Board of the Montreal Telegraph Company. Mr.
Rawlings’ business duties, which are international in scope have
engrossed much of his time but he has published one important guide to
business corporations entitled “How to Prevent Defalcations.” When the
war broke out he entered the Home Guard as a full private and qualified
himself by military drill. His recreations are described as “motoring,
golf, and a little of everything else.” In religion he is an Anglican
and in politics a Conservative, and is a member of the following Clubs:
Mount Royal, St. James, Montreal, Montreal Hunt, Forest and Stream,
Royal Montreal Golf, Beaconsfield Golf, Indoor Tennis Club, Winter Club,
Automobile Club of Canada, St. Paul’s Lodge, A.F. & A.M. and the Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. Mr. Rawlings was married in
1907 to a daughter of Hon. James Bunting Snowball, Senator and former
Lieut.-Governor of New Brunswick, and one of the pioneer lumber
merchants of that Province. The union has been blessed with two
children, Margaret Snowball, and Henry Miller Fitzwilliam Rawlings.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hara, Frederick North= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born in that city on
April 28, 1856. Son of John and Charlotte A. (Phelps) Hara. Educated at
the Public Schools of St. Catharines and began his business career in
1874 as an office boy with S. Atkinson & Sons, Toronto. With said firm
he subsequently became book-keeper and in 1878 returned to St.
Catharines to accept a similar position with H. Patterson & Co. In 1884
he was promoted to the position of office and business manager and in
1893, when the firm name was changed to E. H. Phelps & Co., he purchased
a partnership interest in the business and continued to act as business
manager. In 1901, when the enterprise was re-organized and incorporated
as the Canada Wheel Works, Ltd., he became its President and General
Manager. In 1914 another change was effected when an amalgamation was
arranged with the Windsor Turned Goods Co., Ltd., and the new
corporation became known as the Canada Pole and Shaft Co., Ltd., of
which Mr. Hara was appointed and still is President. His other business
and industrial interests are extensive. He is President of the St.
Catharines Steel and Metal Company, Ltd.; Vice-President of the Marathon
Tire & Rubber Co., Ltd.; President of the United Gas Co., Ltd.; a
Director of Industrials, Ltd., St. Catharines; a Director of the Port
Arthur Wagon and Implements Co., Ltd.; and is also interested as a
shareholder in many other companies. During the recent war his business
energy was sought in connection with Red Cross and Patriotic Funds and
he became an ardent worker and supporter of them, and was a member of
the local executive in connection therewith. Though on many occasions
his fellow citizens have desired that he take public office, his only
experience of the kind was thirty years ago when he served two years as
a school trustee at Merritton. His recreations are motoring and golf,
and he is a Past President of the St. Catharines Club; Vice-President
(1918) of the St. Catharines Golf Club and a member of the Laurentian
Club, Ottawa. He is also a member of the A.F. & A.M., and is a Liberal
in politics. On June 5, 1905, he married Emma Catherine, daughter of Mr.
John Baillie.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hough, John Atwell= (Matheson, Ont.), Police Magistrate, was born in
Ireland in 1882, and received his early education in England and
Scotland, but migrated to Canada at an early age. He was appointed
Mining Recorder, Larder Lake Mining Division, with headquarters at
Larder Lake, Ont., in March, 1907; four years later, however, the
boundaries of the Division were enlarged and the head office moved to
Matheson, where he now resides. As Police Magistrate for the Town of
Matheson and part of the District of Temiskaming, Mr. Hough was placed
in charge of all relief work from Ramore to Porquis Junction, after the
great fire which devastated Northern Ontario on July 29, 1916, and many
stricken families have reason to be thankful for the energy and public
spirit with which he discharged this difficult task. John Hough is a
Conservative in politics and a member of the Masonic Order. By his wife,
Myrtle, daughter of M. Donaghue of Windsor, Ont., he has two children.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Fifield, Albert Frank= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born at Lowell,
Mass., on Feb. 8, 1876. Son of Frank and Abie Mary (Cummings) Fifield,
of Ashland, N.H. Educated at the Public Schools of New Hampshire and
commenced his business career operating a machine shop in Ashland, in
1896. This he continued until 1905, when he accepted a position as
Construction Superintendent of the Jenckes Machine Company, Quebec, and
has ever since been a resident of Canada. In 1907 he set up business at
St. Catharines and engaged in buying and selling machinery until 1910.
He established the Reo Sales Company for the sales of Reo motor cars in
Canada, and, during this period, organized and fully carried out a coast
to coast motor trip in a Reo car. This was the first trip of the kind
made in Canada and Mr. Fifield furnished the car and men. In 1914 he
organized and became the first General Manager of the Metal Drawing
Company, Ltd., of St. Catharines. In pursuance of his policy of building
up new industries in the city of his adoption, Mr. Fifield, when the
demand came for shells from the British War Office, sold out his other
interests and engaged in the manufacturing of munitions on a large scale
with great success. In fact, he was one of the most prominent figures in
this industry during the Great War. He also organized the American
Patriotic Fund among former residents of the United States living in St.
Catharines, part of whose revenues were subsequently diverted to the
associated charities of the city, of which he was for a time chairman
and is now a member of the executive. He also served as a member of the
Executive Committee of the Local Branch of the Canadian Patriotic Fund.
He is Independent in politics, a Protestant in religion and a member of
the A.F. & A.M. His recreations are motoring, angling and hunting and he
belongs to the following clubs: St. Catharines, Niagara (Niagara Falls,
N.Y.), Buffalo Motor, St. Catharines Golf, and St. Catharines Canoe. On
May 25, 1904, he married Velma Faunee, daughter of A. N. Linscott,
Damarscotta Mills, Maine, and has two daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wright, Harry George= (Hamilton, Ont.), Manufacturer, is the surviving
partner and President of the E. T. Wright Company, Ltd., Tinware,
founded in 1883, Mr. E. T. Wright having died in 1908, with whose
passing the firm suffered the loss of a man whose practical knowledge
and mechanical ability had done much to lay the foundations of the
present flourishing business. Mr. H. G. Wright is well known throughout
Canada, having represented the firm for many years on the road, where
the many friends made in his younger days still know him best as
“Harry.” Energetic and aggressive, he has always been the life of the
concern since its inception. Coming as he does of good Devonshire
fighting stock, it is not surprising to find that two of Mr. Wright’s
sons are taking an active part in the Great War. Captain George Craig
Wright, Vice-President of the firm, has just returned from the front,
having served from the first and being the first officer to enlist in
the Fourth Battalion of the City of Hamilton in 1914. He was the only
officer of that battalion left at the battles of Langemarcke and Ypres,
who was not either wounded, captured or killed. For efficient conduct he
was promoted to his present rank and, although home on furlough, is
acting as Brigade Major to the Sixth Brigade on the Niagara Peninsula.
Mr. Gordon Wright, the Treasurer, has received his commission as a
Lieutenant in the Thirteenth Royals. The subject of this sketch was born
at Bethany, Pa., December 11, 1855, the son of Thomas W. Wright, and
came to Hamilton five years later, where he received his education in
the Public School and Commercial College. In 1889 he married the
daughter of George Craig, of R. Hay & Company, Toronto, Ont., and has
five children—George Craig, Kate, H. Gordon, Phyllis and Jack Edwin.
Mr. Wright is a Liberal in politics and a Methodist in religion. His
recreations are golf and bowling, and he is a member of the following
clubs: Hamilton, Commercial, Royal Yacht and Victoria Curling, all of
Hamilton, and the Ontario, of Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, William Robert= (St. Catharines, Ont.), son of James J. and
Elizabeth Robertson. Was born at Hamilton, Ont., on June 28th, 1875,
where he received his education. Married September 17th, 1905, to Maud,
daughter of P. J. O’Neil, of Merritton, Ont., and has one son (William.)
Is the Superintendent of the Niagara, St. Catharines and Toronto
Railway, and a member of the Masonic Order, Engineer’s Club, Toronto,
and St. Catharines Club. Mr. Robertson has always been interested in
amateur sports and was manager of the St. Catharines Hockey Team
1908-13; President of the Niagara District Baseball League, 1910-14. He
has been identified with all patriotic movements and took a leading part
in raising funds for war purposes. He is Secretary-Treasurer of the
Soldiers’ Aid Commission; Secretary of St. Catharines Recruiting League
and was Military Representative on the Conscription Tribunal at St.
Catharines. Mr. Robertson holds the rank of Lieutenant in the Provincial
Corps Guides.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Innes, Hugh Patterson, K.C.=, Barrister-at-Law of Simcoe, Ont., is a
prominent figure in the politics of Western Ontario. He is a son of
William P. and Marion (Livingstone) Innes and was born at Dundas, Ont.
on Sept. 14th, 1870. His father is an eminent manufacturer and
capitalist who was one of the pioneers of the canning industry in this
country, and is now a Director of Dominion Canners, Limited. The subject
of this sketch was educated at the public and High schools of Simcoe,
Norfolk county, and studied for the legal profession at Osgoode Hall,
Toronto. He was called to the Bar of Ontario on graduation in 1893, and
has since practised at Simcoe, where he acts as Town solicitor and legal
adviser for the Molsons Bank, Dominion Canners, Ltd., and other
important institutions. He has also been a public and High school
trustee for the town and was made a King’s Counsel in 1908. In the
latter year he was the candidate of the Conservative party at the
general elections for the Ontario Legislature and was elected.
Subsequently he voluntarily resigned his seat to become the candidate of
his party for the House of Commons in the Federal riding of Norfolk and
was nominated in the spring of 1915, the date of the contest at that
time being uncertain. In the autumn of 1917, however, after Union
Government was formed it was necessary for Sir Robert Borden to ask
certain Conservative candidates to make the sacrifice of withdrawing
from the field in order to permit the election of prominent Liberals who
had given their support to Union Government. Mr. Innes was one of these
and his course in stepping aside assured the election of Hon. W. A.
Charlton as a Liberal-Unionist representative of Norfolk. Nevertheless
his election to the Commons at some future day may be regarded as a
certainty. Mr. Innes is a Presbyterian and a member of the following
lodges: Norfolk No. 10; A.F. & A.M. and Past Master Ezra Chapter, No.
23; Royal Arch Masons. On June 29th, 1898, he married Mabel M., daughter
of His Honor Judge Livingstone of Norfolk County and has eight children,
Margaret Livingstone; Hugh Paterson, Jr.; Robert T. L.; Helen M.;
Constance M.; Grace L.; James S.; and Edith V. Innes.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Williams-Taylor, Sir Frederick, LL.D.= (Montreal, Que.), General
Manager Bank of Montreal, is one of the outstanding figures in the
financial world of Canada. During his eight years as Manager of the
Bank’s London, England Branch, Sir Frederick was notably successful in
financing many Canadian municipal and corporate undertakings in that
market. Recently his abilities have been devoted to war-time financing
in Canada. On both sides of the Atlantic, therefore, he has had wide
experience in the flotation of high-class Canadian issues. In addition
to being expert in all financial matters, Sir Frederick is possessed of
marked personality and exceptional social charm. Born at Moncton, New
Brunswick, October 23, 1863, the son of Ezekiel Moore Taylor and
Rosalind Beatty. Sir Frederick entered the service of the Bank of
Montreal in 1878; since then he has been successively Assistant
Inspector, Head Office, 1897; Joint Manager, Chicago, 1903; Manager,
London, Eng., 1906, and General Manager, November, 1913. The
distinguished subject of this sketch was awarded a silver medal by the
Royal Society of Arts for his paper, “Canadian Loans in London,” before
the Royal Colonial Institute, 1912; was knighted, 1913, and received the
honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of New Brunswick,
1915. As a young man he won distinction in many forms of athletics,
including rowing, tennis, squash and snow-shoeing. Sir Frederick married
Jane Fayrer, daughter of Joshua Henshaw, Esq., Montreal, 1888, by whom
he has one son, Lieutenant Travers Williams-Taylor, 13th Hussars,
B.E.F., and one daughter, Mrs. Frank Duff Frazier, of 17 West 57th
Street, New York, N.Y., and “Uplands,” Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass. In
addition to being General Manager of the Bank of Montreal, Sir Frederick
is a Director of the Allan Steamship Company, Ltd., and the Liverpool
and London & Globe Insurance Company, Ltd.; Director and member
Executive Committee, Royal Trust Company, and Vice-President of the
Canadian Bankers’ Association. His clubs include Mount Royal, St. James
and University, Montreal, Que.; Rideau, Ottawa, Ont.; York, Toronto,
Ont.; Metropolitan and Down Town, New York, N.Y.; St. James, Bath, City
of London, Ranelagh and Swinley Forest Golf, all of London, Eng. Sir
Frederick resides at 686 Mountain Street, Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Law, Bonnar B.= (Yarmouth, N.S.), late member of Parliament for
Yarmouth County, N.S., was the son of William and Mary A. Law, of
Yarmouth, and was born in Douglas, Mass., U.S.A., July 29, 1855. After
graduating from the Yarmouth Public School, Mr. Law entered on a
commercial career and was one of the successful merchants in his home
town. For thirteen years he was a Director of the Exchange Bank of
Yarmouth, until its absorption by the Bank of Montreal, and for six and
a half years a town Councillor of Yarmouth. Mr. Law was a Director of
the Canadian Wood Working Co., of the Yarmouth Hospital Society and of
the Yarmouth Cemetery Co., as well as a trustee of the Yarmouth Public
Library and of the Yarmouth Y.M.C.A. Mr. Law lost his life in the
burning of the Parliament Buildings at Ottawa, February 3, 1916. He was
first elected to the House of Commons at a by-election, December 3,
1902, to fill the vacancy caused by the appointment of Mr. Thomas B.
Flint as Clerk of the House of Commons. The fact that the late member
for Yarmouth County was elected to the House of Commons at Ottawa for a
fourth term, with the largest majority ever given a candidate from that
Constituency, testified to the esteem in which he was held by those who
knew his worth. Mr. Law married Agnes M., daughter of Capt. Joseph B.
Lovett, and had an only child, Dorothy I. Law. He was a Methodist in
religion and a Liberal in politics.




[Illustration: SIR FRANK W. BAILLIE
Toronto]




=Hunnisett, James Edward= (Toronto, Ont.), Educationist, is the son of
Frank and Maria Hunnisett, and was born at Toronto, July 14, 1879. He
was educated at Givens Street Public School and Harbord Collegiate
Institute, Toronto, also at Hamilton Normal College, graduating in 1899.
He married Clarice Emley, daughter of Thomas Fussell, construction
contractor, in 1910, and has one daughter, Jean Eleanor, born in 1912.
Having obtained a scholarship from the Public School in Toronto that
gave him free tuition at the High School, Mr. Hunnisett had no
difficulty in realizing his natural bent for educational work, and was
appointed Assistant Master at Palmerston Ave. Public School, Toronto, in
1900. Since then he has been successively, Principal of Cottingham St.
School, Toronto, 1907-09; Clinton St. School, Toronto, 1909-14, and
Givens St. School, Toronto, 1914 to date. As member of a former
championship team in Interfaculty Association Football at Toronto
University, Mr. Hunnisett has always shown a consistent interest in
promoting athletic games at the Public Schools of his city, and was
President of the Toronto Public Schools Athletic Association in 1906.
Mr. Hunnisett is a Conservative in politics and a Methodist in religion.
His only fraternal connection is a life membership of St. Andrew’s
Masonic Lodge, G.R.C. 16. Mr. Hunnisett has always worked along the line
to make the Toronto Public School System second to none on the
continent.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Norcross, Joseph W.= (Montreal, Que.), is one of the chief factors in
the Canadian shipping industry, and though still in his forties has
built up a very important position for himself in the Canadian business
world. He was born at Port Colborne, Ont., on May 14th, 1871, the son of
Samuel R. and Susan (Deeks) Norcross. His father was engaged in Lake
transportation and the subject of this sketch after an education at Port
Colborne public school and Welland High School, himself entered the same
calling. As a mere boy from 1890 to 1892 he ran his own boat, S.S.
Varuna on the Bay of Quinte. As he grew older he gradually increased his
interests in connection with transportation on the Great Lakes; on
extensive amalgamations being effected in 1913, became Vice-President
and Managing Director of the Canada Steamships, Ltd., the most important
shipping corporation on Canadian Inland waters, which has much to do
with the handling of this country’s grain crop, and is also a dominant
factor in passenger traffic. In addition to the offices named he is
President of the Canadian Chadwick Metals Co., Ltd.; Vice President of
the Canada West Coast Navigation Co., Ltd. of British Columbia;
Vice-President of the Collingwood Shipbuilding Co., Ltd.; Director of
the Canadian Vickers, Ltd.; Director of the Sterling Bank of Canada; and
Director of the Cluff Ammunition Co., Ltd. During the late war the
Government availed itself of his expert talents by appointing him a
Director of ship construction in connection with the Naval Service
Department. In that capacity he rendered very valuable service to the
Canadian community and refused to accept remuneration therefor. He is
recognized by transportation men everywhere as one of the leading
shipping experts of this continent. He is widely known in all the cities
of the Great Lakes and a member of many clubs including the Albany and
National (Toronto); Travellers’ (London); Montreal and St. James
(Montreal); Mississauga Golf (Toronto); Cleveland Athletic Club;
Kaministiquia (Fort William); and Shunia (Port Arthur). He is also a
member of Montreal Board of Trade, the Toronto Board of Trade and the
Winnipeg Grain Exchange. He is a Protestant in religion and was married
on Jan. 2nd, 1895, to Jessie, daughter of John McCullough, Port
Colborne, Ont., by whom he has two daughters, Jessie Eileen and Helen J.
Norcross.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McCarthy, Jesse Overn= (Toronto, Ont.), Vice-President and General
Manager of the Security Life Insurance Co. of Canada, has been somewhat
prominently connected for twenty-five years with the life insurance
business of the Dominion and in the field of Social Welfare and Moral
Reform. Nearly thirty years ago he began giving addresses on Child
Welfare Problems and on different phases of Social Welfare work and
legislation, when to speak on these matters was like “a voice crying in
the wilderness,” and has seen the objects which he so strongly advocated
accomplished to a remarkable extent in legislative and practical effort
by the city and province alike. During that time he has given over two
thousand addresses before churches, Canadian Clubs and municipal
organizations. His entry into the municipal life of Toronto, first as
alderman and then as Controller, was due to the adverse conditions
prevailing at that time in the Isolation Hospital and his desire to see
a thoroughly up-to-date and efficient Health Department established.
Outside authorities and those familiar with the situation have stated
that he was able to strongly interest and influence the Council in all
health and social problems, so that splendid progress was made during
the time that he was connected with that body. A Methodist in religion
and a Liberal in politics, Mr. McCarthy served as Alderman of the City
of Toronto, 1910-1911, and as Controller, 1912-1914. He is a member of
the Board of Trade, the Sons of Temperance, the Royal Templars of
Temperance, the Canadian Order of Foresters, and the Protestant
Benevolent Society, as also of Parkdale Canoe and Lawn Bowling Clubs.
Mr. McCarthy is the son of Charles Calahan and Margaret Frances
McCarthy. He was born in Walpole Township, Haldimand County, Ont.,
November 10, 1867, and was educated in the Public Schools. He married
Mary, daughter of James Grant Davis, Jarvis, Ont., August 10, 1892, by
whom he has two daughters, Lilian Pearl and Mary Vourneen, and one son,
Jesse Davis.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Massey, Charles Vincent= (Toronto, Ont.), Lecturer in Modern History,
University of Toronto, and Dean of Residence, Victoria College, Toronto.
The son of Chester D. Massey, Honorary President of the Massey-Harris
Company, Ltd, and Anna (Vincent) Massey. Born in Toronto, on February
20, 1887. Educated at the University of Toronto (B.A. 1910) and Balliol
College, Oxford (2nd Cl. Mod. Hist. B.A. 1913, M.A. 1918). Married 1915,
Alice S., daughter of George R. Parkin, C.M.G., D.C.L., Secretary of the
Rhodes Scholarship Trust, Goring-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, England, by
whom he has two sons, Lionel, born July 2nd, 1916, and Hart, born March
30th, 1918. Mr. Massey is a Director of the Massey-Harris Co., and of
the Toronto Housing Co., a member of the Board of Governors, Toronto
General Hospital, and of the Art Museum, of Toronto, Vice-Chairman of
the Massey Foundation, a Governor of the Wesleyan College, Montreal, and
a Director of Ridley College, St. Catharines. He held a commission in
the University of Toronto contingent, C.O.T.C., 1914-1915, was appointed
to Headquarters Staff, Military District No. 2, November, 1915, to take
charge of musketry training, and was promoted temporary Lieut.-Col.
October, 1916. (Mentioned for services). He was appointed Secretary of
the War Committee of the Federal Cabinet, January, 1918, and Secretary
of the Dominion Government Repatriation Committee in December, 1918,
becoming in March, 1919, the Director of the Committee. He is a member
of the York, University, Toronto Golf and Arts and Letters Clubs, all of
Toronto, and of the Savile Club, London, England. A Liberal in politics,
and a Methodist in religion. Residence, Dean’s House, Victoria College,
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rowell, Hon. Newton Wesley, K.C., M.P.= (Ottawa, Ont.), is the son of
late Joseph and Nancy (Green) Rowell. Was born in London Township,
County of Middlesex, Ontario, on November 1, 1867, and was educated at
the local Public Schools and the Ontario Law School, Osgoode Hall. He
also holds the honorary degree of LL.D. from The North-Western
University, Chicago (1915). Called to the Bar in 1891 with honors and
medal, and created K.C. in 1902; has successfully practised his
profession in Toronto as head of the law firm of Rowell, Reid, Wood &
Wright, and has for many years been considered one of the leaders of the
Bar. He has been a Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada since
1911, is a Senator of Toronto University, and a Regent of Victoria
University and very prominently identified with the Methodist Church,
and with the Laymen’s Missionary Movement, and also with the Christian
Endeavor movement; formerly Vice-President of the Ontario Dominion
Alliance. He was an unsuccessful candidate for the House of Commons for
East York in 1900, and was first elected to the Ontario Legislature for
the riding of North Oxford in 1911 and re-elected in 1914. Was Leader of
the Liberal Opposition of the Ontario Legislature from 1911 to October,
1917, when he entered the Union Government at Ottawa, as President of
the Privy Council. Honorable Mr. Rowell has a magnetic personality and
is an exceptionally able platform speaker, and has a splendid grasp of
all national matters. He has lectured on “Canada’s Future” and other
national topics, and stands for the highest traditions of public life.
He is a man of untiring energy and a gift of rare eloquence and a genius
for public affairs. He has visited the Canadian soldiers in the trenches
and has brought back messages from the boys at the front which he has
delivered with much fervor. Honorable Mr. Rowell married, in June, 1901,
Nellie, youngest daughter of Rev. Alex. Langford, D.D., of Toronto, and
is the father of three children, William Langford, Mary Coyne and
Frederick Nealon Alexander. He is a member of the following clubs:
Rideau, York, National, Ontario, Rosedale Golf Club, Alpine Club of
Canada. He finds recreation in horseback riding and golf.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sauvé, Arthur, M.L.A.= (Saint Benoit, Deux Montagnes), is leader of the
Liberal-Conservative opposition to the government of Sir Lomer Gouin. As
such he advocates, particularly, the fostering of agriculture and its
allied industries, as also of those questions of social and political
economy which most affect his province at the present time. Born at St.
Hermas, Que., October 1, 1875, the son of Jos. Sauvé, the member for Two
Mountains was educated at St. Therese College and married the daughter
of L. de J. Lachaine, Notary Public. His children are Mercedes, Paul,
Gustave and Pauline Sauvé. He is a Journalist by profession, a member of
the Club Canadien, and the Club Morin, and a Roman Catholic in religion.
Mr. Sauvé was elected a Member of the Legislative Assembly of the
Province of Quebec for the Constituency of Two Mountains, in 1908, by a
majority of 174, and in 1912 by a majority of 276. In the elections of
1916 he was returned by acclamation and chosen as Leader of the
Liberal-Conservative party in the Province.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Machin, Lieut.-Col. Harold Arthur Clement, M.P.P.=, who represents the
riding of Kenora in the Ontario Legislature, is one of the ablest and
most aggressive members of that body, and has also had a distinguished
military career in connection with the late war. Although born at
Rochester, N.Y., on May 9, 1875, he is of English descent, the son of
Rev. Canon C. J. Machin and Emma M. L. Machin, both of whom were born in
the Motherland. Col. Machin as a child lived in St. John’s,
Newfoundland, and later in Port Arthur, Ontario, in both of which cities
his father served as an Anglican rector. In 1885 he was sent to England
to be educated at The School House, Beaconsfield, Bucks county. He
returned to Canada in 1893, and to Rat Portage, now Kenora; that town,
despite many prolonged absences, has ever since been his home. He
qualified for the law at Osgoode Hall, Toronto, and, after being called
to the bar, practised in Kenora, and soon became widely known through
that region of far western Ontario. Identifying himself with the
Conservative party, he was first elected to the Legislature in 1908, and
subsequently returned at the general elections of 1911 and 1914. From
early manhood he showed military enthusiasm, and went to South Africa in
1899 as a private in the 1st Canadian contingent under Col. (now Sir
William) Otter. He served as private and n.c.o. until 1901, when he was
given a commission in the South African Constabulary. In 1904 he retired
with the rank of Captain, and returned to Canada, after which he spent
the open seasons of the three successive years in prospecting for
minerals in the Chibogomo and Mistissini districts of Northern Quebec.
When the great war broke out, the old spirit of patriotism and adventure
came over him again, and in 1915 he raised and became the O.C. of the
94th Battalion, with headquarters at Port Arthur. He went overseas with
his Battalion in 1916, and shortly after his arrival in England was
directed to raise and command the Canadian Labor Battalion for service
in France. He went to the fighting area with this battalion, and served
six months at the advanced base and with the 4th British Army between
Peronne and St. Quentin. In 1917, he returned to Canada on leave, and
was retained for duty as a member of the Military Service Council,
established in connection with the Military Service Act. On the
completion of the work of the Military Service Council in 1918, Col.
Machin became Director of the Military Service Branch of the Department
of Justice, under arrangement with the Department of Militia and
Defence. Both as a legislator and a judicial officer, Col. Machin has
shown a fearlessness and ability in the expression of opinion that have
commended him to persons of independent mind, even when in disagreement
with him. He was one of the few men in the Ontario Legislature with the
moral courage to assail the defects of the Ontario Temperance Act,
though it was fathered by the government of which he is the elected
supporter. His strong utterances against a bigoted attitude toward the
French Canadians of Quebec and Roman Catholics in general, coming from a
Protestant of English descent and education, have also been widely
commended. On December 24, 1918, he was the recipient of an address and
silver rose bowl from the officials who served with him and under him as
Director of Military Service in the Department of Justice at Ottawa.
Their sentiments were voiced by Crown Attorney J. A. Ritchie, who
referred to him as their “guide, counsellor and friend.” He is a capital
speaker, and in the Ontario Legislature his speeches are always hailed
with interest. He is an adherent of the Church of England, and a member
of the Toronto Club, Albany Club, Toronto Military Institute, and the
Canadian Mining Institute. He is also a Fellow of the Royal Geographical
Society of England. On December 8, 1902, he married Miss Ida F. Knight,
of Horner Grange, West Hill, Sydenham, England, and has two daughters,
Ida A. K., born Bloemfontein, South Africa, December 7, 1903, and
Barbara K., born Kenora, Ont., January 7, 1914. Though of late years his
duties have carried Col. Machin far afield, his permanent residence is
at Kenora, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Senecal, Francis Albert= (Plantagenet, Prescott County, Ont.), County
Clerk, is the son of Gedeon Senecal and Rose de Lima Blondin. He was
born at Lefaivre, Ont., January 23, 1882, and received his education at
Plantagenet School and Bourget College, Rigaud, and McDonald
Agricultural College, Ste. Anne de Bellevue. Mr. Senecal has acted as
Reeve of Plantagenet Township and was elected Warden of the County in
1914, County Clerk in 1915, and County Road Superintendent in 1916. He
is the Secretary of the Liberal Association in his riding and is the
owner of “Mountain Side View Farm,” where he specialized in Ayrshire
cattle. In 1906 he married Marie Louise, daughter of J. Bte. Lafrosse,
of Alfred, Ont., and has five children—Alexandrine, Marie Jeanne,
Madeline, Blaise and Jean Paul. He is a Roman Catholic and a member of
the I.O.F., C.O.F., St. Joseph and Artisans Canadien Français Societies.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Taylor, Albert William, J.P.= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born in
Toronto on October 10, 1873, and is the son of the late W. D. and
Charlotte (Lee) Taylor. His ancestry is Scotch. Educated at the Toronto
Model School, Jarvis St. Collegiate Institute, Toronto, and Ridley
College, St. Catharines. He commenced his business career as office boy
with the wholesale grocery firm of Sloan & Crowther, Toronto, in 1890,
and was with them for five years, becoming a clerk and then a commercial
traveller. In 1895 he became an Accountant with the firm of J. Marshing
& Co., New York, and in 1900 became European representative of the Crown
Silver Plate Co., London, England. In 1901 he returned to Canada and
became a member of the firm of Mara & Taylor, stock brokers, Toronto. In
1910 he went to St. Catharines to take his present position as Auditor
of the Welland Vale Manufacturing Co., Ltd., manufacturers of hand
agricultural tools, special forgings and edge tools. He is also Director
and Treasurer of the Metal Drawing Co., Ltd., and Director and Secretary
of the St. Catharines Realty and Building Co., Ltd. He is a Justice of
the Peace for the County of Lincoln, a Director of Ridley College and a
Trustee of the St. Catharines Tuberculosis Hospital. His recreations are
golf, angling and shooting and he is a member of the St. Catharines
Club; the St. Catharines Golf Club, Niagara Club (N.Y.), Albany and
Royal Canadian Yacht Clubs, Toronto; the Tourilli Fish and Game Club,
Quebec, and the Big Creek Shooting Club, Toronto. He is a member of the
A.F. & A.M., a Conservative and an Anglican. On January 5, 1904, he
married Jessie, daughter of Mr. J. L. Fenton, Decatur, Ill.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dalton, Hon. Charles, M.P.P.=, Minister without portfolio in the
government of Prince Edward Island, resides at Tignish in that province.
He was born at Tignish, P.E.I., on June 9, 1850, the son of Patrick and
Margaret (McCarthy) Dalton, and was educated in the public schools. His
father was a farmer, and the son has been especially identified with the
raising of black foxes for the fur trade. He engaged in this business
upwards of twenty years ago in a legitimate way, before it became a
field for reckless speculators, and has bred some of the most valuable
foxes in the world. He is President of the Charles Dalton Silver Black
Fox Company, Ltd., one of the pioneer companies in this industry. He
first entered politics 1900, when he was an unsuccessful candidate for
the Prince Edward Island Legislature. Subsequently, in 1912, he was
elected for Prince constituency, and became a member without portfolio
in the Mathieson ministry, since which he has spent a considerable part
of his time at the capital, Charlottetown. Hon. Mr. Dalton is one of the
leading capitalists and philanthropists of his province. He gave a
donation of $60,000 for the erection of a tuberculosis sanitarium at
North Wiltshire, P.E.I., and also a benefaction of $55,000 to St.
Dunstan’s University, P.E.I. Another of his public gifts was that of the
Donald Ambulance, which he equipped for the Canadian Red Cross for use
at the front during the late war. He is a Roman Catholic in religion,
and has been honored with a papal knighthood by His Holiness, Pope
Benedict XV. In politics he is a Conservative, and is a member of the
Knights of Columbus and of the Ancient Order of Hibernians. On June 30,
1874, he married Annie, daughter of Michael and Mary (O’Neil) Gavin, of
Tignish, and has seven children, C. Howard, Joseph Gerald, Winnifred,
Nora, Zita, Edith, and Irene.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Perley, Sir George Halsey= (Ottawa, Ont.), Acting High Commissioner for
Canada in England, and Overseas Minister of Militia and Defense in the
Cabinet of Sir R. L. Borden, Premier of Canada, is the son of the late
W. G. Perley, who represented Ottawa in the House of Commons from 1887
to 1890, and was senior member of the well-known lumber firm of Perley &
Pattee. Sir George Perley was born at Lebanon, N.H., in 1857, but coming
to Ottawa in early youth, received his primary education at the old
Grammar School of that city, and later attended Harvard University, from
which he graduated in 1878 with the degree of B.A. In 1900 the present
Cabinet Minister contested the County of Russell unsuccessfully, and was
also unsuccessful in a by-election for the County of Argenteuil, held in
1902. Perseverence, however, and the ability which marked these
campaigns led to his return for the latter County at the General
Elections of 1904, since when he has been twice re-elected in 1908 and
1911. On the re-organization of the Conservative Party Executive, during
its last session in Opposition, Sir George Perley was chosen as Chief
Whip, in which capacity he showed such tact and ability as Mr. Borden’s
Chief Lieutenant, and also in directing the organization for the Ottawa
Valley District during the Reciprocity Campaign, that the latter, on his
accession to power, appointed him a Minister Without Portfolio. After
the death at an advanced age of Lord Strathcona and Mount Royal in 1913,
Mr. Perley was sent to England to replace him, with the title of Acting
High Commissioner for the Dominion of Canada, a position which he has
since filled with such distinction as to earn for him the honor of
Knighthood. In the re-organization of the Department of Militia and
Defense, following the resignation of Sir Sam Hughes, Sir George became
the first Overseas Minister of that Department. He has been for years a
Director and Vice-President of a number of large lumber companies, and
is a Director of the Bank of Ottawa. Nowhere, however, has his executive
ability been more strikingly displayed than in his discharge of the
duties of Chairman of the Relief Committee in connection with the
disastrous fire of 1900 that devastated the cities of Ottawa and Hull.
Sir George Perley married Annie Hespeler Bowlby, daughter of the late W.
H. Bowlby, K.C., Kitchener, Ont., in 1884 (deceased, August, 1910);
secondly, Emily Colby White, daughter of the late Hon. Thomas White,
June 11, 1913.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mather, James=, is one of Ottawa’s oldest, best known, and most
accomplished architects, whose handiwork and skill is seen in almost
every section of Ottawa—in the fine residential, office, department,
business, and public buildings. Mr. Mather is a Director of Beechwood
Cemetery; Director, Pritchard & Andrews Co., Ltd., Ottawa. He was born
at Montrose, Scotland, December 9, 1843, and is the son of James and
Jane (Low) Mather. He received his education in the Bowman Academy,
Scotland. In 1872, Mr. Mather came to Canada, since which time he has
practised his profession in Ottawa. He married Margaret Piper, and has
one daughter. He is a member of the A.F. & A.M.; is independent in
politics; has his office at 110 Wellington Street; and resides at 328
Chapel Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Barrow, Hon. Edward Dodsley, M.P.P.=, Minister of Agriculture for the
Province of British Columbia, is one of those Canadians of English birth
who have risen to high position in their adopted country. He was born at
Ringwood, Hants, England, in 1867, the son of Stephen and Sarah (Barnes)
Barrow. His father was a farmer, and the subject of this sketch was
educated at the public schools of his native place. Coming to this
country, he settled at Chilliwack, B.C., and successfully engaged in
farming. He became widely known in his district, and at the general
elections for the legislature in 1916 he was induced to contest
Chilliwack as a Liberal candidate, and was elected. In 1918, Hon. John
Oliver, the present Prime Minister of British Columbia, on accepting
that office, relinquished the ministry of Agriculture, and asked Mr.
Barrow to enter his cabinet as administrator of that portfolio. Mr.
Barrow accepted, and his conduct of the office has brought much
satisfaction to the agricultural interests throughout the province. He
is a protestant in religion, a Liberal in politics, and a member of
Ionic Lodge, No. 19, A.F. & A.M. His favorite recreations are hunting
and fishing. In 1891, he married Millicent E., daughter of Thomas R.
Knight, contracting builder, of Wickham, Hants, England, and has two
daughters, Dorothy M. and Hilda G. Barrow. Though compelled by his
duties to spend much of his time at Victoria, B.C., Mr. Barrow’s home is
still at Chilliwack.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Corrigan, Ambrose Eugene=, is the Managing Director of the Capital Life
Assurance Company, which he organized in 1912, and which, under his able
management, has made rapid advancement in the life assurance business in
Canada, and is now recognized as one of the best and most economically
conducted companies in the Dominion. In 1913, Mr. Corrigan organized the
Capital Trust Corporation, and, in 1914, he organized the Anglo-Colonial
Bureau, London, England. All of these enterprises were organized on a
remarkably firm basis and with much skill, and their success from the
start has more than met with the most sanguine expectation. All of them
are to-day in a flourishing condition, and are growing in both strength
and prestige as they grow older. In that part of western Ontario, now
known as Mount Forest, in the vicinity of Nottawasaga Bay and Lake
Huron, when prairie and forest lands and the adjacent water stretches
were the only attractions, there being no signs of habitation, and no
evidence that, in the near future, even a small settlement would be
established, in 1830, Mr. James Corrigan, the grandfather of the subject
of this sketch, arriving from Ireland, settled, and became the first
settler in that vicinity. With indomitable pluck and spirit
characteristic of his ancestors, he set to work to cultivate the soil,
to build up a home. The next settlers to arrive were the Martins, the
ancestors of Premier Martin of Saskatchewan, and then came others and
others, and more and more land was tilled and houses built until Mount
Forest became a flourishing agricultural and business centre. But it was
James Corrigan who set the ball rolling, and sounded the clarion call to
the others to follow. It was in Mount Forest, May 28, 1881, that Mr.
Ambrose Eugene Corrigan was born, and at the public and high schools
there received his first tuition, which was enlarged at the O.A.C.,
Guelph, Toronto University, and the Ontario Normal School, Hamilton,
Ont. Starting out at the early age of 23 years, Mr. Corrigan, in 1904,
became the teacher of mathematics in the Elora High School. In 1905, he
became attached as a teacher to the Renfrew Collegiate Institute, and,
in 1906, we find him in full harness on the teaching staff of the Ottawa
Collegiate Institute. From 1907 to 1911, Mr. Corrigan was manager of the
Eastern Ontario Branch of the Confederation Life Assurance Company. Mr.
Ambrose Eugene Corrigan is the son of Michael and Ellen (Murphy)
Corrigan. In 1909, he married Rosemary Lunny, daughter of James Lunny,
of Smith’s Falls, Ontario. Five children—three boys and two girls—have
blessed the union. Mr. Corrigan is a Director of the Newman Club,
Toronto, of the Anglo-Colonial Bureau, London, England, and
Vice-President of the Capital Trust Corporation. He is a member of the
Laurentian and the Rivermead Golf Clubs, and of the Knights of Columbus.
Golf is Mr. Corrigan’s favorite recreation. In religion he is a Roman
Catholic. His business office is at 14 Metcalfe Street, and his
residence 301 Laurier Avenue East, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Daniels, Hon. Orlando T.= (Halifax, N.S.), son of Wellington Daniels
and Lavinia Daniels. Born March 20, 1860, at Laurencetown, Annapolis
County, N.S. Educated at Laurencetown Public Schools, University of
Acadia College, Wolfville, King’s County, N.S. Married on November 29,
1893, to Mary L. Muir, and is the father of one daughter, Ethel M.
Daniels. Barrister-at-law. First elected to Legislative Assembly at a
by-election on March 6, 1906, for Annapolis County. Re-elected at the
general elections, June 20, 1906, and at the general elections in 1911.
Appointed a member of the Executive Council of Nova Scotia without
portfolio, March 16, 1907. Appointed Attorney-General to succeed Hon.
Alex. Maclean; resigned to accept nomination for the House of Commons,
October 10, 1911. He was re-elected in 1917. He is a member of the
Church of England, and a Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Faulkner, Hon. George Everett= (Halifax, N.S.), son of Thomas and
Arabella Faulkner (North of Ireland ancestry). Born January 31, 1855, at
Glenholme, Colchester, N.S. Educated at Glenholme and Pictou Academy.
Married on October 23, 1883, to Laura Guille Denison, daughter of
William Denison, M.D., and is the father of two daughters. He is senior
member of Faulkner & Company, insurance and financial agents, Halifax;
President of The Maritime Trust Corporation; President of The Nova
Scotia Furnishing Co., Ltd.; Director Eastern Canada Savings and Loan
Co.; Director Maritime Telegraph & Telephone Co., Ltd., and other
corporations. Member Nova Scotia Legislature for Halifax, June, 1906;
re-elected, 1911; elected Speaker of Legislative Assembly, February,
1910; re-elected, 1916; appointed to Executive Council for Nova Scotia
without portfolio, June 28, 1911. President Halifax Board of Trade,
1908; appointed to the Board of School Commissioners for the City of
Halifax by the Government of Nova Scotia, 1895. Chairman, Board of
School Commissioners, 1898. Alderman, Halifax, 1896-1901, serving as
Chairman, Financial Committee, and on other important committees. A
Governor, Halifax Ladies’ College; a Governor, School for the Deaf. He
is a Presbyterian in religion, and a Liberal. He belongs to the
following clubs: Canadian (President, 1911), City.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sloan, Hon. William, M.P.P.=, Minister of Mines for the Province of
British Columbia, is also one of the best known capitalists and public
men of the Pacific Coast. He was born in Wingham, Huron County, Ontario,
on September 10, 1867, the son of Dr. R. J. and Elizabeth (McMichael)
Sloan, and was educated in the public schools and at the Collegiate
Institute, Seaforth, Ont. While he was still a boy, his father removed
to Shanghai, China, where the elder Sloan still resides. After two years
in the Orient, the subject of this sketch returned to Canada, locating
in Victoria, British Columbia, in 1887, and later residing at Vancouver
and at Nanaimo, B.C. The mining possibilities of the region soon claimed
his attention, and he was one of the discoverers of the Eldorado Creek
placer gold deposits in the Yukon territory in the later nineties. His
enterprise in that country laid the foundations of a substantial
fortune, and on his return to Victoria, he became Liberal candidate for
the House of Commons for Vancouver Island at the general elections of
1900. He was re-elected both in 1904 and 1908, and became one of the
most popular figures in Ottawa during that period. Shortly after his
election in 1908, he resigned his seat in order that the late Hon.
William Templeman, who had been Appointed Minister of Inland Revenue,
might be elected as his successor. For eight years Hon. Mr. Sloan
remained in retirement, so far as politics were concerned; but in the
political upheaval of 1916 he consented to join forces with those who
were anxious to reform the administration of his province, and was
elected to the British Columbia Legislature for Nanaimo at the general
elections of September 14, 1916. On the formation of a new government,
he was offered, and accepted, the portfolio of Minister of Mines, and
was sworn in on November 29, 1916. His administration has been noted for
progressive business management, and the expert knowledge he is able to
bring to his task. He is married, and has one son, Gordon Sloan. He is a
member of the Vancouver, Union (Victoria), and Rideau (Ottawa) Clubs,
and his favorite recreations are hunting and fishing. In politics he is
a Liberal, and in religion a Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lennox, Lieut.-Col. Thomas Herbert, K.C., M.L.A.= (Aurora, Ont.), son
of Thos. and Margaret Lennox, both Irish. Born on April 7th, 1869, at
the Township of Innisfil, County of Simcoe. Educated at the Barrie
Public Schools and Collegiate Institute and Osgoode Hall, Toronto. Was a
member of the Town Council of Aurora for three years and of the Aurora
School Board for six years. Was first elected to the Ontario Legislature
as the member for North York at the general elections in 1905. For years
North York was the stronghold of the Liberal Party and its final
redemption by Lieut.-Col. Lennox gave him an unique place in public
favor and a strong position in Provincial Politics. He was re-elected at
the general election in 1908, 1911 and 1914, and is to-day the most
popular man in the riding. A few years ago the member for North York
originated the “Lennox Picnic” which has been declared to be the biggest
affair of its kind in the world. Up at Jackson’s Point on the beautiful
shores of Lake Simcoe, his constituents and friends hold their annual
gathering of thirty thousand people. Each year the attendance grows
bigger and the people throng to it from all parts and it is now
recognized as being the most popular out-of-door festival of the year.
Lieut.-Col. Lennox has always taken a keen interest in sports of all
kinds, particularly lacrosse, and played the game himself. He was
elected President of the Canadian Lacrosse Association, following which
he was elected President of The Presidents’ Association. As a sound
lawyer and an able counsel, Lieut.-Col. Lennox enjoys a large and
lucrative practice, being solicitor for the County of York, and several
corporations. He is a Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada and a
King’s Counsellor. On the outbreak of the war, having had previous
Military experience as Lieutenant of the Twelfth York Rangers and later
a Squadron Commander of the Governor-General’s Body Guard, and
subsequently as Major of an Irish regiment known as the 110th,
authorized by the Minister of Militia, he undertook the raising of an
Irish Canadian Battalion. The onerous work of recruiting began on the
17th day of March, 1915, and no finer body of men ever rallied to the
colors in so short a time. Men flocked to the standard of the popular
member for North York, and the battalion, which was known as the 208th
or “The Irish Fusiliers,” was accompanied overseas by Lieut.-Col.
Lennox, where they gave a splendid account of themselves. This battalion
had one of the finest brass and bugle bands in the Canadian forces and
also the fully equipped Brian Boru Irish War Pipe Band, the first of its
kind in Canada, made possible by the splendid generosity of Mrs. Ambrose
J. Small, of Toronto. Lieut.-Col. Lennox was married on June 5th, 1894,
to Louise, daughter of Edward Meeking, of Barrie, and has one son,
Herbert Sidney Lennox. He is a member of the following Clubs and
Societies: Albany, Military Institute; Masonic Order; Sons of England;
Orange Order; Foresters; Odd Fellows and The Workmen. In religion he is
an Anglican. Honorable Mr. Justice Lennox, of the Supreme Court of
Ontario, is a cousin of the member for North York. Lieut.-Col. Lennox
enjoys a very wide popularity among his fellow legislators, and his
constituents in North York. He makes friends everywhere and retains them
by his personal magnetism. He is recognized as one of the best types of
Canadian manhood, and has spared neither time nor energy to always
inculcate a strong National sentiment.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Veniot, Hon. Peter John= (Bathurst, N.B.), born October 4, 1863, at
Richibucto, N.B. Son of Captain Stephen Veniot and Mary Morell, his
wife, both French. Educated at Pictou Academy, Pictou, N.S., from which
he graduated in 1882. Married on February 8, 1885, to Cathelene
Melanson, daughter of Raphael Melanson, of parish of Shediac, N.B., and
is the father of six children: Dr. C. L. Veniot, married to Mary Leger;
A. S. Veniot, C.F., married to Jane Gautrear; Dr. J. L. Veniot, dentist;
Lieut. W. L. Veniot, who went overseas with the 132nd Battalion, married
to Mina Cote; Lieut. P. J. Veniot, Jr., formerly of the famous 26th
Battalion; and Francis P. Veniot, attending college. Member of the New
Brunswick Legislature from 1894-1900. Collector of Customs from
1900-1911. Elected a member for the constituency of Gloucester at the
general elections in 1917, and taken into the Foster cabinet, on its
formation, as Minister of Public Works for the province, and re-elected
at by-election on April 23, 1917. He is a Roman Catholic in religion,
and a Liberal. He is a member of the Catholic Mutual Benefit
Association, Knights of Columbus, Assumption, and Artisans. His
principal recreations are curling and boating.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Winkler, Hon. Valentine, M.P.P.=, Minister of Agriculture for Manitoba,
is a public man who has been largely identified with the progress and
growth of that province. He was born at Neustadt, Grey County, Ont., on
March 18, 1864, the son of David and Barbara J. (Lang) Winkler. He was
educated at the public schools of his native village, and as a very
young man went to Manitoba in the days of its early development,
settling at Morden, where he became a farmer, and also engaged
extensively in the lumber business. His friends and neighbours induced
him to enter politics at an early age, and he entered the municipal
office, serving as reeve of Stanley. In 1892, the late Hon. Thomas
Greenway, for some years Premier of Manitoba, induced him to run for the
riding of Rhineland, now called Morden and Rhineland, as a Liberal, and
he was elected. He was re-elected at the general elections of 1896 and
also at those of 1899, though the latter contest resulted in the defeat
of his party in many constituencies. In 1900, he was induced by Sir
Clifford Sifton, then the Western leader in the Laurier administration,
to resign his seat in the Legislature, and contest the riding of Lisgar
for the House of Commons at the Federal elections of that year. In this
contest he was unsuccessful, but was immediately re-nominated for the
Legislature in his old constituency of Rhineland, and was returned at a
by-election on November 19, 1900, and has ever since continued to hold
that seat, despite the fact that from 1899 until 1915 his party
continued in opposition. The general elections of the latter year
brought the Liberals back to power, and one of the first acts of the new
Premier, Hon. Mr. Norris, was to send for Mr. Winkler and offer him the
portfolio of Agriculture in his government. Mr. Winkler accepted, and as
an administrator has shown himself thoroughly in touch with all
progressive movements for the benefit of the farming industry. He is
widely popular with both parties in the Legislature, of which he is the
oldest member in point of service. On March 31, 1886, he married
Josephine, daughter of M. B. Rombough, Dominion Land Surveyor, and has
four children, Howard W., Hazel F., Ruth W., and Josephine R. Winkler.
His address is the Parliament Buildings, Winnipeg, Manitoba.




[Illustration: MARSHAL VAUGHAN
Welland, Ontario]




=Champagne, Napoleon.= Controller Napoleon Champagne, barrister, many
years ago, became well known to the citizens of Ottawa. Well educated,
talented, aggressive, ambitious and persistent, he has year after year
kept himself in the public eye, and has been, and deservedly so,
accorded public recognition. On several occasions he was selected by the
Conservatives of Ottawa as their candidate for political honors in the
Federal Parliament, and on each occasion he made a gallant fight to
achieve success. When, in the early part of 1918, the famous Blue Devils
of France, those brave fellows who made themselves famous in many
battles during the terrible world war by their dare-devil conduct,
reached Ottawa, Controller Champagne was selected to receive and welcome
them. His address of welcome was one of the finest gems of oratory heard
during the war. Mr. Champagne is the son of Seraphin Champagne, grocer,
and Melina Duchene. His brother, Albert Champagne, is the member for
North Battleford, Saskatchewan, in the House of Commons. He was born in
Ottawa, May 4, 1861, and was educated in the Christian Brothers School.
He has been a frequent contributor to both English and French newspapers
and French magazines. In civic life, Controller Champagne has had a
phenomenal career. He has served in the City Council as alderman for the
years 1892-3-4-5-6-9, 1900-1-2-3-4-5-6-7, fourteen years, and as
Controller for the years 1908-9-10-11-14-15-16-17-18-19, ten years.
During the latter part of 1908, Controller Champagne, owing to the
resignation of Mayor Scott to accept a position on the Dominion Railway
Commission, became acting mayor, and held the office with much dignity.
Since Controller Champagne first entered into civic life as one of the
city’s representatives, he has rendered effective service on the
following committees: Fire and Light, Waterworks, Board of Health,
By-Laws, Printing, Library, and Finance, of which he was chairman for
several years. He was also a member of the following special committees:
Conduit, City Charter, Street Lighting, and Water Power. Controller
Champagne is a member of the Union St. Joseph Society and the Artisans
Canadiens Français. Mr. Champagne is a brilliant and successful lawyer,
and has distinguished himself in several important law cases,
particularly in two murder cases, in which his handling of the witnesses
and his ability in cross-examination created quite a stir, and placed
him in the front ranks of the legal profession in Ottawa. He practises
law in both provinces—Ontario and Quebec—and has a large clientele in
each. In 1911, Mr. Champagne was elected to the Ontario Legislature. He
was slated for, and had he not been defeated at the election of 1914,
would have become a member of the Provincial Government. He never
married. In religion he is a Roman Catholic, and in politics a
Conservative. His law office is at 30 Rideau Street, and he resides at
184 Osgoode Street, Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sifton, Hon. Arthur Lewis, M.A., LL.B., D.C.L., K.C.=, was born in St.
John’s County, Middlesex, Ontario (about six miles from London,
Ontario), October 26, 1858, of Irish descent. He is the son of the late
Hon. John W. Sifton, formerly Speaker of the Manitoba Assembly, who, in
1875, with his family left Ontario for Manitoba, where he executed a
number of public contracts and conducted an extensive wheat farm near
Brandon, and Kate Sifton, and a brother of Hon. Sir Clifford Sifton,
ex-Minister of Interior and Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs in
the Laurier Cabinet. Mr. Sifton was educated in various public schools,
in Wesley College, Winnipeg, Manitoba, and in Victoria University,
Cobourg, Ontario. In 1880 he was awarded his B.A., and in 1888 his M.A.
and LL.B. degrees. In 1880, Mr. Sifton began the study of law in
Winnipeg, and was admitted to the bar of Manitoba in 1883. In 1882 he
was elected a member of the first municipal council, and, the following
year, in 1883, commenced his legal practice in Brandon, Manitoba. He
remained in Brandon until 1885 when he removed to Prince Albert,
Saskatchewan, where for a few years he continued his practice, and then
removed to Calgary, Alberta, in 1889. In 1898, Mr. Sifton was elected to
the North-West Assembly. In 1901 he was created a K.C. In the same year,
having been re-elected a member of the North-West Assembly, Mr. Sifton
became Treasurer and Commissioner of Public Works in the Haultain
Administration. In January, 1903, he resigned his portfolio to accept
the position of Chief Justice of the Superior Court of the North-West
Territories. In 1905, when the new provinces—Saskatchewan and
Alberta—were established, Mr. Sifton was appointed Chief Justice of the
Superior Court of the Province of Alberta. May 26, 1910, when the
Rutherford government resigned, Mr. Sifton also resigned his position as
Chief Justice to accept the call of the Lieutenant-Governor of the
Province to form a new Provincial Government, and was sworn in as Prime
Minister. He also assumed the portfolios of President of the Executive
Council, Provincial Treasurer, and Minister of Public Works. In 1911,
Mr. Sifton attended the coronation of their Majesties King George and
Queen Mary, and, in June of that year, was presented to King George at
St. James’ Palace. December, 1911, in addition to the other Cabinet
portfolios which he held, Mr. Sifton was appointed Minister of Railways
and Telephones. February 29, 1912, he was appointed a member of the
Commission of Conservation as one of the representatives from the
Province of Alberta. At the Provincial election in 1913, he was
re-elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta for Vermilion. In
1917, when, owing to the serious circumstances that had arisen in Canada
and throughout the world resulting from the effects and requirements of
the terrible world war that was then raging it was found necessary to
cut out political party differences, and to have, politically and
otherwise, a united Canada in the conduct of Dominion political,
commercial, financial, and all public and private affairs, Mr. Sifton
consented to join Sir Robert Borden, the Prime Minister, in the
formation of a Union Government, and resigning his office as Prime
Minister of the Province of Alberta, was sworn in as Minister of Customs
in the Dominion Cabinet, which position he still holds. In 1918, Mr.
Sifton accompanied Sir Robert Borden to the Peace Conference at Paris
and Versailles, as one of the Canadian delegates to that memorable
assembly in whose hands was placed arrangements and terms for the
present and future peace of the world; and it is noteworthy to state
that while there he rendered distinguished services by his advice and
otherwise in the preparation and final agreement of terms that were
placed before the Teutonic nations to accept and sign. On Sept. 20,
1882, Mr. Sifton married Mary H. Deering, daughter of William Deering,
of Cobourg, Ontario. He has two children—one girl and one boy—Nellie
Louise and Lewis Raymond. He is a member of the following clubs:
Ranchmen’s, Calgary; Edmonton, Edmonton; and the Rideau and County,
Ottawa. In politics, Mr. Sifton was formerly a Liberal, but is now a
Unionist, and in religion a Methodist. His office is in Connaught Block,
Sussex Street, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Proudfoot, William, K.C., M.P.P.=, for Centre Huron and Leader of the
Opposition in the Ontario Legislature, is a barrister practising both at
Toronto and at Goderich, Ont. He was born in Colborne Township, Huron
County, on February 1st, 1859, the son of Robert and Margaret
(Darlington) Proudfoot. His mother came from Wicklow, Ireland, and his
father, a native of Perthshire, Scotland, was one of the family which
won considerable distinction in Ontario. One of his brothers was
Vice-Chancellor of Ontario, and another was Rev. Dr. Proudfoot, a leader
of religious thought. The subject of this sketch was educated in the
Public and High Schools of Goderich, Ont.; and qualified for the law as
a student in the office of James (afterward Mr. Justice) Garrow, K.C.,
and at Osgoode Hall. On being called to the bar in 1880 he commenced the
practice of law at Goderich, Ont., as a member of the firm of Garrow &
Proudfoot and he is now head of the firm of Proudfoot, Killora & Cooke
in that town. He is also a member of the firm of Proudfoot, Duncan,
Grant & Gilday, barristers and solicitors, Confederation Life Building,
Toronto, which he joined in 1902. He was created a King’s Counsel in
1902 and has long been Treasurer and Secretary of the Huron Law
Association, and is a Bencher of the Ontario Law Society. His business
interests include Directorship in the Goderich Elevator and Transit
Company, Ltd. and the Dominion Road Machinery Co’y. Ltd. Despite a large
practice throughout Huron county Mr. Proudfoot found time to take an
active part in politics and was for many years President of the West
Huron Liberal Association. In his younger days his partner, the late Mr.
Justice Garrow, was long an honored member of the Ontario Legislature,
and on the elevation of the latter to the bench, the Liberal party
naturally tendered the nomination to Mr. Proudfoot, who had already
rendered valuable municipal service as Reeve of Goderich town. He was
elected for the newly constituted riding of Centre Huron in 1908 and
re-elected at the general elections of 1911 and 1914. As a member of the
small band of Liberals sitting opposite to Sir James Whitney he soon
made his mark in debate and proved one of the most discerning and
aggressive critics of the Government, though giving his support to wise
measures. When in 1917 Hon. N. W. Rowell retired from the Leadership of
the Opposition to enter Federal politics Mr. Proudfoot was his logical
successor, a decision which was ratified by the Liberal caucus in Jan.,
1918. The war being then in progress Mr. Proudfoot took the
statesmanlike position that there should be no party contests during the
duration of the conflict and agreed to support the Government in all
reasonable measures looking exclusively to the unification of the
country for the prosecution of the war. Nevertheless a large body of
independent support rallied to his support and the signing of the
armistice found him in a stronger position both in point of followers
and as a parliamentary leader than when he accepted office. In religion
he is a member of the Church of England and was married on June 23,
1886, to Marion F. Dickson. He has two children. Isobel, now the wife of
Lieutenant E. H. Jordan, who went overseas in October, 1914, was wounded
twice and invalided home in February, 1919. Lieut. Jordan was with the
18th Field Battery, saw much service, and was decorated with the M.C.
Capt. W. Proudfoot, M.C., was a member of the 15th Battalion, was
wounded several times, and is a member of his father’s legal firm in
Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Machado, Jose Antonio, B.A.=, is Vice-President of the American Bank
Note Company, and Chief Executive Officer of its Canadian Branch, with
headquarters at 208-228 Wellington Street, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada; and
is also a Director of the American Bank Note Company, New York. Mr.
Machado is a son of the late Juan Francisco Machado, gentleman (A.B.
University of Havana), and Elizabeth Frances Jones, and was born at
Camaguey, Cuba, January 20, 1862. He was educated in Salem, Mass.,
U.S.A., and at Harvard University, and graduated as Bachelor of Arts in
1883. After graduation, Mr. Machado took a special course in mechanical
engineering, and later acquired his business training in New York City,
and during that period travelled somewhat extensively in Europe, the
West Indies, and Mexico. On May 16, 1893, Mr. Machado was married to
Eleanor Esmond Whitman, daughter of the late Alfred Whitman, merchant,
of New York City, and a native of Annapolis Royal, N.S. There are four
daughters and two sons, viz., Eleanor Whitman (now Mrs. Lawrence M.
Mead), Jose Antonio, Jr., John Zaldivar, Angela Andrews, Salome Cecilia,
and Theodora. Both sons have been in active service overseas during the
great war. In January, 1902, Mr. Machado came to Ottawa and took charge
of the American Bank Note Company’s Canadian plant and business, which
includes the preparation of the Dominion of Canada bank notes, postage
stamps, and inland revenue stamps, as well as the larger part of the
bank notes for the chartered banks of Canada. The company also prepares
engraved bonds, stock certificates and other securities for various
Canadian corporations. The business has kept pace with the general
development of the business of the Dominion, so that additional
buildings have been erected from time to time, until the plant now
comprises a large group of modern fire-proof buildings. The plant is a
model one in every respect, and no expense or thought has been spared
for the comfort and well-being of the employees of the company. Mr.
Machado is a member of the Finance Board of the Presbyterian Church in
Canada; President of the Canadian Association for the Prevention of
Tuberculosis; a member of the International Committee of the Y.M.C.A.
New York; a member of the Canadian National Council of the Y.M.C.A., and
of the Military Committee of same, which has dealt with the Y.M.C.A.
work of Canadian soldiers at home and overseas; a Vice-President of the
International Daily Vacation Bible School Association (U.S. and Canada).
As regards Ottawa activities, Mr. Machado has been for many years
interested in and President of the Ottawa Anti-Tuberculosis Association,
which secured the building of the Royal Ottawa Sanatorium for the
treatment of pulmonary consumption, and is a member of the Board of
Governors of this institution. He is Hon. President of the Ottawa
Y.M.C.A.; President of the Ottawa Welfare Bureau, and vice-chairman of
the Ottawa Symphony Orchestra. Recently, Mr. Machado was appointed a
member of the Ottawa Housing Commission, formed to take advantage of the
new legislation of the Province of Ontario for improvement in housing
conditions. Mr. Machado is a member of the following clubs: Harvard (New
York), Rideau, Royal Ottawa Golf, Rideau Curling, Lake Bernard Fishing
Club, and is a Fellow of the Royal Colonial Institute, London, England.
His favorite recreations are golf, fishing, and curling. Several years
ago Mr. Machado became a Canadian citizen and a British subject. In
religion he is a Presbyterian, and attends St. Andrews Church, and his
place of residence is 169 Daly Avenue, Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Levy, Gabriel Herman, B.A., LL.B.=, Barrister, member of the firm of
Gibson, Levy and Gibson, Bank of Commerce Chambers, 4 Hughson Street
South, Hamilton, Ont., was born in Hamilton, August 12, 1874, the son of
Herman Levy, President of Levy Bros. Co., Limited, wholesale jewellers,
Hamilton, and Camilla Levy, his wife. He was educated at the Central
School and Collegiate Institute, Hamilton, Toronto University, and
Osgoode Hall, taking his degree of B.A. at the unusual age of under
twenty, and that of LL.B. two years later. In the year of his graduation
he was elected Vice-President of Varsity Literary Society at the last of
the “old style” contests, which will never be forgotten by those who
participated therein. He also engaged in post-graduate studies in
Europe. He studied law with Sir John Gibson, and entered into practice
in 1898 with the firm of Gibson, Martin & Osborne, and has retained his
connection with Sir John Gibson under various firm names up to the
present of Gibson, Levy and Gibson. He is largely engaged in corporation
practice, the firm being counsel for, among other corporations, The
Dominion Power & Transmission Co., Limited, Hamilton Street Railway,
Hamilton Radial Electric Company, Canadian Westinghouse Co., Limited,
National Steel Car Co., Limited, Landed Banking and Loan Company and The
F. F. Dalley Corporations, Limited. Mr. Levy is interested in numerous
enterprises, and is Vice-President of McKittrick Properties, Limited, a
director of Canada Crushed Stone Corporation, Hamilton Hotel Company,
Limited, and is Vice-President of Levy Bros. Co., Limited, the oldest
and one of the most extensive wholesale and manufacturing jewellery
firms in the Dominion. His reputation as a lawyer and a man is high with
those who know him; “but,” as an intimate friend facetiously remarked,
“it’s in bridge whist that he really shines.” And he was in charge of a
team who held the Canadian Whist Championship for a number of years, and
was a member of a team of the New York Bridge Whist Club that won the
Atlantic Whist Trophy, one of the most important contests in America.
His other recreations are golf, chess and fishing. He married on March
29, 1909, Blanche Ruth Shire, daughter of Adolph Shire, of Chicago,
Ill., and has a daughter, Marion Louise, born in 1912, a son, Gabriel
Herman, in 1915, and a son, John Gibson, in 1919, and enjoys life with
them at his pleasant home, 193 James Street South. His clubs are
Hamilton Club, Hamilton Golf and Country Club, Caledon Mountain Trout
Club, Buffalo Club, Buffalo, N.Y., University Club, Toronto, New York
Bridge Whist Club. He is a member of A.F. & A.M., Murton Lodge of
Perfection, Moore Consistory, was T.P.G.M. of Murton Lodge of Perfection
for years 1908-9. He is independent in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Blondin, Hon. Pierre Edouard=, Senator and Postmaster-General, was born
at Saint François du Lac, County of Yamaska, Quebec, December 14, 1874,
and is the son of Louis M. and Elodie (Barnard) Blondin. He was educated
in the Seminarie de Nicolet and Laval University. In 1900, Mr. Blondin
was admitted to the practice of the notarial profession, and was
appointed Clerk of the Circuit Court of County of Champlain. For two
terms he was alderman in the Grand Mere Municipal Council. Having
distinguished himself in law and municipal activities, he was nominated
and elected to the House of Commons in 1908; was re-elected in 1911, and
became Deputy-Speaker of the House. October 20, 1914, Mr. Blondin was
appointed a member of the Privy Council of Canada, and was sworn in as
Minister of Inland Revenue. October 6, 1915, he was appointed Secretary
of State, and Postmaster-General January 8, 1917. Realizing that the
serious turn the great world war had taken called for Canada’s best
efforts to be evident in the firing line, and satisfying himself in the
decision that all who could should give the best mental and manual
assistance they possessed to the Entente forces, on March 21, 1917, Mr.
Blondin resigned his portfolio as Postmaster-General, raised the 258th
Battalion, of which he became Lt.-Colonel, and with his regiment started
overseas, where he remained until July, 1918, when he returned to
Canada. Landing at Halifax, July 8, 1918, Mr. Blondin was accorded a
cordial reception and hearty congratulations in recognition of the
valiant services he had rendered while on military duty in France and
Italy. Having been defeated in his candidature for re-election to the
House of Commons at the general election in 1917, notwithstanding that
he had resigned his office as Postmaster-General and had voluntarily
donned the King’s uniform to serve abroad in the cause and defence of
Canada and the Empire, on July 21, 1918, on his return to Ottawa, Mr.
Blondin was requested by Sir Robert Borden to assume his duties as
Postmaster-General, and to accept a Senatorship in succession to the
late Senator Sheyn. July 2, 1902, Senator Blondin married Marie Rose
Buisson, daughter of Louis L. F. T. Buisson, of Saint François du Lac,
Quebec, and has one daughter. Clubs: Canadian Club of New York, Rideau
Club, Ottawa. Commander of the Legion of Honor. A Roman Catholic in
religion and a Unionist in politics, his home address is Ottawa, Ont.,
and his official address as Postmaster-General, Ottawa, Ontario.




[Illustration: Lieut. Col. Arthur Peuchen, Toronto
W.G. Harris, Toronto]




=Pedley, Frank, B.A.=, ex-Superintendent of Immigration and Deputy
Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs, entered the Civil Service as
Superintendent of Immigration in 1897, and in 1902 was promoted to the
position of Deputy Superintendent-General of Indian Affairs, which
position he held to the end of the Laurier administration and for some
years after the Borden Government had come into power in 1911, when he
resigned to resume his practice as a barrister, etc. During Mr. Pedley’s
terms of office in the public service, Canada and Canada’s great natural
resources and opportunities, the fertility of the soil, and the millions
of acres awaiting the attention of the husbandman, and the open door to
success and happiness that was in store for all who came to Canada to
help in her development, were made known throughout the world by
advertising and specially appointed agents and exhibition displays in a
manner that was never before anticipated, and with the result that the
peoples from all quarters of the globe, including hundreds of thousands
from Great Britain and the United States, left to make Canada their
future home. Mr. Pedley is the son of Rev. Charles and Sarah (Stowell)
Pedley, of Hanley, Staffordshire, England, and was born at St. John’s,
Newfoundland, June 25, 1858. He was educated at private schools in St.
John’s, the public and high schools in Ontario, and at McGill
University, Montreal, where he graduated in 1886 a B.A., with first
class honors. He practised law at Toronto until 1897, when, at the
invitation of Sir Clifford Sifton, he entered the Civil Service. On Aug.
28, 1895, Mr. Pedley married Helen Louise Hobart, daughter of Sidney and
Mary Ann Hobart of Cobourg, Ontario. Mr. Pedley is a member of St.
George’s Society. In politics he is a Liberal. He resides at 483
Maclaren Street, and his office is at 46 Elgin Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Miller, Frederick Robert= (Western University, London, Ont.), son of A.
F. Miller and Elizabeth Crean. Was born at Toronto. Educated at Jarvis
Street Collegiate Institute, Toronto, and at the University of Toronto,
graduating in 1907, holding degrees of M.A., M.B. Was Assistant in
Physiology in Cornell University for two years. Demonstrator of
Physiology in the University of Toronto 1907-10. Studied in Munich
1910-1911, where he obtained the degree of M.D. from the University of
Munich. Took a post-graduate course in the University of Strasbourg, and
afterwards spent some time attending clinics in Paris, France.
Afterwards studied for a year at the University of Liverpool with Prof
C. S. Sherrington. Was Lecturer on Physiology, McGill University,
1912-1914. Studied in University of Oxford during summer of 1914.
Appointed Professor of Physiology at Western University, London, Ont.,
1914, which position he still fills with distinction. Dr. Miller is an
Anglican in religion, and holds a commission as Captain in the Canadian
Army Medical Corps. He has contributed a number of articles to British
and American journals on physiological subjects. He has travelled
extensively, visiting the most important educational centres both in
Europe and America.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Jenkins, Lieut.-Col. Stephen Rice Jenkins, M.D., F.A.C.S., M.P.P.=, of
Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, during the late war, proved himself
one of the ablest members of the Canadian Army Medical Corps. He was
born at Charlottetown on November 12, 1858, the son of John T. and
Jessie Esther (Rice) Jenkins. His paternal grandfather was Rev L. C.
Jenkins, and his maternal one, Captain the Hon. Stephen Rice. His father
John T. Jenkins, M.D., M.R.C.S. (Eng.), was a member of the Canadian
House of Commons from 1884 to 1887. The subject of this sketch was
educated at King’s College, Windsor, N.S., and at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, U.S.A., from which he graduated with the
degree of M.D. in 1884. Returning to Charlottetown, he entered on the
practice of his profession, and became one of the best known physicians
in the Maritime Provinces. He is a member of the Dominion Medical
Council. In 1912, he was elected to the Legislature of Prince Edward
Island as Liberal-Conservative member for Charlottetown, and was
re-elected at the general elections in 1915. In September of the latter
year, he also became a member of the provincial cabinet, without
portfolio. He was on active service in connection with the late war from
March, 1915, until his discharge in April, 1919, holding the rank of
Lieut.-Col. in the Canadian Army Medical Service, and had charge of the
Military Hospital at Rockhead, Halifax, N.S., in 1915. He was a Roman
Catholic in religion, a Conservative-Unionist in politics, and a member
of the Q.G.D., and the Charlottetown Club. In October, 1886, he married
Ellen J., daughter of Patrick Sweeney, merchant, of Charlottetown, and
has nine children. His eldest son, Lieut.-Col. John S. Jenkins, D.S.O.,
had a distinguished career overseas during the late war; also his second
son, Henry G., served overseas with the 3rd Bn. C.E., 1st Division, as
Capt.; and his other children are, Mary E., Helen J., Nora I., Margaret
L., Hilda, Louis C., and M. Stephanie Jenkins.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Farris, Hon. John Wallace de Beque, M.P.P.=, Attorney-General and
Minister of Labor for British Columbia, has for some years been
recognized as one of the leading lawyers on the Pacific Coast. He is,
however, a native of New Brunswick, and was born at White’s Cove in that
province on December 3, 1878. His father, Hon. L. P. Farris, was
formerly Minister of Agriculture for New Brunswick. The subject of this
sketch was educated at St. Martin’s Seminary and Acadia University,
N.B., graduating with the degree of B.A. in 1899. Subsequently, he took
a course at the University of Pennsylvania, graduating with the legal
degree of LL.B. in 1902. In connection with both degrees he took honors.
In the same year he went to Vancouver, British Columbia, and, having
been called to the bar of the province, commenced the practice of law in
that city. Within two years he was appointed City Prosecuting Attorney,
a post he filled from 1904 to 1906. At the same time he became prominent
in politics, and served as President of the Vancouver Liberal
Association. In the political upheaval of 1916 he fought strongly for a
change of government, and himself stood as one of the Liberal candidates
for the Legislature in Vancouver city. He was elected, and proved one of
the ablest of the new members that the contest brought into the House.
In 1917, the Hon. Mr. Brewster, then Prime Minister, asked Mr. Farris to
take the portfolio of Attorney-General and that of Minister of Labor as
well, and the latter accepted. Though young in parliamentary experience,
Mr. Farris is looked upon as one of the coming men in Canadian politics.
In religion he is a Baptist; and is a member of the Terminal City Club,
Vancouver, and of the Union Club, Victoria, B.C. He married, in 1905,
Evelyn F., daughter of Prof. E. M. Keirstead, D.D., of McMaster
University, Toronto, and has four children, Katherine H., Donald F.,
Ralph K., and John L. Farris. Mr. and Mrs. Farris, until 1918, made
their home in Vancouver, but now reside in Victoria, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Smith, Hon. Ernest Albert, M.P.P.=, Minister of Lands and Mines for the
Province of New Brunswick, resides at Shediac, N.B., where he is also
engaged in lumbering and general mercantile business. He was born at
Shediac on June 20, 1864, the son of Edward J. and Amelia E. Smith. His
father was formerly a prominent member of the New Brunswick Legislature,
to which he was elected in 1884, and founded the commercial business now
carried on by the subject of this sketch. Sir Albert J. Smith, Minister
of Marine and Fisheries for Canada in the government of Hon. Alexander
Mackenzie from 1874 to 1878, was an uncle. Hon. E. A. Smith was educated
in the High School and also at a private school in Charlottetown,
P.E.I., and originally adopted the profession of dentistry, graduating
with the degree of D.D.S. in 1887. On leaving college he went to British
Columbia, where he practised for two years, and subsequently practised
for a year in New Brunswick. He entered his father’s business in 1891,
and since 1912 has conducted it under his own name. In 1916, he was
induced to follow the family tradition and enter politics, and was
elected to the Legislature as Liberal for Westmorland County, defeating
Hon. P. J. Mahony, Minister of Public Works. At the general elections of
1917, he was again elected, and was selected as a member of the Foster
government, taking over the portfolio of Lands and Mines, for which his
business experience amply qualified him. He has since given an effective
business administration to the department which was sorely needed, and
by his policies has materially added to the public revenues. Sat in Town
Council, Shediac, for several years as Alderman, and elected Mayor for
1906 and 1907, by acclamation; President of Liberal Association for
County of Westmorland from 1894 to 1911; President of Provincial Liberal
Association several years, which position is still held. He is an
Anglican in religion, and a Past Master, A.F. & A.M. His recreations are
salmon and trout fishing and shooting of small and big game. On
September 30, 1896, he married Euphemia, daughter of Mr. Colin Russell,
of the Customs Department, Ottawa, and has four children: Gladys, born
1897; Russell, born 1899; Donald, born 1902; and John, born 1911. Though
Mr. Smith’s official duties compel his presence in Fredericton, N.B.,
for the greater part of his time, he still makes his home at Shediac.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Turgeon, Hon. William Ferdinand Alphonse, K.C., M.P.P.=,
Attorney-General of the Province of Saskatchewan, is one of the best
known leaders of the legal profession in the Canadian West. He was born
at Bathurst, New Brunswick, on June 3, 1877, the son of Onesiphore
Turgeon, a French-Canadian journalist, and his wife Margaret Eulalia
Baldwin, a lady of English descent. Politics comes naturally to him, for
his father is a member of the House of Commons for Gloucester County,
New Brunswick, and has long been a prominent figure in the public life
of that province, while his brother, J. G. Turgeon, M.P.P., is a member
of the Alberta Legislature. The subject of this sketch was educated in
New York City, and later at Laval University, Quebec, graduating in Arts
in 1899 with the degree of B.A., and in law in 1902. Shortly afterwards
he went to the West, and was called to the bar of Saskatchewan. He also
became prominent as a leader in the Liberal party, and at a by-election
on October 12, 1907, was elected to the legislature for Prince Albert.
At the general elections of August, 1908, he contested two ridings in
behalf of his party—Prince Albert and Duck Lake. He was defeated in the
former, but elected to the latter. At the general elections of 1912, he
stood for the riding of Humboldt, and was successful, and has ever since
represented that riding. Hon. Mr. Turgeon joined the Ministry of Hon.
Walter Scott as Attorney-General on September 23, 1907, shortly before
his first political contest in Prince Albert. He has ever since
continued to hold that portfolio, and for some years filled that of
Provincial Secretary as well. His oratorical powers are exceptional, and
he speaks with equal facility both in French and English. He is a Roman
Catholic in religion; and on February 18, 1901, married Gertrude,
daughter of Gerome Boudreau, Petit Rocher, New Brunswick. He has five
children: Alice, born May 13, 1902; Cecile, February 19, 1907; Wilfrid,
August 20, 1910; Eveline, November 16, 1913; and Frances Regis, July 12,
1918. He resides at 2320 Angus Street, Regina, Sask.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pritchard, Henry Thomas=, who was born in London, England, February 26,
1852, came to Canada, locating in Ottawa in 1875, and started in
business as an engraver. Three years later, in 1878, he formed a
partnership with J. E. Andrews, under the firm name of Pritchard and
Andrews. Being exceptionally clever engravers, their business so
increased that in 1897 a joint stock company was formed, and is now
established and known as “The Pritchard-Andrews Company of Ottawa,
Limited,” with J. A. Seybold as President and Henry Thomas Pritchard as
Secretary-Treasurer and Manager, with their head office at 264 Sparks
Street, Ottawa. Mr. Pritchard is the son of William Pritchard, cabinet
manufacturer, of Bishopgate Street, London, England, and Elizabeth Ann
(Thompson) Pritchard, and received his education in a boarding school in
London. Having served his time to engraving in England, he crossed the
Atlantic Ocean, and, arriving in Ottawa, Ontario, has made that city his
home ever since. In 1887, Mr. Pritchard married Margaret Ramsay Black,
daughter of John Black, of Hamilton, Ontario. Four sons and four
daughters have blessed the union—Walter, Elizabeth Ann, Harold, Ernest,
John, Margaret, Emily and Edith. Mr. Pritchard is an Anglican in
religion and a Unionist in politics. He resides at Eastview.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Arsenault, Hon. Aubin E.= (Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island), son of
Hon. Joseph O. Arsenault, Senator, and Gertrude Arsenault, his wife.
Born at Egmont Bay, P.E.I., on July 28, 1870. Educated at St. Dunstan’s
College, Charlottetown, and St. Joseph’s University, Memramcook, N.B.
Studied law with McLeod, Morson & McQuarrie, barristers, Charlottetown,
and with the Hon. (now Sir) Chas. Russell, London, England. Called to
the bar in 1899, and has successfully practised his profession at
Charlottetown and Summerside, P.E.I. Was first elected to the
Legislature of the province of P.E.I. in 1908. On the accession of
Liberal-Conservative Government in 1911 appointed a member of the
Government. Re-elected in 1912 and 1915. On elevation of the leader of
the Government, Hon. J. A. Mathieson, to the Supreme Court Bench of the
Province, was called on by the Lieutenant-Governor to form a Government,
which he did, and became President-in-Council and Attorney-General.
Re-elected in 1917. The subject of this sketch was married on November
5, 1907, to Bertha R., daughter of Captain Frank Gallant, of Tignish,
P.E.I., and is the father of six children. He is a Roman Catholic in
religion, and a member of the Conservation Commission of Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dunning, Hon. Charles Avery, M.P.P.=, is Minister of Agriculture and
Provincial Treasurer for the Province of Saskatchewan, and one of the
youngest and ablest of the public men of the West. He was born at Croft,
Leicestershire, England, on July 31, 1885, the son of Samuel and
Katherine (Hall) Dunning. His father was a farmer, and he was educated
in the public schools of the Motherland. In 1903, as a boy of seventeen,
he settled in Saskatchewan, and engaged in farming at Beaverdale in that
province, an industry which he has ever since conducted on a large
scale. He is one of the most prominent of those who organized the
movement in the West for the betterment of agricultural conditions, and,
in 1910, became a Director of the Saskatchewan Grain Growers’
Association. He was also its Vice-President from 1911 to 1914. In 1911,
he organized the Saskatchewan Co-operative Elevator Company, and acted
as general manager of this remarkably successful enterprise from its
foundation until 1916. From 1911 to 1916, he was a member of the
Executive Board of the Canadian Council of Agriculture, and, in 1918,
served on the Canada Food Board organized in connection with the war as
Director of Food Production. Earlier, in 1913, he was a member of the
Royal Commission appointed by the Government of Saskatchewan to
investigate the question of agricultural credits, and also that of grain
markets in Europe. He has also been a frequent contributor to the press
on such subjects, his vast fund of expert knowledge making him an
especially welcome contributor. In 1916, he resigned his position as
general manager of the Saskatchewan Co-operative Elevators to enter the
Legislature of that Province. He was elected for the riding of Kinistino
by acclamation. At the general elections of 1917, he was returned for
Moose Jaw County. After his first election he was appointed Provincial
Treasurer in the Martin administration, having been sworn in on October
20, 1916. Exactly one year later, he was also appointed Minister of
Railways, and in addition on May 16, 1918, he became Minister of
Telephones. On the rearrangement of portfolios, February 15, 1919, he
retained his old portfolio of Provincial Treasurer, and became Minister
of Agriculture as well, a step that was applauded by the whole farming
community. He is a Liberal in politics and a Presbyterian in religion,
and a member of the Assiniboia Club, Regina, and the Wascana Country
Club. His favorite recreation is golf. On July 3, 1913, he married Ada,
daughter of John Rowlatt (deceased) of Nassington, Northants, England,
and has one son and one daughter. His home is at 2150 Retallack Street,
Regina, Sask.




[Illustration: RT. HON. SIR W. T. WHITE, P.C., M.P.,
Ottawa]




                 *        *        *        *        *

=Williams, the Right Rev. Lennox Waldron, Lord Bishop of Quebec, M.A.
(Oxon.), D.D.=, is the only son of the late Right Rev. J. W. Williams,
D.D., fourth Bishop of the same diocese. He was born at Lennoxville,
while his father was headmaster of Bishop’s College School, on November
12, 1859. His mother’s maiden name was Miss Anna Maria Waldron. He
received his earlier education at Bishop’s College School, from which
institution he went to St. John’s College, Oxford, where he received his
degree of B.A. in 1882, and his M.A. in 1887. In 1899 he received the
degree of D.D. from Bishop’s College University. His first charge as a
clergyman was that of curate in St. Matthew’s Church, of Quebec, while
the Rev. Charles Hamilton (afterwards Bishop of Ottawa and
Archbishop)—was its rector. A vacancy occurring in the rectorship of
that charge, the Rev. Lennox Williams was selected to fill it. In 1899
he was promoted to be Dean of the Cathedral and Rector of Quebec. In
1890 he was unanimously elected Coadjutor Bishop of Ontario, but felt
obliged to decline. On the death of Bishop Dunn, he was elected Lord
Bishop of the Diocese of Quebec. As a native of the Province of Quebec,
he has been identified with the religious life of Quebec and the Eastern
Townships during his lifetime. During his ministry he has always taken
an active interest in the schools and colleges of the diocese, having
been for years a member of the corporation of Bishop’s College,
Lennoxville, Chairman of the Protestant Board of School Commissioners of
Quebec City, and a Director of the High School. While he was Dean of the
Cathedral, he was chosen a delegate to the Pan-Anglican Congress held in
London, England, in 1908; and, in 1910, he again took part in the
Anglican Church Congress held at Halifax, Nova Scotia. In 1887 he
married Miss Caroline Annie Rhodes, daughter of the late
Lieutenant-Colonel William Rhodes, at one time Minister of Agriculture
for the Province of Quebec. The Bishop and Mrs. Williams had four
children, viz., James William, who, after taking his degree at Oxford,
joined the Canadian Army in the great war, and was killed in action at
the battle of the Somme; Violet Mary; Gertrude, wife of Colonel R. O.
Alexander, D.S.O.; Sydney Waldron, gentleman cadet at R.M.C., Kingston.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Margeson, Joseph Willis, Lieut.-Col.= (Bridgewater, Nova Scotia) son of
Otis A. Margeson (English) and Jennie Cahill (Irish). Was born on April
2nd, 1880, at Harborville, King’s County, Nova Scotia. Educated at
Berwick High School; the Provincial Normal School, Truro; Acadia
University, Wolfville; and Dalhousie Law School, Halifax, from which
latter institution he graduated in 1908 with the degree of LL.B. Was
principal of Berwick High School 1903-4. Also taught at South Berwick,
Waterville and Lakeville. Married Sept. 16, 1908, to Mary Gertrude,
daughter of Duncan McIntosh of Truro, Nova Scotia, and has two
daughters, Doris Gwendolyn and Olive Gertrude, born Sept. 26th, 1910,
and Nov. 10th, 1911, respectively. He is a barrister-at-law, and High
Counsellor of the Independent Order of Foresters. He is also a member of
the Masonic Order, the Loyal Order of Moose and the Ancient Order of
Foresters. In religion he is a Baptist. He contested the riding of
Lunenburg in November, 1909, against the Hon. A. K. MacLean,
Attorney-General, at a by-election for the Provincial Legislature, but
was defeated. First elected to the Provincial Legislature at the general
election June 14th, 1911, and re-elected in 1916 with a largely
increased majority. He resigned his seat in November, 1917, to contest
his constituency as a Unionist candidate for the Federal House, but was
defeated after one of the most bitter contests in the Province of Nova
Scotia. Col. Margeson polled the largest vote he ever received. His
opponent was a strong anti-conscriptionist. He has been prominently
identified with the Canadian Militia, being Lieutenant of the 75th
Regiment, 1910, Captain in the 25th Nova Scotia Overseas Battalion,
December 1914, with which unit he went to France. Promoted to the rank
of Major, June, 1916, and appointed Inspector of Pay Accounts and
Records, C.E.F. In April, 1917, Lieut.-Col. Margeson was appointed
President of “The Pay and Allowance Board,” with headquarters at Ottawa.
In December, 1918, he was promoted Lieut.-Col., and in January, 1919,
his name was brought to the notice of the Secretary of State for War for
valuable services rendered in connection with the war. He is a Director
of The News Company, publishers of “The Daily News” and “The Weekly
News,” Lunenberg, Nova Scotia. He is also Vice-President of the
G.W.V.A., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Thornton, Hon. Robert Stirton, M.P., M.B., C.M., LL.D.=, Minister of
Education for the Province of Manitoba, is one of the educational
leaders of Western Canada, though not a native of this country. He was
born at Edinburgh, Scotland, on May 8, 1863, the son of David and Mary
(Gavin) Thornton. His parents decided that he should adopt the career of
a physician, and after a good general education in his native city at
Heriot’s Hospital school, he entered Edinburgh University, and graduated
in 1884 with the degree of M.B., C.M. In the same year he came to
Canada, and commenced the practice of his profession at Deloraine,
Manitoba. He became well-known throughout the province, and, in 1896,
was elected President of the Manitoba Medical Council; and, later,
President of the Medical Council of Canada. Among other matters in which
he interested himself was that of horticulture, a neglected pursuit in
the western country, and became recognized as a pioneer horticulturist
of the prairies, and an inspiration to others to adopt such a hobby. He
became identified with the Liberal party, and, in 1907, was elected to
the Manitoba Legislature for Deloraine. Though defeated in 1910, he was
again elected in 1914, and also in the general elections of 1915, which
resulted in the overthrow of the Roblin administration. He had taken a
very strong stand against the indifference of the authorities to school
problems; and when Hon. Mr. Norris was called upon to form a government,
he entrusted to Dr. Thornton the portfolio of Education, which, under
the peculiar circumstances of the case, was perhaps the most important
within the Premier’s gift. In no section of the world is the problem of
education more difficult, owing to the great number of nationalities
represented in the numbers of unlettered immigrants that poured into
Manitoba in the years preceding the great war. With the problem of
making the children of these newcomers good Canadians, conversant with
the language and institutions of the land of their adoption, Dr.
Thornton grappled, in 1915, and three and a half years later it was the
testimony of the Winnipeg “Tribune,” that the change of government had
been worth while, if only for what had been accomplished in making the
schools of Manitoba Canadian. Before he became Minister of Education,
large numbers of the public schools were nondescript, and breeding
centres of foreign speech and ideals. In a determined and unflinching
way, Dr. Thornton put into action, through the machinery of the schools,
the ideals of true Canadianism, and for the first time enforced the law
with regard to an English education for every child of school age in
Manitoba. As a result of his policies, other western provinces have
followed his example, and many educationists of the western United
States look to Manitoba’s system of dealing with the foreign problem in
education as a model. Latterly, Dr. Thornton has taken a strong stand
against immigration of the old indiscriminate sort, and proclaims the
doctrine that anyone who comes to Canada must be prepared to shoulder
all the responsibilities, with the privileges, duties, and rights of
Canadian citizenship. By the many advocates of these new views he is
looked up to as a leader. In recognition of his services, Queen’s
University (Kingston) some time ago conferred on him the honorary degree
of LL.D. Dr. Thornton is a Presbyterian in religion, and a member of the
Masonic Order. On April 30, 1889, he married Mary, daughter of Robert
Johnston, Princeton, Ont., and has no children. He resides at Winnipeg
and at Deloraine, Manitoba.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bailey, Charles Frederick=, Agricultural Commissioner for the Province
of Ontario, is, singularly enough, a native of the Maritime Provinces.
He was born at Kentville, Nova Scotia, in 1880, and his mother, who
still survives, is now Mrs. P. Innes of that town. He was educated in
King’s County High School, Kentville, and had a practical insight into
agriculture as a lad on a Nova Scotia farm. In 1902 he resolved to
qualify himself on the scientific side of agriculture and entered
himself at the Ontario Agricultural College at Guelph, Ont., which holds
a standard position throughout North America. From 1904 to 1907 he was
engaged largely in commercial work related to this basic interest of the
country’s prosperity and returned to the O.A.C. in the latter year. In
1909 he received from its affiliated Institution the University of
Toronto, the degree of Bachelor of Scientific Agriculture. At that time
the Ontario Department of Agriculture was looking about for expert young
men to carry on the work of agricultural instruction and development and
on receiving the above degree Mr. Bailey was in June, 1909, appointed
Live Stock Specialist for Ontario. He brought a great deal of enthusiasm
and knowledge to bear on his task and in 1912 was promoted to the post
of Assistant Deputy Minister of Agriculture by the late Hon. James Duff.
A few years later the office of Commissioner of Agriculture was created
in order to place a permanent official of expert knowledge in charge of
policies for the betterment of agriculture in this province. Mr.
Bailey’s grasp of all the problems of his subject is exceptional and he
holds a high reputation as an expert in other states and provinces. As a
young man he was a Captain in the King’s County (N.S.) Regiment, but has
always eschewed politics. In religion he is a member of the Church of
England, and some years ago married Louise D., daughter of David Hogg,
Perth, Ont. He has had three children, of whom one, a boy born in 1915,
survives. His address is 164 Walmer Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dalley, Frederick Fenner=, President of the F. F. Dalley Corporations,
Limited, Hamilton, Ont., and subsidiaries, was born in Hamilton, April
11, 1883, the son of Fenner Frederick Dalley (former President of the F.
F. Dalley Co., Limited), who died in 1913, and his wife, Mabel (Forster)
Dalley. He received his education at the Hamilton public schools and
Collegiate Institute. He married Ethel Hazel Gibson, daughter of the
late Samuel Gibson, of Caledonia, February 21, 1914, and has two sons,
Fenner Frederick Dalley, born June 1, 1915, and Samuel Gibson Dalley,
born September 17, 1916. Mr. Dalley is President of the F. F. Dalley
Corporations, Limited, Hamilton (the parent organization); President
Dalley Products, Limited, Hamilton; President of F. F. Dalley Co. of
Canada, Limited, Hamilton; President of F. F. Dalley Co. of New York,
Inc., Buffalo, N.Y.; President S. M. Bixby & Co., Inc., New York (plants
Brooklyn, N.Y. and Indianapolis, Ind.); Director and Treasurer The
Thermokept Products Corporation, New York; Chairman and Treasurer
Perfect Vacuum Canning Co., New York; and Chairman and Treasurer
Thermokept, Limited, Hamilton, Ont. As parent Company, the F. F. Dalley
Corporations, Limited, control in the Dalley Co., founded in 1846,
manufacturers of the well known “2 in 1” shoe polishes and other
specialities, and the Bixby Company of New York, founded in 1864, the
two largest individual manufacturers of shoe polish in America, in
addition to which they control many other specialities and staple lines.
The Corporation conducts five factories and eighteen branch offices,
extending from coast to coast in Canada and the United States. The
Corporation’s spacious offices are centrally situated at No. 50 James
Street South. Mr. Dalley’s clubs are: Hamilton, Thistle, Tamahaac, Royal
Hamilton Yacht, Caledon Mountain Trout, Hamilton Golf and Country,
Seaview Golf, Absecon, N.J., Buffalo, Buffalo, N.Y., Canadian, New York
City. He is a member of the Hamilton Board of Trade and of the Canadian
Manufacturers Association; of St. George’s Society, and the A.F. and
A.M.; and is an Anglican. Mr. Dalley has a pleasing personality and
great efficiency, necessary in the direction of a business with such
extensive ramifications as that of which he is the head. He held a
commission as Lieutenant in the Thirteenth Royal Regiment in 1906. Golf
is his chief recreation. His residence is at “Wynnstay,” Ancaster, Ont.,
on the mountain a short distance out of Hamilton.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Stapells, Richard A.=, is one of the best known figures in the business
and social life of Toronto, where he was born on February 12, 1879, the
son of Richard George and Susan (Carruthers) Stapells. He was educated
in the Toronto Public Schools and commenced his business career with the
firm of Caldecott, Burton & Spence, from which so many successful
Canadian business men have graduated. About 1900 he left the employ of
that firm to pay a visit to England and engaged in the commission
business in London for some two years. On his return to Toronto in 1902
he purchased and incorporated the business now known as the McElroy
Manufacturing Company, Limited, makers of “Royal Garments,” with offices
at 47 Simcoe Street, Toronto, of which he is President and Managing
Director. Despite the fact that he is a most successful business man who
had won success at an age when many men are but on the lower rungs of
the ladder, Mr. Stapells’ general interests are remarkably wide and his
artistic tastes exceptional. His chief hobby is music, for which he has
a great natural talent. As a boy he was an accomplished violinist and a
member of the Toronto Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by the late Dr.
F. H. Torrington. At the age of fifteen he was a member of the violin
section of the great orchestra formed for the Festival in connection
with the opening of Massey Hall in 1894. Later he obtained vocal
instruction with the best masters in London, England, and New York, and
for several years has been baritone soloist of the Church of the Messiah
(Anglican), of which he is a member, and a lay delegate to the Anglican
Synod, representing Church of Messiah. He was for some years also a very
enthusiastic member of the executive of the National Chorus, a
celebrated Toronto choral organization. In social and patriotic work he
is equally active. He has long been a prominent member of the Empire
Club of Canada, Toronto; was one of its vice-presidents in 1913-14 and
President 1918-19. In the latter capacity he has induced many eminent
men to come to Toronto and address the public on questions of the day,
and made the Club one of the most vital organs of opinion in the
Dominion. He is a life member of York Pioneer and Historical Society;
life member of St. George’s Society; life member of the Canadian Red
Cross Society, member of the Executive Committee, Canadian Defence
League; member of the Executive, Overseas Club, and member of the Navy
League of Canada, in connection with all of which he was active in
promoting patriotic movements during the war and the succeeding
repatriation period. Is a Trustee of Queen’s University. He is also a
member of the Toronto Board of Trade, member of the Canadian
Manufacturers Association (an Executive officer thereof in 1914), member
of the Royal Colonial Institute and the Canadian Institute; a past
president of the Dufferin School Old Boys’ Association; and belongs to
the following clubs: Strollers’, National, Royal Canadian Yacht, and
charter member of the Eastbourne Golf Club. With all his manifold
activities Mr. Stapells is one of the most affable and well-poised men
in the city of Toronto. In politics he is a Conservative-Unionist. In
July, 1902, he married Pauline Edwina, daughter of William C. Harvey,
and has two sons and four daughters. He resides at 99 Roxborough St.
East, Toronto, and has a summer home, “Deancroft,” at Jackson’s Point,
Lake Simcoe, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Weld, Edmund= (London, Ont.), Barrister, is the member of a well-known
English county family, his grandfather having been the Rev. Joseph Weld,
Rector, Tenterden, Kent. His father, the late Wm. Weld, was the founder
and owner of the “Farmer’s Advocate,” London, Ont. The subject of this
sketch was born at Delaware, Ont., in 1859, and educated at London,
Ont., where he became a Barrister, in 1884, and successfully practised
his profession, as also at Toronto. He has been an Alderman and a member
of the Public Library Board of his native town, also President of the
Western Ontario Bowling Association. In 1907 Mr. Weld was appointed to
his present position as Deputy Clerk of the Crown, Registrar of the
Surrogate Court and of the County Court, Middlesex County, Ont. He
married Gertrude Isobel, daughter of Richard Gibson, Delaware, Ont., in
1890. He has a family of five, viz.: Helen G., Constance G., Rowena G.,
Hume G., and Stanley G. He is a member of the London Club, a
Conservative in Politics, and a member of the Church of England.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Brodeur, Hon. Louis Philippe=, is one of the Judges of the Supreme
Court of Canada, Ottawa, to which position he was appointed August 11,
1911. Mr. Brodeur was born at Beloeil, Quebec, August 21, 1862. He is
the son of Toussaint Brodeur, a patriot of 1837, and of Justine Lambert.
He was educated in the College of St. Hyacinthe, was graduated LL.B. at
Laval University, and, in 1904, received the degree of LL.D. from that
university. Called to the bar in 1884, he was in 1899 created a K.C. He
has written largely for the press, and, in 1896, was editor of “Le
Soir.” In 1891, Mr. Brodeur was elected to the House of Commons for
Rouville, Quebec. He was re-elected in 1896, and became Deputy-Speaker
of the House, and on his re-election in 1900 was appointed Speaker. He
was re-elected at the next two general elections, viz., in the elections
of 1904 and 1908. Mr. Brodeur gained much prominence owing to his keen
knowledge of parliamentary procedure, and while Speaker was noted for
the able and dignified manner in which he gave his decisions on all
questions that came before him for solution. Before entering Parliament,
Mr. Brodeur had gained an enviable reputation in the legal profession,
and, as a member of the House of Commons—he being a fluent and eloquent
speaker in both English and French, and one who had studiously labored
to acquire a masterly knowledge of parliamentary procedure—he soon rose
in the estimation and confidence of his fellow members; and his
affability in politics, as in social life, made him a great favorite. In
1904, Mr. Brodeur was called to the Laurier Cabinet, and was sworn in as
Minister of Inland Revenue. In 1906, on the death of Hon. Raymond
Prefontaine, Mr. Brodeur was transferred to the Department of Marine and
Fisheries, and when the Department of Naval Service was organized he was
appointed head of it. It was Mr. Brodeur who was the author of the first
Naval Bill introduced in the Canadian Parliament in 1910, calling for
the organization of the Navy. It was Mr. Brodeur who introduced in
Parliament a Bill against the American Tobacco Trust, which proved
successful in checking the methods the Tobacco Company wanted to employ
in Canada. The success resulting from the passing of this legislation
attracted the attention of the people of Canada, and even the United
States press commented favorably upon it. Taking a keen interest in
navigation in all Canadian waters, Mr. Brodeur was instrumental in
having established along the St. Lawrence River innumerable aids to
navigation which have made that river, night or day, or in fog,
navigable. In 1907 and 1911, Mr. Brodeur was a member of the Imperial
Conference at London, and, by Imperial Order-in-Council of August 8,
1907, Mr. Brodeur was appointed by the King one of the
joint-plenipotentiaries to negotiate the first treaty which has been
exclusively negotiated by Canadians or representatives of any other
sister nations of the Empire, viz., the Franco-Canadian Treaty. In 1909,
Mr. Brodeur represented Canada at the Imperial Defence Conference, and
was Canada’s representative to the Washington Conference held in
pursuance of the decision of the Hague Tribunal on the North Atlantic
fisheries. Mr. Brodeur was created an officier of the Legion d’Honneur
in 1908. He is one of the Governors of the Notre Dame Hospital. In 1887,
Mr. Brodeur married Emma Brillon, daughter of J. R. Brillon, notary, of
Beloeil. He has four sons and one daughter. One of his sons was during
the war a Lieutenant in the Imperial Navy. Mr. Brodeur is a member of
the following clubs: Hunt, Rideau, Rivermead, of Ottawa, Montreal
(Montreal), Winchester (Montreal), and Country Club of Montreal. He
resides at 229 Chapel St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Côté, Narcisse Omer, I.S.O.=, Controller of the Lands Patents Branch
and Registrar of Dominion Lands Patents, Department of Interior, is a
descendant of Jean Côté, a native of France (being the eighth generation
of this ancestor residing in Canada), one of the first settlers of
Quebec, having been married there in 1635, to Anne, daughter of Abraham
Martin, the owner of a piece of ground in Quebec known as the plains of
Abraham. Entering the Department of the Interior in the Canadian Civil
Service in 1879, which Department was then presided over by the late Rt.
Hon. Sir John A. Macdonald, K.C.B., Prime Minister and Minister of
Interior, Mr. Côté soon made himself an attentive, valuable and trusted
employee. He rapidly rose from one station to another until 1904 when he
became chief clerk, in 1906 registrar of Dominion Land Patents and chief
of the Lands Patents Branch, and in 1913 controller. Mr. Côté was a
member and secretary of the Royal Commission on the claims of
half-breeds in the North-West Territories, now comprising the Provinces
of Saskatchewan and Alberta, during 1885, 1886, 1887, and chairman in
1900 of the Royal Commission on claims of the half-breeds of the
Provisional District of Saskatchewan, and of persons who had served as
scouts, or otherwise, during the Rebellion of 1885. Mr. Côté is the
author of many valuable publications, some, if not all, of which will
remain for all time to come as useful reference for historical,
parliamentary, and other purposes, and which, as the years pass, will
increase in value and become indispensable. The following are to be
found among his literary works already published: “Political
Appointments, Parliaments, and the Judicial Bench in the Dominion of
Canada 1867 to 1895,” published in 1896; Supplement thereto up to 1903,
published in 1903; Volume II. to the original work, for period 1896 to
1917, published in 1917; “Appendix 1865 to 1867 and Index,” published in
1918, to his father’s work published in 1866, entitled “Political
Appointments and Elections in the Province of Canada from 1841 to 1865.”
The whole series providing an indispensable record for present and
future reference of public men and public events in Canada during the
last seventy-six years, 1841 to 1917. Mr. Narcisse Omer Côté, I.S.O.,
was born in Quebec, September 14, 1859. He is the son of the late Joseph
Olivier Côté, a notary public for the Province of Quebec, and clerk of
H.M.’s Privy Council for Canada, and Marie Julie Léocadie Leprobon. He
was educated at de la Salle Commercial Academy, Ottawa, and the
University of Ottawa. On the occasion of the coronation of His Majesty
King George the Fifth, in 1911, Mr. Côté was created a Companion of the
Imperial Service Order. In 1907, Mr. Côté married Mabel Edna, daughter
of the late Hon. Désiré Girouard, D.C.L., Puisne Judge of the Supreme
Court of Canada. For several years, Mr. Côté was connected with the
Canadian militia; and was formerly captain in the Governor-General’s
Foot Guards. Mr. Côté is a member of the Rideau Club and the Royal
Ottawa Golf Club. He is a Roman Catholic in religion and resides at 54
Russell Avenue, Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bole, David W.=, President National Drug and Chemical Company of
Canada, Limited, with head office in Montreal, was born in the county of
Lambton, Ont., February 15, 1856, the son of James Bole, a farmer, and
Ann Murdock Bole, his wife. He was educated at the Watford Public School
and Woodstock College, and graduated from the Ontario College of
Pharmacy in 1880, and on March 3 of that year married Isabella Lennox,
daughter of Thomas Lennox, merchant, of Thedford, Ont. He has three
children, the sons being Frederick H. Bole and David L. Bole, President
and Managing Director respectively of the Mutual Elevator Co., Fort
William, Ontario, and a daughter, Florence, wife of W. D. Muirhead, of
Fort William. Mr. Bole moved to Regina, Sask., in 1882, and established
the first drug store in the north-west between Brandon, Man., and
Kamloops, B.C. He was a member of the Provisional School Board in Regina
before schools were established by law, and also President of the Board
of Trade. In 1889, he moved to Winnipeg where he established a wholesale
drug house, and built up an extensive business. He was elected in 1906
President National Drug and Chemical Co., with head office in Montreal,
and branches in all of the leading cities of Canada. This company is one
of the largest drug concerns in the British Empire, employing about
$5,000,000 active capital. He was elected by acclamation to the Winnipeg
School Board for eight years, during three of which he was chairman. For
thirteen years he was a member of the Council of the Winnipeg Board of
Trade, and one year its President. Mr. Bole was elected member of the
House of Commons for Winnipeg at the general election in 1904, but
declined to be a candidate in 1908. Since taking up his residence in
Montreal, he has accepted no public office, except as a member of the
Council of the Board of Trade. He is a member of the Montreal Club.
Presbyterian; Liberal. His address is 34 St. Gabriel St., Montreal,
Quebec.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wetherell, James Elgin, B.A.= (Toronto, Ont.), born at Port Dalhousie,
Ont., September 20, 1851. Son of James S. Wetherell and Jane (Hilts)
Wetherell, both of U.E. Loyalist descent, his mother being a sister of
the Rev. Joseph H. Hilts, the well-known pioneer preacher. Mr. Wetherell
was educated at the Newmarket Public and High Schools and at the
University of Toronto (B.A. 1877 with medal in classics). After
graduation he was Professor of Latin for two years at Woodstock College.
In September, 1879, he became the first Principal of the newly created
Collegiate Institute at St. Marys. In 1884 he moved to Strathroy, where
in 1885 he became the first Principal of the newly created Collegiate
Institute of that town. For five years he was Principal of the Strathroy
Training Institute for High School teachers. He was President of the
Ontario Classical Association in 1896, and President of the College and
High School section of the Ontario Teachers’ Association in 1902. In
1905 he was elected a Senator of the University of Toronto to represent
the High School teachers of the Province. This position he resigned in
1906 when appointed Inspector of High Schools and Collegiate Institutes
for Ontario to succeed Dr. John Seath. During the ten years of his
inspectorship he travelled extensively, not only in Ontario, but also in
the United States and Europe. In January, 1917, he was appointed General
Editor of Text-Books for the Ontario Department of Education. He has
edited many High School text-books in Latin and English, as follows:
Virgil, Book I.; Virgil, Book V.; Cicero, Cato Major; Cicero against
Catiline; Scott, Lay of the Last Minstrel; Selections from Longfellow;
Selections from Wordsworth. After visiting Tennyson’s homes and haunts
he edited in 1890 the first annotated edition of selections from
Tennyson in Canada—a work which called forth a letter of appreciation
and thanks from the poet. He has edited also four anthologies: Later
Canadian Poems (1893); Later American Poems (1896); Poems of the Love of
Country (1905); and the Great War in Verse and Prose (1919). He is also
the author of two books, “Over the Sea,” and “Fields of Fame in England
and Scotland” (1914). He has contributed numerous articles and
occasional verse to magazines and journals, and was at one time a
regular contributor of unsigned articles to a Toronto newspaper. He has
often lectured on educational and literary topics. Mr. Wetherell married
(1) Rebecca Randle, daughter of William Nason, Weston (died May, 1912);
and (2) Margaret, daughter of Henry Smith, Thorold. He has three
children, two sons and a daughter. He is a member of the Canadian Club
and a charter member of the Champlain Society. He attends St. Paul’s
Anglican Church.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hamilton, Frank Kent, LL.B.=, General Manager of the McKittrick
Properties, Limited, Hamilton, Ontario, was born in Stratford, Ont.,
March 19, 1887, and received his education in the local public and high
schools and University of Manitoba, from which he graduated with the
degree of LL.B. in 1910, and in the following year he graduated as a
barrister. He married October 6, 1915, Fannie Irene Moodie, daughter of
Honorary Lieut.-Col. J. R. Moodie, an extensive manufacturer, of
Hamilton, Ont., and has a daughter, Fannie Margaret, born February 14,
1917, and a son, Kenneth Moodie, born June 29, 1918. He is a member of
the Hamilton Golf Club, the Hamilton Club, the Glendale Golf Club, and
his principal recreations are golf and tennis. He is a Presbyterian, and
a Unionist-Liberal. With the exception of one year, his boyhood days
were spent in Stratford, Ontario. This year was spent in Syracuse, New
York, where his father went in November, 1897, to go into the wholesale
shoe business. He died there in June, 1898, and his widow and four
daughters and son returned to live in Stratford. His widow died in
November, 1913. After matriculating in 1904, Mr. Hamilton spent two
years in the men’s clothing business at Stratford, and left in May of
1906 for Western Canada, where he felt the prospects were better for
working his way through for law. He articled to Norman P. Buckingham,
then practising at Boissevain, Manitoba. In July, 1908, he went to
Winnipeg, where he studied for a short time under Lieut.-Col. A. W.
Morley, and from 1909 till 1911 he studied under the firm of Aikins,
Robson, Fullerton & Coyne, the senior member of the firm being Sir James
Aikins, the present Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba. Mr. Robson later
became Judge of the King’s Bench of Manitoba, and is now general counsel
for the Union Bank of Canada. Mr. Fullerton is now Judge of the Court of
Appeal, while J. B. Coyne is one of Manitoba’s most prominent counsel.
Graduating in 1911, the partnership of Coyne & Hamilton was formed in
January, 1912, which firm later became Coyne, Hamilton & Martin.
Successful law practice was carried on under this name until May, 1918,
when Mr. Hamilton came East to accept the General Managership of the
McKittrick Properties, Limited, owners of some 700 acres of land within
the limits of the city of Hamilton, which is now in the course of
development as a residential area. In the winter of 1904 and 1905 he was
one of the members of the Stratford Junior Hockey team, which won the
Junior Championship of the Province of Ontario. In 1910 he was a member
of the Varsity Hockey team of Winnipeg, holders of the Championship of
Manitoba. The team challenged for the Allen Cup, emblematic of the
Amateur Championship of the World, then held by St. Michaels’ of
Toronto, but spring came before dates could be arranged for a play-off.
He also belonged to the Law Hockey team, winners of the Inter-Collegiate
Championship of the University of Manitoba, and though he has given up
active athletics, still bears the stamp of an athlete. He is tall, fair,
active, affable and enterprising in a marked degree. The family reside
at 407 Queen Street South, Hamilton, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Barnard, Sir Frank Stillman, K.C.M.G.=, Lieutenant-Governor of British
Columbia since 1914, is a native of the city of Toronto, but a British
Columbian since early childhood. He was born on May 16, 1856, the son of
the late Francis J. Barnard, who settled in that province during the
Fraser River gold rush of 1859, and brought his family to permanently
reside there in 1860. The elder Barnard subsequently became one of the
strongest advocates of Confederation with the Dominion of Canada, and
later, from 1879 to 1887, sat in the House of Commons as Conservative
member for the old constituency of Yale-Kootenay. The maiden name of the
mother of the subject of this sketch was Miss Ellen Stillman. He was
educated at Hellmuth College, London, Ont. On returning to B.C., he, in
1879, became associated with the British Columbia Express Company of
Victoria, B.C., and was promoted to the post of general manager in 1881,
and president in 1882. For a considerable period he was prominent in
connection with transportation interests. He was President of the
Consolidated Railway Company of Vancouver, 1894-96, and Managing
Director of the British Columbia Electric Railway Company, Limited, of
London, Eng., 1898-1906. In 1906 he retired from active business.
Despite his large commercial interests, he found time to devote to
politics, and in 1886 and 1887 served as member of the Victoria City
Council. In 1888, he was elected to the House of Commons for the Cariboo
district as a Conservative, and continued to sit until 1896. His
brother, Hon. George Henry Barnard, was also at one time a member of the
House of Commons, and is now a Senator. In 1914, Sir Frank was appointed
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province, a post he still holds at the time
of writing, and was later created a Knight Commander of the Most
Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George. During his term of
office Sir Frank has been a leader in the patriotic activities in
connection with the war, and Lady Barnard has proven a most valuable aid
to him in the important social duties of his office. They were married
on November 7, 1883, and prior thereto Lady Barnard was Miss Martha
Loewen, daughter of the late Joseph Loewen, brewer, of Victoria. Sir
Frank is a member of the following clubs: Union, Victoria; Vancouver,
Vancouver; Royal Vancouver Yacht; Victoria Golf; Victoria Tennis; Royal
Automobile, London, Eng.; and the Royal Canadian Yacht Club, Toronto. He
has no children, and his address is Government House, Victoria, B.C.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hodgetts, Col. Charles Alfred, C.M.G., M.D.=, sanitary specialist, is
the third son of the late George Hodgetts, of Toronto, and a grandson of
the late Lt.-Col. Thomas Hodgetts, of His Majesty’s 24th Regiment, and
was born in Toronto, August 23, 1859. In 1896, Dr. Hodgetts married
Elizabeth B. Salter, daughter of W. T. Salter, of St. John’s,
Newfoundland. She died in March, 1909. He has two sons and three
daughters. He was educated at the Provincial Model School, Toronto, and
was awarded the Dufferin Medal at the Ontario College of Pharmacy,
graduating with honours in 1875, at the Victoria University, graduating
in 1886 as an M.D., C.M., and subsequently received the membership of
the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario. Dr. Hodgetts was
house surgeon at the Toronto General Hospital 1886-7, and resident
assistant surgeon at the Stafford Infirmary, England, 1888, and received
his L.R.C.P., London, 1889. He received the first D.P.H. of Queen’s
University in 1912. From 1891 to 1904 he was Medical Inspector of the
Provincial Board of Health and Secretary and Deputy Registrar General of
the Province of Ontario from 1904 to 1910. In 1910, he was offered the
M.O.H. of the city of Toronto, but declined the appointment;
subsequently he was appointed Medical Adviser of the Public Health
Committee of the Commission of Conservation, with headquarters at
Ottawa. Dr. Hodgetts has held the Honorary Treasurership of the St. John
Ambulance Association, and is at present Honorary Secretary; also the
Honorary Secretaryship of the Canadian Branch of the Red Cross Society
from the time of its organization, and was most active during the war in
South Africa, 1899-1900, in carrying out the work in Canada. He resigned
from the office in 1910, and was elected the first Honorary Life Member.
Sup. Presdt. Sons of England Ben. Soc., Canada, 1900-1; a Fellow Royal
Sanitary Institute, 1905; an examiner, Royal Sanitary Institute, 1906;
Fellow Royal Institute of Public Health; Fellow of the Society of
Medical Officers of Health of Great Britain; Hon. Vice-President
Association Public Vaccinators, Great Britain; Member, International
Commission on Bovine Tuberculosis, 1909; Member, Ottawa Commission to
investigate the best source of water supply for Ottawa, and to suggest a
plan of sewage disposal for that city, 1911; Life Member of the British
Red Cross Society. He has served as 3rd, 2nd, and 1st Vice-President,
American Public Health Association; Hon. Asst., 1903, Esquire, 1910, and
Knight of Grace, 1912, Order of St. John of Jerusalem; Past President,
Conference Executive; Officer, State and Prof. Boards of Health,
Washington; President, Canadian Public Health Association of Canada,
1911-12; gazetted Lieut. A.M.C., present rank, Lt.-Col.; a founder and
charter member of the Canadian Red Cross Society, St. John Ambulance
Association, and the Canadian Public Health Association; author of
numerous contributions to the press and of several pamphlets on public
health. Represented Canada at International Congress on Tuberculosis,
Washington, 1909; International Congress on Maternity and Child Welfare,
Berlin, 1911; Conference on Pollution of International Waterways,
Cleveland, 1912; and British and Overseas Dominion Conference on Child
Welfare, London, England, 1913. The only medical member of the Trustees
holding the charter of the Toronto School of Medicine for the Ontario
Government. He is credited with being one of the foremost public health
authorities in Canada and, as the “Montreal Gazette” has wisely
pronounced, is “regarded everywhere as an authority on all subjects
dealing with public health.” He was prominent with the Conservation
Commission in urging the creation of a Dominion Department of Health,
and carried out a campaign for the better housing of the people and for
town planning. Dr. Hodgetts is thoroughly British, and believes that the
maintenance of British connection is essential for the continuance of
Canada’s progress. On mobilization, at Valcartier in August, 1914, O.C.
in charge of Inoculation Column. Nearly 30,000 troops were inoculated,
being the largest number ever inoculated on mobilization. In October,
1914, Dr. Hodgetts was appointed Hon. Canadian Red Cross Commissioner
overseas, with the rank of Colonel, and left for the front. From London
he organized and directed the activities of the Society overseas in
England, France and the countries of the Entente. He was elected a
member of the Joint War Committee of the British Society and Order of
St. John of Jerusalem for the full period of his residence overseas. In
September, 1917, among the birthday honours conferred by King George at
Buckingham Palace, the C.M.G. was given to Dr. Hodgetts in appreciation
of his work, he having been mentioned in despatches for distinguished
service. In April, 1918, he resigned the Commissionership of the
C.R.C.S., and the Imperial authorities appointed him to the post of
deputy Commissioner of Medical Service under the Imperial Ministry of
National Services—one of the highest positions in the medical services
of the Empire, and he subsequently served in Ireland as Assistant
Commissioner. Dr. Hodgetts returned to Canada the following December,
and was enthusiastically received by the members of the Great War
Veterans’ Association, to whom he had rendered such attentive and
efficient service overseas, that it had received the personal praise of
the Commanders-in-Chief of the British and French armies. He received a
personal letter of thanks from Queen Marie of Rumania, and the badge of
membership of the Serbian Red Cross for his services to those allies.
Dr. Hodgetts is a Protestant in religion, and his residence is 238
Argyle Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Member of the Rideau and
University Clubs.




[Illustration: D. E. HENRY
Ottawa]




                 *        *        *        *        *

=Macdonald, Sir Donald Alexander=, the oldest Major-General in the
Canadian Army, upon whom fell the work of equipping the Canadian Forces
during the continuance of the war of 1914, is now on the retired list.
His responsibilities covered a wide field, embracing the clothing and
equipment of all branches of the service, and in addition the housing,
feeding, transport, of the mounted and postal services. Having served
his country faithfully and with marked ability for fifty-four years,
Major-General Sir Donald Alexander Macdonald, I.S.O., C.M.G., K.B., in
January, 1918, retired from active service loaded with honours,
decorations and distinctions, and carrying with him the high estimation
of the Canadian people and of the Empire at large. The record of his
devotion to duty and his ability to do those duties that fell to his lot
will ever hold a prominent place in Canada’s military history. In 1863,
Major-General Sir Donald Alexander Macdonald first became a member of
the Canadian Militia when he joined the Rifle Company of Cornwall as
Ensign. In 1865 he became Lieutenant of the 59th Regiment, and in 1866
Captain, in which capacity he served during the Fenian raids of 1866. In
1869 he became Adjutant, and in 1870 served in the Red River Expedition,
and was awarded a medal and two clasps. In 1871 he became Major, and in
1877 was promoted to Lieutenant-Colonel. Then came in 1885 the
North-West Rebellion, in which he distinguished himself, and was awarded
a medal. In 1900 he was promoted to Colonelcy, and, having for some time
been Chief Superintendent of Military Stores, in 1903 was appointed
Director-General of Ordnance for Canada, and received the honour of
I.S.O. In 1904 he was appointed Quartermaster-General of the Canadian
Militia. In 1908 he was promoted to Brigadier-General, and in that year
received his C.M.G., for his services in equipping the South African
Contingent. In 1912 he was made a Major-General, and in January, 1918,
was knighted by His Majesty King George V. In addition to the other
distinctions that were accorded him, Sir D. A. Macdonald holds the Long
Service Decoration and the honour of being the third military member of
the Militia Council. Major-General Sir Donald Alexander Macdonald is the
son of the late Alexander Eugene Macdonald, Deputy Clerk of the Crown
and Registrar of the Surrogate Court of Cornwall, Ontario, and was born
October 31, 1845, in Cornwall, and educated at the County High School.
In 1876 he married Mary, the second daughter of Hon. Justice Hugh
Richardson, formerly of the Superior and Supreme Court of the Canadian
North-West Territories. He has one daughter, the wife of Lt.-Colonel C.
L. Panet, Secretary of the Department of Militia and Defence. He resides
at the Chateau Laurier, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Davidson, William McCartney, M.P.P.= (of Calgary), is one of the
leading editors and public men of Alberta. He was born at Hillier,
Prince Edward County, Ontario, on November 12, 1872, the son of James C.
Davidson, a farmer, and Sarah McCartney Davidson, and was educated at
the public school of his district, Picton High School, St. Catharines
Collegiate Institute, and the University of Toronto. From the latter
institution he graduated in June, 1893, with the degree of B.A., and
decided to enter newspaper work. His first experience was as a reporter
on the staff of the Toronto “World” under W. F. Maclean, M.P. A year
later he was invited to join the staff of the Toronto “Star,” then in
the early stages of its career, and shortly afterward became its
representative in the press gallery of the Ontario Legislature. Mr.
Davidson showed a grasp of public issues beyond the ordinary, and during
the seven years he remained with the “Star” made its legislative reports
a definite feature of the newspaper. In 1901 the Canadian West was just
on the verge of the tremendous development which has marked the first
two decades of this century, and Mr. Davidson resolved to try his
fortunes there. In 1902 he established himself at Calgary, then a town
of about 3,000 inhabitants, and founded the “Morning Albertan.” From
comparatively humble beginnings it has developed into one of the most
widely known newspapers in Canada. Throughout its career Mr. Davidson
has retained the position of editor-in-chief and proprietor. He soon
became prominently identified with the Liberal party in the province,
and at the Alberta general elections of 1917 was elected to the
Legislature for the riding of North Calgary. Few members of that body
have as deep a knowledge of public questions and of parliamentary
procedure. Mr. Davidson has travelled extensively, and one of his
favorite pastimes is mountain-climbing. He is a member of St. Andrews
Golf Club, of the A.F. & A.M., and the I.O.F. He is a Senator of the
University of Alberta, and a Presbyterian in religion. He has been twice
married: first, on June 6, 1899, to Christiana Constance Robertson,
daughter of Rev. James Robertson, D.D., of Toronto, Superintendent of
Missions for the Presbyterian Church of Canada. She died in March, 1904,
and on September 10, 1913, Mr. Davidson married Ethel M. Heydon,
daughter of George Heydon, of Yarmouth Centre, Ontario. He has three
children, James R., William M., and Marian C. R. Davidson.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Parent, Hon. Simon Napoleon, K.C.=, who was Chairman of the National
Transcontinental Railway Commission from 1905 to 1911, is the son of
Simon Polycarpe and Luce (Belanger) Parent, of Beauport, Quebec, and was
born there September 12, 1855. His education was had at the Quebec
Normal School and Laval University, and between 1881 and 1902 he was
awarded the following degrees and honours: Laval University, LL.L., with
Lorne Gold Medal and Tessier Prize, 1881; LL.D., 1902; D.C.L. (Hon.),
Bishop’s College University, Lennoxville, 1902. In 1881 Mr. Parent was
called to the Bar, and was created K.C. in 1899. In October, 1877, he
married Marie Louise Clara, daughter of the late Ambroise Gendron. Four
sons and four daughters have blessed the union. At present Mr. Parent is
President of the Quebec Streams Commission for the Province of Quebec.
When admitted to the Bar, Mr. Parent successfully practised his
profession in the city of Quebec, and from the start was looked upon as
a practical man and a good and reliable lawyer. He served as an alderman
in the Quebec City Council from 1890 to 1904, and was Mayor of the city
from 1894 to 1905, during which time he built the new City Hall. Largely
through his perseverance and energetic work, the splendid Quebec Bridge
was built, and it was he who originated the park at St. Roch, between
St. Roch and St. Sauveur. Quebec city streets were improved and the
finances of the city placed on a better footing. Mr. Parent sat in the
local legislature for St. Sauveur in the Liberal interest from 1890 to
1905, and served in the Marchand administration as Commissioner of Crown
Lands, Mines and Forests from 1897 to 1900. On Mr. Marchand’s death in
the latter year, Mr. Parent was called upon to succeed him as Prime
Minister of the Province, and held that position up to 1905, when he
resigned at the request of the Right Hon. Sir Wilfrid Laurier to accept
the position of Chairman of the National Transcontinental Railway
Commission, with headquarters at Ottawa, which Commission had charge and
control of the construction of the Eastern Division of the
Transcontinental Railway, extending from the city of Moncton, N.B., in
the east to the city of Winnipeg, Manitoba, in the west, and the
operation thereof until completed and leased to the Grand Trunk Pacific
Railway Company. Mr. Parent was President of the Quebec Bridge Company
from 1897 to 1908, was formerly a director of the Quebec Railway, Light
and Power Company and the Quebec and Lake St. John Railway. During his
whole public career, Mr. Parent has held the reputation for being an
honest and able man; as one of the most industrious administrators of
modern times; as a man of decision, business and legal ability, and rare
enterprise in public matters; unassuming, courteous, and practical. A
Roman Catholic in religion, Mr. Parent has ever been a staunch Liberal,
and one of the late Sir Wilfrid Laurier’s best and most influential
supporters. He is a member of the Rideau, Laurentian, and Ottawa Hunt
Clubs in Ottawa, and of the Garrison Club, Quebec. His Ottawa residence
is at 485 King Edward Avenue.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rutherford, John Gunion, C.M.G., V.S.=, Ottawa, Honorary Associate of
the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, Commissioner, Board of Railway
Commissioners for Canada (Ottawa, Ont.) born at Mountain Cross,
Peeblesshire, Scotland, on December 25, 1857, son of Rev. Robert
Rutherford, M.A., and his wife Agnes Gunion. In 1887, he married Edith,
daughter of Washington Boultbee, of Ancaster, Ont., by whom he has three
daughters. He was educated at the High School of Glasgow, and later
spent several years in the practical study of agriculture in the
counties of East Lothian and Selkirk. Coming to Canada at the age of
seventeen, he attended the Ontario Agricultural College in 1875 and
1876, being one of the earliest students at that institution, and later
gained valuable practical experience in agriculture on the famous Bow
Park Farm at Brantford, Ontario. In 1879 he graduated from the Ontario
Veterinary College with honors, winning the gold medal for the best
general examination, and numerous other prizes. He practised veterinary
medicine for several years in Ontario, the United States and Mexico, and
returning to Canada in 1884, settled at Portage la Prairie, Manitoba,
where he engaged in general practice and horse breeding operations. He
served as Veterinary Officer with the North-West Field Force under
General Middleton during the Riel rebellion in 1885, and holds medal and
clasp for that campaign. During his residence in Portage la Prairie he
was for several years President of the Horse Breeders’ Association of
Manitoba and the North-West Territories; President of the Manitoba
Veterinary Association; President of the Manitoba and Lakeside
Agricultural Society; the Island Park Racing Association, and the St.
Andrew’s Society of Portage la Prairie. In 1884 he was appointed
Veterinary Inspector for the Manitoba Government, an appointment which
he held until 1892, when he was elected to represent the constituency of
Lakeside (Portage Plains) in the Manitoba Legislature, in which body he
was Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture. He was re-elected by
acclamation in 1896, but after one session resigned to enter Dominion
politics as representative for the constituency of Macdonald, which then
comprised over one-sixth of the province of Manitoba. He sat as member
for this constituency in the Dominion House until 1900, and in 1901 went
to Great Britain as special Quarantine Officer for the Canadian
Department of Agriculture. In 1902, he was appointed Chief Veterinary
Inspector, and in 1904, after organizing the Health of Animals Branch,
he became Veterinary Director-General. In 1906, he also took over the
office of Live Stock Commissioner, and in the same and the succeeding
year organized the present Meat and Canned Foods Inspection Service.
During his tenure of office many original and radical departures were
made in connection with the control and eradication of contagious
diseases among the live stock of the Dominion, the results achieved
being eminently satisfactory. Under his direction, the work of the Live
Stock Branch was very considerably extended, and brought into close
correlation with that of the Health of Animals Branch, joint supervision
over the work of both branches being in a number of cases exercised by
the same officers, especially in those provinces farthest from Ottawa.
In 1908, he went twice to Rome as delegate for Canada to the
International Institute of Agriculture, and in the same year was
appointed to represent the Dominion at the International Congress on
Tuberculosis at Washington, D.C. He was President of the American
Veterinary Medical Association in 1908-09, and Chairman since its
inception of the International Commission on the Control of Bovine
Tuberculosis. He was for several years President of the St. Andrews
Society of Ottawa, and from 1909 to 1911 President of the Civil Service
Association of Canada. He was created a C.M.G. in 1910. In May, 1911, he
resigned from the Dominion service, but at the request of the Government
retained office until March, 1912. Immediately thereafter, he was
engaged by Lord Shaughnessy, then President of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company, to undertake a campaign for the general development of
the live stock industry and the encouragement of mixed farming in the
three prairie provinces. In the organization of the campaign he found it
advisable to co-ordinate this special work with that of the Company’s
Department of Natural Resources at Calgary, Alberta, and in the
following spring (1913) he was appointed Superintendent of Agriculture
and Animal Industry, a position involving full responsibility for all
the agricultural operations of the Company, including the educational
and experimental activities in connection with its irrigation projects
in Alberta. From 1913 to 1919, he was President of the Western Canada
Live Stock Union, an organization in the creation of which he was
largely instrumental, and which comprises in its membership all live
stock associations and other bodies interested in the production of live
stock in the four Western Provinces. In December, 1918, his portrait in
oils was added by the live stock men of Canada to the collection of
similar pictures of live stock celebrities in the Saddle and Sirloin
Club of Chicago. He was a member of the Dominion Economic and
Development Commission, as also a member of the Saskatchewan Royal Live
Stock Commission, and has since its inception been Chairman of the Joint
Committee on Commerce and Agriculture. While resident in Alberta he was
Vice-Chairman of the Provincial Board of Agricultural Education, as also
President of the Alberta Thoroughbred Horse Breeders’ Association,
besides holding office in numerous other live stock and kindred
organizations. He has had exceptional opportunities of acquiring a
practical knowledge of Canadian agriculture, having actually farmed,
more or less extensively, in every province of the Dominion except
Prince Edward Island, his own farm being situated in the Chilliwack
Valley in British Columbia. He was appointed to the Board of Railway
Commissioners for Canada in November, 1918, and assumed office in
February, 1919. Dr. Rutherford is a member of the following clubs:
Ranchmen’s (Calgary), Rideau (Ottawa), University Club (Ottawa), Royal
Ottawa Golf Club (Ottawa), and his home address is 218 MacLaren Street,
Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Breithaupt, John C.=, of Kitchener, Ont., is one of the most widely
known business men of Canada, and has been particularly identified with
the leather industry. He was born at Buffalo, N.Y., on February 27,
1859, the son of the late Louis and Catherine (Hailer) Breithaupt; but
his parents removed to Kitchener, then known as Berlin, Ont., when he
was very young. He was educated in the public and high schools of that
thriving manufacturing city and later at the North-Western College,
Naperville, Ill., of which despite his Canadian citizenship, he has in
later life been a Trustee for upwards of twenty years. In Berlin, Ont.,
he became associated in the tanning business of his father, which of
late years has grown to great dimensions. He is Secretary of the
Breithaupt Leather Company, Ltd., with tanneries at Kitchener,
Penetanguishene and Woodstock, Ont., and President of the Hastings
Tannery Company, Ltd., with head office at Kitchener and tannery at
Hastings, Ont. In addition to his widespread commercial interests Mr.
Breithaupt has shown unselfish activity in public affairs. While his
city was still known as Berlin he was a member of the Municipal Council
for six years, first as Councillor, then as Reeve, and later, in 1896-7,
as Mayor. He has been a member of the Board of Water Commissioners of
the city since 1899 continuously, and Chairman for every year of that
period but one. He held the office of President of the Local Board of
Trade for a term, and is also a member of the Toronto Board of Trade,
with which he has been connected since 1891. In all municipal movements
for the betterment of civic government he has been a leader, and his
voice has frequently been heard in the cause of progress in the province
at large. He was President of the Berlin and Waterloo Hospital for
several years and takes a deep interest in religious matters. He is a
member of the Evangelical Association, and has been a member of various
Boards and Commissions of the Church, having been delegate to the
General Conference in 1911 and again elected in 1919 in a similar
capacity. He is a member of the following clubs: Lancaster, Grand River
County and Golf, and Ontario Club (Toronto). In 1892 he married Caroline
C., eldest daughter of the late J. S. Anthes, furniture manufacturer of
Kitchener, and has six children: John Edward, chemical engineer of the
various Breithaupt tanneries; Louise Catherine, Carl Louis, who early in
1919 returned from overseas after two years’ service with the Canadian
Engineers in France; Freida Caroline, Walter Hailer, and Helena Esther
Breithaupt.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cronyn, Hume, M.P.=, who represents the city of London, Ont., in the
House of Commons, was born in London on August 28th, 1864, the son of
Verschoyle Cronyn, LL.B., K.C., and Sophy Cronyn. The latter was a
daughter of the late Hon. William Hume Blake, and a sister of the late
Hon. Edward Blake, formerly leader of the Liberal party in the Canadian
House of Commons, and later one of the ornaments of the British House of
Commons as member for Longford, Ireland. The subject of this sketch was
educated at Dr. Tassie’s famous grammar school, Galt, Ont., and at
Toronto University, from which he graduated with the degree of B.A. He
qualified for the law, and in 1889 received the degree of LL.B. from the
same institution, and in that year was called to the Bar. He at once
commenced the practice of law at London, and continued therein for the
next eighteen years. In 1907 he gave up practice to take up the post of
General Manager of The Huron and Erie Mortgage Corporation, a position
he still holds in combination with the office of Vice-President. He is
also General Manager of the Canada Trust Company, London, and a Director
of the Mutual Life Assurance Company of Canada. Though long identified
with the Liberal party, both from conviction and family association, Mr.
Cronyn always declined public honors until the political crisis
attendant on the adoption of the policy of conscription by Sir Robert
Borden arose in 1917. Mr. Cronyn was one of many Ontario Liberals who
decided to support the Prime Minister in forming a Union Government to
carry out that policy, and when the general elections were announced on
this issue, accepted the nomination as a Unionist candidate for the
riding of London. The Laurier Liberals decided to make London one of the
chief arenas of their battle against conscription, by nominating Mr.
George S. Gibbons who had also been prominent in the politics of that
city. After one of the most hotly contested campaigns of that momentous
election, Mr. Cronyn was elected by a majority of over 4,000. In his
younger days, he had been prominent in military circles; while a student
at Toronto University he had enlisted in the Queen’s Own Rifles and
served with that famous regiment in the North-West Rebellion of 1885,
taking part in the engagement of Cut Knife Creek, for which he holds the
medal and clasp. On returning to London, he joined the 7th Fusiliers,
and served as Major in that battalion from 1899 to 1907, when he
retired. During the late war he was active in promoting all patriotic
causes. He is a member of the following clubs: London; London Hunt and
Country; Toronto; Rideau (Ottawa); Royal Societies and the Zeta Psi
fraternity. In religion he is an Anglican, and on September 6, 1892,
married Frances A., second daughter of John Labatt, of London. He has
three sons and two daughters, and his residence is at 580 Dundas Street,
London, Ont.




[Illustration: COL. H. A. C. MACHIN
Kenora]




=Davis, Albert Mayno=, President of the McAuliffe-Davis Lumber Company,
Limited, lumber manufacturers and dealers, with head office on Duke
Street, Ottawa, and a capital of $300,000, has been in the lumber
business in Ottawa for over twenty years, first with the Export Lumber
Company, later as manager of the Chaudiere Lumber Company, and for seven
years as manager of the McAuliffe-Davis Lumber Company, Limited, of
which he is now President. Mr. Davis is not only recognized as one of
the leading retail lumbermen of eastern Ontario, and one with entire
knowledge of trade conditions in Ottawa and throughout the valley, but
is known to be one of the leaders among the younger business element in
the city. In the Company, Mr. Davis has associated with him Mr. W. Allen
Taft, Jr., of Boston, Vice-President, who is also President of the
Export Lumber Company; Mr. W. J. Armstrong, Secretary-Treasurer; and the
following constitute the Board of Directors: Messrs. Albert Mayno Davis,
W. H. McAuliffe, George I. Dewar, W. A. Taft, and W. Allen Taft. Mr.
Albert Mayno Davis is the son of C. W. Davis, Burlington, Vermont, and
Jennie Taft, of the same place, and was born at Burlington, October 3,
1878. He was educated at the Burlington High School and the University
of Vermont. June 23, 1903, he married Adele Sylvain, daughter of L. P.
Sylvain, of Ottawa, Chief Clerk in the Library of Parliament, with which
he has been connected since 1878. Two daughters and one son—Margaret,
Philip, and Adele—add joy and lustre to the home. Mr. Davis is a member
of the Laurentian, Royal Ottawa, Rivermead and Rideau Tennis Clubs. His
recreations may be classified as outdoor sports. His residence is at 24
Clemow Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bâby, Wolstan Alexander Dixie=, Collector of Inland Revenue for the
Division of Hamilton (Ontario), is one of the most widely known and
respected of Federal Government officials. Moreover, he comes of one of
the oldest of all Canadian families and his ancestry dates back almost
to the beginnings of white settlement on the continent of North America.
He is the son of the late William Duperon Bâby, attorney-at-law and
sheriff of the County of Essex, Ont., and Christina Jane Wilson,
daughter of Captain John Wilson, of H.M. Canadian Militia, Amherstburg,
Ont., and was born at Sandwich, Ont., on April 13, 1858. As a matter of
record it is important to say something of the ancestry and family
history of Mr. Bâby. His forefathers came from France in the earlier
years of French settlement, and settled at Fort Detroit in what is now
the State of Michigan, but then part of the French domain of Canada.
Later they moved across the Detroit River, and took up land in what is
now the town of Sandwich, Ont. The founders of the family on this
continent were Jacques Bâby de Rainville and his wife, Isabeau Robin, of
Monteton, in the Bishopric of Agen, France. Jacques was an officer in
the famous Carignan Regiment and with it came to America in the
seventeenth century. Subsequently, in 1670, he was married a second time
to Jehanne Dandonneau de Sables, of which union were born nine children.
The eldest grandson of this couple was Hon. Jacques Duperon Bâby, who
was born in 1731, and lived until 1796. While he was still a young man,
the British conquest of Canada occurred, and Detroit falling into
British hands in 1760, Jacques Duperon Bâby and his wife, Suzanne de la
Croix Rheaume (who lived until 1812), became British subjects. In all
they had twenty-two children. The name of Hon. Jacques Duperon Bâby is
intimately interwoven with the history of the Essex peninsula. He played
a prominent part in the defence of the Detroit district during the
conspiracy of the Indian chieftain, Pontiac, in 1760. He was a man of
great worth and integrity, who enjoyed the confidence alike of the
French, English, and Indian population, and consequently was able to be
of great assistance to the British government in the establishment of
the new regime. Hon. Jacques Duperon Bâby was the eldest of his many
children. He was born in 1762 and died in 1833, and held positions of
honour and influence in the young colony of Upper Canada. Jean Baptiste
Bâby, grandfather of the subject of this sketch, was a younger brother,
and served as Treasurer of the newly-organized County of Essex. Two
other brothers entered the British army, one, Daniel, rising to the rank
of Major-General; while four of his sisters married British officers,
one of whom was Lord Bellingham. The eldest son of Jean Baptiste Bâby
was William Duperon Bâby, afterward sheriff of Essex, born at Sandwich
in 1819; and the subject of this sketch was William’s sixth child. Since
most of the various generations had large families, the Bâby family
connection in Western Ontario, and indeed throughout America is
literally enormous, and all have preserved the high tradition of
“noblesse oblige.” Mr. Dixie Bâby was educated at the Separate Schools
and at Assumption College, Sandwich, Ont., and at the Christian
Brothers’ School, Toronto, in 1876. At the age of eighteen he was
appointed to the Inland Revenue service, and detailed to Rae’s
distillery as assistant officer to the late Pierre Ramon. He qualified
himself so well as a vigilant watcher of the government interests in
connection with the important revenue derived from excise that he has
since served in many parts of Canada, including Paris, Woodstock, St.
Catharines, Belleville, Brantford, Portage la Prairie, and
Berthierville, Que. He was first stationed at Hamilton in 1886 as second
officer to the late William Donaghy, and in 1890 transferred to
Berthierville. In 1892 he went back to the Hamilton distillery, and was
appointed officer in charge in October, 1898. On November 21, 1914, he
was appointed Collector of Inland Revenue in charge of the entire
Hamilton division. His duties have always been of a character which
required expert knowledge as well as rigid probity, and during his
forty-three years’ service he has won the unfailing confidence of the
Department, no matter which party was in power. In December, 1880, he
married Mary McDougall, of Belleville, Ont., who was born April 7, 1861.
He has had seven children: Christina Caroline, deceased; Julia Fortier
and Mary Louisa (twins, also deceased); Frances Jeanette, wife of Henri
Bâby, notary public, Lachine, Que.; John Dixie; George Raymond; and
Madeline Cecilia. Capt. George Raymond Bâby, M.D., C.M., who was born at
Berthierville on April 1, 1892, went to France with the McGill
University 1915 unit, Canadian Army Medical Corps, and was awarded the
Military Cross for bravery and devotion to duty during the great British
advance which began August 8, 1918, and only ended when the armistice
was signed. The other son, John Dixie Bâby, is a civil engineer by
profession, who assisted in building the Canton Hankow Railway, China.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bell, Hon. George Alexander=, Chairman of the Local Government Board
for the Province of Saskatchewan, is one of the pubic administrators of
the Canadian West, and in an unusual degree the architect of his own
fortunes. He was born on a farm in Brant County, Ontario, on August 3,
1856, the son of David and Agnes (Melrose) Bell. He was educated in the
public schools of Huron County, and continued on the farm until he was
twenty years old, after which he learned the trade of blacksmith, which
he followed for the next twelve years, four in Ontario and eight in
Manitoba. He moved to the latter province in 1880 on the opening up of
that province by the Canadian Pacific Railway. In 1888 he engaged in the
agricultural implement business as agent for the Massey-Harris Company,
and continued therein for the next thirteen years. In 1903, because of
his exceptional knowledge of the country he was appointed by the
Dominion Government Homestead Inspector for the Land District of
Estevan, Saskatchewan, a position he resigned in 1908 to become a
candidate for the Saskatchewan Legislature, and was elected as a
supporter of the Liberal administration of Hon. Walter Scott. He was
re-elected for Estevan in 1912, and called to the Cabinet and sworn in
as Provincial Treasurer on August 19 of that year. The Government had
established a system of Government-owned telephones, and this portfolio
was shortly combined with his duties as Treasurer. In his second
capacity of Minister of Telephones he was sworn in February, 1913, and
continued to administer both offices until May, 1918, when he resigned
from the Cabinet and Legislature to accept the post of Chairman of the
Local Government Board, an important office, for which his
administrative capacity and thorough knowledge of Western conditions
eminently fit him. Mr. Bell is a Liberal in politics, and a Presbyterian
in religion. He is a member of the Wascana Country Club, Regina (his
favorite recreation being golf), and of the following societies: A.F. &
A.M., I.O.O.F., and C.O.F. On December 6, 1883, he married Elizabeth,
daughter of Johnston and Rachel (Cosgrove) Smith, of Elmwood, Bruce
County, Ont., and has seven children, George Melrose, Ella Mabel,
Gordon, Ethel, Grace Agnes, Lorne David, and Harold Alexander Bell. Mr.
and Mrs. Bell reside at Regina, Sask.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Martin, Hon. William Melville, K.C.=, Prime Minister of Saskatchewan,
is a native of the village of Norwich, Oxford County, Ont. He was born
on August 23, 1877, the son of Rev. William M. and Christina (Jamieson)
Martin, both his parents being natives of Scotland. While he was very
young his parents removed to Exeter in Huron County, where his father
served as Minister of the Presbyterian Church for twenty-six years. The
subject of this sketch was educated at Exeter Public School, Clinton
Collegiate Institute, and the University of Toronto, from which
institution he graduated with the degree of B.A. and honors in classics.
He also attended the Ontario School of Pedagogy to qualify as a High
School teacher, and subsequently acted as Classical Master at Harriston
High School for two years, 1899-1901. This however he regarded but as a
stepping-stone to the practice of law for which he qualified at Osgoode
Hall, Toronto. On being called to the bar he went to Regina,
Saskatchewan, and commenced practice in July, 1903. He developed great
talent not only as a lawyer but as a public speaker, and soon became
prominent in the Liberal party. In 1906 he was offered the Liberal
nomination for the House of Commons, for the old riding of Western
Assiniboia, in succession to Hon. Walter Scott (who had resigned his
Ottawa seat to become the first Prime Minister of the newly organized
province of Saskatchewan), but declined. At the general elections of
1908, however, he yielded to the requests of his friends and accepted
nomination, being elected by a majority of 708. At the general elections
of 1911, despite the fact that the Liberal party as a whole met defeat,
he was elected by the increased majority of 1,730. In all he sat in the
House of Commons at Ottawa for eight years and although one of its
youngest members was regarded as one of the most brilliant. In 1916 Hon.
Walter Scott was obliged to resign the Premiership of Saskatchewan owing
to ill health and Mr. Martin’s party friends in the West urged that he
resign from Federal politics and accept the Premiership. He assented and
at a by-election on November 13, 1916, was returned for Mr. Scott’s
seat, Regina City, by acclamation. He reorganized the cabinet and framed
a programme of progressive legislation which proved so acceptable to the
electorate that at the general election of 1917 his administration was
sustained by a very handsome majority. In addition to the offices of
Prime Minister and President of the Council he administers the
portfolios of Minister of Education and Minister of Railways. His
educational reforms, covering as they do many problems of extreme
moment, have been very important, and have attracted wide attention
throughout Canada, and in the United States as well. Generally speaking
Saskatchewan legislation under his regime has won fame for progress and
effectiveness. So widespread is his reputation that on the death of Sir
Wilfrid Laurier, early in 1919, many, both in the East and West,
suggested him as the best available successor to the Federal Liberal
leadership. Many of his friends still predict a Federal career for him,
although Mr. Martin himself prefers to see his own programme of
legislation for Saskatchewan carried out before aspiring to a wider
arena. He is a Presbyterian in religion and a member of the Wascana
Country Club and the Assiniboia Club. On Sept. 26, 1906, he married
Violet Florence, daughter of the late Walter Thomson of Mitchell, Ont.,
and has two sons, Walter M. and Douglas Martin. His home is at 2042
Cornwall St., Regina, Sask.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Henry, David Edouard=, founder of Henry’s Shorthand School, 209 Sparks
Street, Ottawa, on January 2, 1913, was born at Clarence Creek, Russell
County, Ontario, April 24, 1874, his parents being Jacques Henry, a
farmer, and Aurelie Laviolette. He was educated in Ottawa at the Grey
Nuns’ Convent and the Christian Brothers’ School. Building it on a sure
foundation—according to the laws of economics, well equipped, and
capably managed by experts—Mr. Henry made his school an enviable
success. At the opening in 1913, the school was located at the corner of
Bank and Gloucester Streets, and within three months, having outgrown
its original premises it was removed to its present premises on the
corner of Sparks and Bank Streets—the Capital’s busy corner—which from
time to time have been enlarged as the requirements of increased
attendance demanded until to-day they are some five times the original
size, and are likely to be enlarged still further at an early date,
although his school is to-day the largest in Eastern Ontario. When the
school was transferred from the corner of Bank and Gloucester Streets to
the corner of Bank and Sparks, Mr. Henry had but 40 day pupils. In 1918,
the number had increased to 562, which students are to-day holding good
positions in the Dominion Government offices, manufacturing and
wholesale establishments, banking houses, etc., all of which bears
tribute to the high standard of efficiency of the school. For eleven
years before Mr. Henry went into business for himself, he was in charge
of the shorthand department of the Willis Business College in Ottawa,
when S. T. Willis was proprietor. In his school, his staff consists of
experts in shorthand, typewriting, business penmanship, practical
English, spelling, punctuation, transcription, correspondence, etc.,
etc., and those who receive instruction in any one of these receive the
best that can be had. At the age of 16 years, Mr. Henry was awarded a
Fourth Form Certificate and honours for composition, spelling and
penmanship. He acquired a systematic course of self-instruction, studied
shorthand (French system) and afterwards English, and made himself
proficient in the Isaac Pitman, Ben Pitman, Graham, Munson,
Scott-Browne, Beale, Calligraphy (a Canadian production), and the Gregg
systems. He studied French, English, German, Greek and Latin, and
received special study in penmanship at the Zanerian College, Columbus,
Ohio. To acquire a practical business education, he had experience as
stenographer and bookkeeper with big business firms such as Perkins &
Fraser, barristers; Alexander Mutchmor, auditor, etc. From 1894 to 1896,
Mr. Henry made a special study of scientific methods for imparting
shorthand and typewriting, and during 1895-6 taught shorthand at the
Capital City Business College, at Ottawa, and had charge of the Y.M.C.A.
classes for several months. In 1896, he attended the Rochester, New
York, Business Institute, to acquire a greater qualification for
teaching, and, in 1899, established a shorthand school, which later he
closed to join the staff of the Metropolitan Business College at Ottawa.
For two years, he attended Rev. Dr. McMeekin’s “Ottawa College of
Oratory,” and gave several successful recitals in the Albert Hall. In
1899, Mr. Henry corrected a text book on Pitman’s shorthand for Messrs.
Powers and Lyons, of Chicago, Illinois. Mr. Henry is a graduate of the
New York College of Phonography; the Phonographic Institute, Cincinnati,
Ohio; and is the only personal graduate in Canada of the well known
Gregg School of Chicago. He holds the Scott-Browne’s Certificate. In his
examination for the Phonographic Institute Teacher’s Certificate, he
made the highest record, viz., 97.2 per cent., thereby defeating more
than 700 candidates. Mr. Henry is a member of the Gregg Shorthand
Association of America, and is the author of two standard works in
shorthand. Mr. Henry is a Roman Catholic in religion, a Liberal in
politics, and, for recreation, spends his time motoring. He resides at
205 O’Connor Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gibbon, Arthur Playford=, Principal of the Central Business College,
Hamilton, Ont., is one of Canada’s leading commercial educationists. He
was born on April 7, 1871, in a log house in the township of Nichol,
Wellington County, Ont., the son of William and Susan (Reynolds) Gibbon.
His early education was received in the rural school of his section, and
later he walked four miles night and morning to attend the High School
and Model School at Elora. From January, 1892, to July, 1894, he taught
in rural ungraded schools, after which he returned to the farm for five
years to care for his father and mother. Deciding to equip himself as a
commercial teacher he took a course at Stratford Business College, and
after graduation taught in that institution for six months. In 1901, he
went to Woodstock, Ont., to take the post of junior commercial teacher,
and after one year became senior in these subjects. In 1904, he became
Principal, and under his guidance built up the institution into one of
the most important of its kind in Western Ontario. In Woodstock he also
took an active part in public and business affairs. He acted as auditor
for several large commercial houses, and sat in the municipal council as
alderman. In the latter capacity his business acumen and sound judgment
made him one of the most useful of public servants. His faculty for
acquiring knowledge of every detail of civic business made him very
valuable in the consideration of measures for the city’s welfare, so
that when in August, 1909, he decided to leave Woodstock, expressions of
regret were universal. In Woodstock, also, he became very active in the
temperance cause, and served as Secretary-Treasurer of the North Oxford
Prohibition Association. As Treasurer of the local branch of the
Y.M.C.A., he rendered very important service in connection with the
erection of new buildings, and he was very prominent in church work as a
member of the Methodist body. In 1909, he sold his interest in Woodstock
Business College, and bought Clark’s Business College at Hamilton, Ont.
When he took charge on January 1, 1910, the attendance at the
institution was but 34 day and 28 night students. He changed the name to
the Central Business College, and within a few years his powers of
organization had built up the attendance to five times the original
figure. Mr. Gibbon’s chief hobby is Sunday School work, and he has
served as a religious teacher of the young for over thirty years, in the
various places where he has lived. His spirit of enterprise and
attractive personality make him an ideal influence on youth. He is a
member of the Kiwanis Club, Hamilton, and of the following fraternal
societies, I.O.O.F., A.F. & A.M., Royal Templars of Temperance, and the
Orange Order. On November 6, 1901, he married Margaret H. Lacey, and has
two children, Playford Sutherland Gibbon and Ada Margaret Gibbon.




[Illustration: E. BLAKE ROBERTSON, OTTAWA
J. C. BREITHAUPT, KITCHENER]




=Webber, John A.=, Assistant Postmaster, Hamilton, Ont., was born in the
township of Binbrook, Wentworth County, December 10th, 1861, the son of
Esau Webber, contractor, Hamilton, Ont., and his wife Isabella (Ledmon)
Webber. He was educated at the Hamilton Public Schools and Hamilton
Collegiate Institute, was appointed to the Civil Service as a clerk in
the Hamilton Post Office, October 24, 1881, advancing steadily till, in
June, 1918, he was appointed to his present position by the Civil
Service Commission, an appointment received with general satisfaction by
the press and business men of Hamilton, and one of the earliest
important promotions made by the Civil Service Commission. He married on
June 1, 1886, Helena S. Murray, daughter of John J. Murray (M.D. Trinity
College, Dublin), of Waterdown, and has two daughters, Ada A., wife of
R. H. Moore, Cleveland, Ohio, and Charlotte I. Mr. Webber is a member of
the Canadian Club, President Hamilton Horticultural Society,
Vice-President Hamilton Garden Club, Director of Ontario Horticultural
Society, representing Niagara District, member of the Executive Council
Hamilton Scientific Association, member of the Canadian Order of
Foresters, life member of Canadian Red Cross, and a sustaining member of
the Hamilton Health Association (Mountain Sanitary). He is an Anglican,
and a member of the Executive Board of St. Thomas Church. Outside of his
agreeable manner, intense activity is Mr. Webber’s outstanding
characteristic, and his principal recreation seems to be in always doing
things, and doing them well and cheerfully. Alluding to his appointment,
“The Civilian” (organ of the Civil Service), says: “In the appointment
of Mr. John A. Webber as assistant postmaster at Hamilton, we have
another instance of the application of the merit system as inaugurated
by the Civil Service Commission. He was appointed to the staff on
October 24, 1881, and has risen from junior clerk to almost head by
efficient work, his standing in all Departmental examinations being very
high. For ten years before his present appointment, he acted as
Superintendent of the office, filling the assistant postmaster’s place
during Mr. Matthews’ absence, and while in these positions his courteous
and prompt attention to the needs of the public made him a host of
friends in the business world with whom the appointment is very popular.
As to the staff, the appointment is equally popular, every man knowing
that under Mr. Webber any grievance is sure of a fair hearing and a just
decision in the matter.” Mr. Webber’s father was a prominent contractor
in the 50’s, 60’s and 70’s, during which period he erected many public
buildings and business blocks, among which were St. Mary’s Cathedral,
Centenary Church, Masonic Hall, Lester Block and hundreds of stores,
hotels and private dwellings. While carrying on the contracting business
during the period of food shortage, following the Crimean War, he bought
and operated a 200-acre farm in the county on which the subject of this
sketch was born but only remained during infancy. During the Great War
Mr. Webber took an active part in patriotic, Red Cross and Relief Work,
and in his long connection as director, and for several years in
succession President of the Hamilton Horticultural Society. Has
contributed not a little to the beautifying of home surroundings
throughout the city. In his connection with the Gordon Club and in the
eight counties under his jurisdiction as director of the Ontario
Horticultural Society he did much to stimulate the production of
vegetables and other foods throughout the district during the war. His
efforts in the direction received commendation from the President of the
National War Garden Commissioner, Washington, D.C., for adding to the
world’s supply of food during the war. Mr. Webber lives at 130 Stinson
Street, where he delights in Horticulture.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Irwin, William Nassau= (Toronto, Ont.), only son of Francis Irwin
(Irish), for many years Treasurer of the town of Orangeville, county
town of Dufferin, and Jane (Taylor) Irwin (Canadian). Born at
Orangeville, Ontario, on November 14, 1863. Educated in the Public and
High Schools of Orangeville, and Trinity College, Toronto. Studied law
in office of McCarthy and Walsh, Orangeville, and afterwards with Mowat,
Maclennan, Downey and Langton, and Maclaren, Macdonald, Merritt and
Shepley, Toronto, graduating from Osgoode Hall, and called to the Bar in
September, 1886. A member of the legal firm of Henderson, Irwin and
Ungaro, Toronto. Married in September, 1893. His only son, James Carter
Irwin, member of the Princess Patricia Canadian Light Infantry, wounded
in action in Flanders, died at King George Hospital, London, England,
July 31, 1916, from effects of his wounds, in his 18th year. Mr. Irwin
was interested in bicycling, when that sport was at the height of its
popularity, being President of the Athenaeum Cycling Club, and member of
the Canadian Wheelmen’s Executive for several years. Member of the
Church of England and the Orange Order. Interested in journalism. A
Liberal-Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sinclair, Robert Victor, K.C.=, Barrister and Solicitor, the son of
Robert and Elizabeth Morrison (Colville) Sinclair, was born in
Forestville, New York, May 24, 1861, and at an early age came to Canada
with his parents and settled in Ottawa, where he received his education
in the Ottawa Collegiate Institute. He read law with Stewart, Chrysler &
Gormully from 1880 to 1885, and was called to the bar in the latter
year, when he went into partnership with Mr. Gormully under the title of
Gormully & Sinclair, and remained there until 1894, when he retired to
practise alone. In 1900, he formed a partnership with the late Sir
Adolphe Caron, the firm being known as Caron & Sinclair, and remained
there until 1907, when he again retired to practise alone. In 1908 he
was created a K.C. Mr. Sinclair is recognized in the Ottawa legal
fraternity as one of the Capital’s most successful barristers. In 1907,
Mr. Sinclair was elected a member of the Ottawa Stock Exchange. August,
1887, he married Daisy King, daughter of James W. King, ex-M.P.,
Director of Penitentiaries. He has one son and three daughters. He is a
member of the Rideau Hunt Club, and was a member of the executive
committee in 1907. In religion he is an Anglican, in politics a
Conservative, and he resides at 237 Wilbrod St., Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Campbell, William Brough.= The late W. B. Campbell, of Toronto,
insurance publisher and editor, was of Scottish extraction and was born
in Shannonville, Ontario (then Canada West), on July 17, 1854. He was
the eldest of four children who reached maturity. While he was still a
child, his parents removed with their family to Toronto, where he
continued to reside until his death. He was educated in the public
schools, and went to work while still only a lad, serving under his
father, who held an administrative position in the Toronto office of the
old Lancashire Fire Insurance Company. About 1880 he joined his father
in the publication of a monthly insurance journal called “The Budget.”
From its first issue the new paper was independent in policy and
aggressive in tone, and its strictures upon some of the loose practices
of insurance companies, and especially its denunciations of wild-cat
concerns carrying on a business of plunder in the name of insurance,
made it a power in its field. A fairly extensive printing business was
developed as a side line of the business, but ultimately this proved too
complex a load for the periodical to carry. The result was that other
people acquired the rights in “The Budget.” But the Campbells, father
and son, at once came out with a new venture, “The Bulletin,” virtually
a continuation of the old. In 1905, feeling the need of greater freedom
in editorial and business policy than his surroundings permitted, Mr.
Campbell dissociated himself from his father, and began the publication
of “Office and Field,” a weekly—in its time the only weekly journal in
the world wholly devoted to life insurance. The world-wide upheaval in
life insurance business arising from the investigation by a committee of
the legislature of the State of New York in 1905 threatened the new
venture with early extinction, but by daring and skilful guidance Mr.
Campbell brought his craft to success. He demanded and insisted upon
service of the public as the one justification for life insurance. It
was largely through his influence that the life insurance agents were
organized as the Life Underwriters’ Association of Canada, an
institution which, carrying out the policy which he and other leaders
laid down, has achieved a splendid success. His work, both as editor and
propagandist was a distinct factor in making life insurance in Canada
the great financial and social force it has become. Mr. Campbell was
married in September, 1887, to Jessie G., eldest daughter of the late
George Maclean Rose. Of this union there were born two daughters and a
son. The son, Wilfrid Maclean Campbell answered the call to the colours,
and served as a private in France and Flanders from February, 1916, to
the end. He was one of the glorious Canadians at Vimy Ridge, was wounded
at Hill 70, but returned to the ranks, and was among those who marched
as victors into Germany. Too great devotion to business broke down Mr.
Campbell’s health, and after a short illness he died in June, 1914, in
his sixtieth year.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Henderson, Alexander, B.A., K.C.=, is one of the most prominent members
of the British Columbia Bar, and practises at Vancouver. He was born at
Oshawa, Ont., in 1861, the son of Alexander Henderson, a native of
Caithness, Scotland, and Grace (KilPatrick) Henderson, a native of
Paisley, Scotland. His father, after coming to this country, became
mechanical superintendent of one of Oshawa’s leading industries, and the
subject of this sketch was educated at the public and high schools of
his native town and at the University of Toronto. He graduated from the
latter institution in 1884 with the degree of B.A., and subsequently
qualified for the law. He was called to the Bar of Ontario in 1889, and
two years later decided to take up his residence in New Westminster,
B.C. He was called to the British Columbia Bar in 1892, and has ever
since pursued an active legal career. In 1896, he was appointed agent
for the Minister of Justice of Canada on the mainland of British
Columbia. In 1898, he was elected to the Provincial Legislature as
member for the city of New Westminster, and sat for two years. In 1899,
he became Attorney-General for British Columbia, and in 1901 was
appointed judge of the County Court of Vancouver, an office he held
until 1907, when he was appointed Commissioner of the Yukon Territory.
For four years he lived at Dawson City, and won distinction by his wise
and able administration. In 1911, he resigned, and resumed the practise
of law at Vancouver, where he has a large and lucrative practice. He has
taken an active interest in military affairs, and was formerly major of
the 6th Regiment, Duke of Connaught’s Rifles, and was placed on the
Reserve of Officers in 1907. His recreation is rifle shooting, and he
accompanied the Canadian Bisley Team to England in 1901, acting as
adjutant. He is a Presbyterian in religion, a Liberal in politics, and a
member of the Vancouver Club. On September 14, 1895, he married Susan
Crawford, daughter of William McCraney, of Oakville, Ont., and
Vancouver, B.C. The latter was a very prominent lumberman, and formerly
represented Halton (Ontario) in the House of Commons. Mr. and Mrs.
Henderson have one daughter, Grace Kilpatrick Henderson, and reside at
1424 Burnaby Ave., Vancouver.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Russell, Adam Lothian=, of Vancouver, B.C., is one of the leading
commercial figures of the Coast province. Like so many others who have
made their mark in Canada he is a native of Scotland, and was born at
Alexandria, Dumbartonshire, on March 27, 1864, the son of James and
Annie (Knox) Russell. He was educated at Glasgow High School and Glasgow
University, and his business training began in 1882 with the firm of
Rutherford Bros., in the Scottish commercial metropolis. With this firm
he remained three years and in 1885 became Manager of the firm of Taylor
Bros., in Glasgow, in which capacity he remained until 1891. His Glasgow
training had rendered him familiar with international shipping, and in
1891 he decided to come to Canada and establish himself at Vancouver as
a Ship Broker and Commission Agent. In this capacity he continued until
1901, after which he acquired his present interests. He is now
Vice-President and Managing Director of Evans, Coleman & Evans, Ltd.,
Vancouver; and Vice-President of Clayburn, Ltd., in the same city. His
business offices are 301-304 Credit Foncier Building, Vancouver. He is a
member of the following clubs: Vancouver, Union (Victoria), Jericho
Country (Vancouver), British Columbia Golf, Vancouver Athletic,
Shaughnessy Golf Club, and Royal Vancouver Yacht Club. His favorite
recreation is golf; he is a member of the Masonic Order and a
Presbyterian in religion. In 1898 he married Rosamund Bickford of
Newcastle, England, and has one daughter, Sheila. Mr. and Mrs. Russell
reside at 1306 Burnaby St., Vancouver.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Shillington, Lieut.-Col. Adam Tozeland, M.D.C.M., M.C.P. & S.,
F.A.C.S.=, Surgeon, of Ottawa, was born in Prospect, Lanark County,
Ontario, August 12, 1870. He is the son of Samuel Kerfort and Ann Eliza
(Poole) Shillington, whose ancestors came to Canada from Ireland in 1812
and settled in Goulbourn, Carleton County, Ontario. Col. Shillington was
educated in the public and high schools of Kemptville, Ontario, McGill
University, Montreal, where he attained the degrees M.D., C.M., M.C.P.&
S., F.A.C.S., Post Graduate Course, London, England, 1902. Col.
Shillington has practised in Ottawa since 1894, and was appointed to the
Medical Board of St. Luke’s General Hospital in 1901, and gynaecologist
in that hospital in 1913; consulting physician in the Ottawa Maternity
Hospital, a member of the Canadian Medical Association, and was chairman
of legislation at the time the Association was incorporated, a member of
the Ontario Medical Association, and was First Vice-President in
1913-1914; Association of Officers of the Medical Service of Canada, of
which he was President in 1913; Ottawa Medical Society, of which he was
President in 1903; Ottawa Medico-Chirurgical Society, of which he was
President in 1918; National Geographical Society; Clinical Congress of
the American College of Surgeons; Fellow, Royal Society of Medicine,
London, England; Fellow, American College of Surgeons, 1914, and a
Justice of the Peace for the County of Carleton. Col. Shillington served
as Lieutenant in the Canadian Army Medical Corps in 1901, as Captain in
1902, Major in 1904, and as Lieutenant-Colonel in 1911. From 1904 to
1910 he was Officer Commanding No. 2 Field Ambulance; Administrative
Medical Officer, M.D. No. 4, in March and April, 1911; represented Army
Medical Corps of Canada at the Convention of the Military Surgeons of
the United States at Milwaukee in 1911; was A.D.M.S. at Barriefield Camp
in 1913. September 22, 1914, Colonel Shillington went overseas with the
First Canadian Expeditionary Forces in command of No. 2 Canadian
Stationary Hospital, and the following November (8th) established the
First Canadian Military Hospital to be opened in the war zone. This
hospital unit was the first Canadian unit to reach France. On November
27, 1915, Colonel Shillington was appointed A.D.M.S., of the Canadians
at Bramshott, England, and in May, 1916, was appointed A.D.M.S.,
A.M.D.I. to the D.M.S. office. On October 25, 1916, he was appointed
A.D.M.S., C.T.D., at Shorncliffe, England, and March, 1917, Officer
Commanding at the Kitchener Military Hospital, Brighton, England.
February 9, 1918, Colonel Shillington, having served overseas for three
years and five months, during which time he was mentioned in despatches
and awarded the “Mons Star,” returned to Canada, and was transferred to
the C.E.F. Reserve of Officers. Colonel Shillington was married to Ethel
Florence Jones, daughter of John Henry Jones, of Montreal, July 31,
1899, and has two sons and one daughter: John T., James G. K., and Ethel
Maud. Clubs: Rideau, Royal Ottawa Golf, Wawa Keshi Fish and Game, Army
and Navy of London; Societies: A.F. & A.M. and I.O.O.F. In religion a
Methodist, in politics a Conservative, he resides at the Bedford House,
281 Gilmour Street, Ottawa, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=White, James, F.R.G.S., F.R.S.C., M. Eng. Inst. Can., E.=, is the
Assistant to Chairman and the Deputy Head of the Canadian Commission of
Conservation, with headquarters in the Temple Building, Metcalfe Street,
Ottawa. He is the eldest son of David White and Christina, daughter of
George Hendry, and was born February 3, 1863. In 1888, he married
Rachel, daughter of Thomas Waddell, and has two daughters. He was
educated at the Royal Military College, Kingston, Ontario. In January,
1884, he was appointed topographer on the staff of the Geological Survey
of Canada, and made surveys in the Rocky Mountains during 1884-5. In
1886, he made surveys in the Madoc, Ontario, gold district; in 1887-90,
in the Ottawa County, Quebec, phosphate district; and in 1891-93, in the
Kingston and Pembroke, Ontario, district, and in the latter year was
employed on the Alaska Boundary Commission. In 1894, he was appointed
Geographer and Chief Draughtsman to the Geological Survey. In 1899, he
was appointed Chief Geographer of the Department of the Interior, in
which branch he organized the map work. In 1907 he made investigations
respecting fast Atlantic passenger steamships (the All-Red Line), and in
1909 was appointed Secretary to the Commission of Conservation and
Assistant Chairman and Deputy Minister in 1913. The following valuable
publications are to his credit: 1901 and 1915, Altitudes in Canada, 1st
and 2nd editions; 1903 and 1916, Dictionary of Altitudes, 1st and 2nd
editions; Maps and Mapmaking in Canada; Derivation of Place-Names in
Northern Canada, of Quebec, of Thousand Islands, of Rocky Mountains, and
of Georgian Bay; Treaties and Boundaries affecting Canada; Fuels of
Western Canada; various other articles, etc.; 1906, Atlas of Canada. For
recreation, Mr. White takes pleasure in travelling, and he belongs to
the Authors and the Rideau Clubs. He resides at 450 Wilbrod Street,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dunlop, Edward Arunah, M.P.P.= (Pembroke, Ont.), born at Pembroke,
Ont., October 26th, 1876, son of Mary Deacon and Arunah Dunlop,
ex-M.P.P. Began his business career as clerk for Dunlop & Chapman,
hardware merchants, Pembroke, in 1892, and in 1897 took charge of the
business, changing the name to Dunlop & Company. In politics he is a
Conservative. Declined nomination to the Ontario Legislature for North
Renfrew in 1899. Was elected at the by-election December 26, 1903, by a
majority of 598, after a contest of nineteen months, during which time
the constituency was unrepresented in the Ontario Legislature. This is
said to be the longest vacancy in the parliamentary records of Canada.
Was re-elected 1905. Declined nomination in 1908. Re-elected by
acclamation in 1911, and re-elected in 1914. Was a member of the Town
Council of Pembroke from 1908 to 1913 inclusive. Is connected with many
commercial concerns, being President of the Pembroke Lumber Company,
Steel Equipment Co., Ltd., Pembroke Electric Light Co., Ltd., and
MacFarlane Neil Mfg. Co. of Fredericton, N.B.; also a director of the
Pembroke Woollen Mills, Ltd., Massey Lumber Co., Ltd., Pembroke Southern
Railway, Pembroke Iron Works, Ltd., Superior Electrics, Ltd., Victoria
Foundry Co., Ltd., Ottawa, and other companies. Is First Vice-President
of the Canadian Electrical Association for 1919. He is a member of the
Rideau and Country Clubs of Ottawa and the National and Albany Clubs of
Toronto. Is a member of the Methodist Church. On June 17, 1908, he
married Mabel Ferguson, daughter of Donald Ferguson, of Beamsville,
Ont., and has three daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Reid, William Brown=, President and Managing Director of United Cigar
Stores, Ltd., of Canada, with head office at 284 King Street West,
Toronto, Ont., was born in Rothes, Scotland, April 7, 1866, the son of
Alexander and Helen (Simpson) Reid. His father was an extensive and
prosperous farmer, and this afforded the subject of this sketch the
opportunity of exercising in his boyhood his innate love of horses which
he still retains. While afforded, like other members of his family, all
the facilities for pursuing the highest educational course, he was
satisfied with that of the common schools which have produced so many
successful Scotchmen. He served with the Rothes (Elginshire) Volunteers
from 1882 till 1888, when he came to Canada, and shortly afterwards
joined the 48th Highlanders, serving for five years. After leaving
school he pursued his own inclinations, and before coming to Canada had
gained practical experience in a general way, besides having
considerable knowledge along useful technical lines as a reserve to fall
back on. In 1888, he became connected with the Empire Tobacco Co., with
which he remained as Toronto representative till 1897, when he
established in Toronto the wholesale tobacco and Cigar firm of W. B.
Reid & Co., which was the foundation of the present extensive
corporation of which he was the originator, and has always been the head
and controlling genius. The firm was incorporated as the United Cigar
Stores, Limited, in 1902, with a capital of $20,000, and opened several
cigar stores in Toronto. In May, 1914, the company’s capital stock was
increased to $250,000, and the number of stores largely increased and
extended to outside cities. A year later, United Cigar Stores, Limited,
of Canada was incorporated with a capital of $3,800,000, with Mr. Reid
still in full control. The Company now has 164 stores, extending from
Quebec City to Port Arthur, including 39 in Toronto, 13 in Ottawa, 11 in
Hamilton, and one or more in almost every important town in the
province. Remarkable as this achievement is in so short a time, it falls
far short of the goal set by Mr. Reid, who intends to have stores in
every city and town of consequence in the Dominion, and no doubt would
have already made this goal an established fact before now if the war
had not put a temporary stop to further expansion. Besides operating
this great chain of stores, the company has two large cigar factories,
and as a holding company, also controls a chain of Drug Stores with
about a dozen branches, and a constantly and rapidly increasing
business. The annual turnover of the cigar stores and cigar factories is
between $3,000,000 and $4,000,000, all directed by Mr. Reid personally
from the head office. This immense volume of business enables the
company to buy goods in such large quantities that it obtains better
terms than are available by small purchasers, and at the same time
minimizes the percentage of overhead expenses. Mr. Reid married Edith E.
Rogers, daughter of A. C. Rogers, Newmarket, Ont., November 8, 1896. He
is a member of the Toronto and Montreal Boards of Trade, of the
Scarborough Golf Club, Lakeview Golf, Mississauga Golf and Ontario
Clubs; member of the A.F. & A.M., a Presbyterian, and independent in
politics. His chief recreations are bowling and golf. He resides at 42
Lakeview Ave., Toronto. Mr. Reid is genial in manner, a systematic
organizer, with sufficient of the imaginative faculty to prompt
enterprise and enough determination and reserve force to ensure the
carrying out of anything to which he lays his hand. He was the first man
in the province of Ontario to place on the market the product of
Canadian grown tobacco, and the expansion of this business has proven
his foresight beyond question. The great war made heavy drafts on the
staff of the Company, but Mr. Reid is too good a Britisher to complain
of that; in fact, in addition to contributing thousands of dollars to
patriotic purposes, so strong along this line is he that he never has
allowed any foreign element to obtain a footing in his company, which he
says will be strictly Canadian, without outside influence, so long as he
is at its head—and that means as long as he desires to remain in active
business.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Johnson, Hon. Thomas Herman, B.A., LL.D.=, Attorney-General of
Manitoba, is a type of those Icelandic Canadians who, going into the
West in the early days, have done so much for its development. He was
born in Iceland on February 12, 1870, the son of John and Margaret
Johnson. When he was a boy of eight years old his father resolved to try
his fortunes in the virgin country of Western Canada, and settled in
Manitoba as a farmer, bringing his family with him. The subject of this
sketch was from early boyhood bent on a professional career. He attended
the public schools of Winnipeg, and later took a course at Gustavus
Adolphus College, Minnesota, from which he graduated in 1895 with the
degree of B.A. As a youth he taught school during the summer in the
Glenboro district to secure funds to continue his studies during the
winter. After obtaining his degree he entered the legal offices of
Richards (afterwards Mr. Justice Richards) and Bradshaw, with a view to
qualifying himself for the law. He was admitted to the Manitoba Bar in
1900, and immediately commenced practice at Winnipeg. His abilities and
knowledge of the different races of Manitoba were such that in 1901 the
Laurier administration appointed him census commissioner for Manitoba to
take the decennial census of that year. In 1904 he was elected as member
of the Winnipeg School Board, and continued to act until 1907, when he
resigned to stand as Liberal candidate for the Legislature in the riding
of West Winnipeg. He was successful, and was also re-elected in 1910. At
the general elections of 1914 he was Liberal candidate in Centre
Winnipeg, and was again successful. As a prominent member of the
opposition, he took an active part in the campaign which resulted in
driving the Roblin administration from office. In 1915, when the
Liberals, under Hon. Mr. Norris, came into power, he was again elected
for Centre Winnipeg, and on the formation of the Norris government was
offered, and accepted, the post of Minister of Public Works.
Subsequently, he was transferred to the more important portfolio of
Attorney-General. Mr. Johnson is a fine public speaker, and his
shrewdness and judgment on all public questions are highly esteemed by
his fellow citizens and colleagues in the Legislature. He is a Lutheran
in religion, and his chief recreation is golf. On June 21, 1898, he
married Aurora, daughter of F. Frederickson, merchant, Glenboro,
Manitoba, and has three children, M. Ethel, Elswood B., and Cecil F.
Johnson.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Farrow, Robinson Russell=, Assistant Commissioner of Customs, was born
at Bluevale, Huron County, Ontario, March 7, 1864, and was educated at
the public schools in Huron. He is the son of Thomas Farrow, (who came
to Canada from England in 1849, and for years was Superintendent of
Schools for Wawanosh, Morris and Turnberry, and who, establishing
himself in business, made progress and prospered as the country advanced
in population, industry and wealth), and Mary Macdonald, of London,
Ontario. His father also became popular in the County of Huron, and at
the general election in 1872 was chosen to represent North Huron in the
House of Commons. He was re-elected at the general election in 1876, and
again at the general election in 1882 was the successful candidate for
East Huron. June 1, 1881, Mr. Farrow first entered the Civil Service of
Canada in the Customs Department, and May 8, 1907, was appointed
Assistant Commissioner. In lawn bowling and curling, Mr. Farrow holds a
prominent station for competency, and is ever sought when championship
contests are listed. He usually carries his team to victory. He is
honorary President of the Ontario Lawn Bowling Association; member of
the Executive of the Dominion Lawn Bowling Association; Past President
of the Ottawa Lawn Bowling Club; and a member of the Finance Committee
of the Ottawa Curling Club. In his official capacity as Assistant
Commissioner, he is one of the busiest men in the Civil Service, and one
of the most competent, coupled with which there is an ever evident
promptness in action and courtesy in manner. January 5, 1887, Mr. Farrow
married Miss R. J. Bradley, daughter of Samuel T. Bradley, a mill owner,
and Margaret Alexander, of Huntley, Ontario. Mr. Farrow has one
daughter—Ethel, B.A. (now Mrs. C. H. Bland), whose son, Corpl. C. H.
Bland, B.A., served during the world war in the 20th Battery, Overseas
Forces, and was with the army of occupation in Germany; and Bombdr.
Russell Farrow, who, with the 20th Battery, C.E.S., served in France,
Belgium, and with the army of occupation in Germany. Mr. Farrow belongs
to the Laurentian Club, and is a member of the following societies:
Scottish Rite Masons; A.F. & A.M.; Oddfellows; A.O.U.W.; Canadian Order
of Foresters; Sons of England. He resides at 7 McLeod Street, Ottawa,
Ont., and he attends the Methodist Church.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Veale, Philip Henry=, Assessment Commissioner for the City of Ottawa,
was appointed to that position February 5, 1917. He is well known among
Canadian municipal officials and civic legislators as a reliable
authority on assessments, both as to the application of the Ontario
Assessment and Local Improvement Acts, and as to land values, of which
he has been a close student. Prior to his appointment as Assessment
Commissioner, there were, besides the Commissioner, an Assistant
Commissioner; and when Mr. Veale was appointed the latter position was
abolished, the civic government considering that in the new appointment
they had secured a man who was competent to perform the duties alone,
although the responsibilities and duties of the office had increased
considerably, and were daily increasing. That they were not mistaken is
amply proved by the fact that the affairs of the Assessment
Commissioner’s office were never working in such regular clock-like form
as they are to-day. When Mr. Veale first became an employee in the
Assessment Commissioner’s Office in 1892, the taxable assessment of the
city of Ottawa was but $18,236,160, and the population only 43,942. In
1919—twenty-seven years later—the taxable assessment had increased to
$114,392,261, and the population to 104,007; and, strange to say, of all
the aldermen who were in the city council at that time, but one man,
Alderman (now Controller) Napoleon Champagne, is still in civic life,
and most of the others have crossed the line and joined the great
majority. Mr. Veale has contributed largely to newspapers and magazines
on assessment and other like important subjects, and few, if any, are
better able to handle such subjects in newspaper discussion than he. It
was in the re-organization of the civic assessment department in 1892
that Mr. Veale was appointed to a clerkship. It was not long before he
was appointed chief clerk, and then Assistant Commissioner; and when Mr.
William Stewart retired in 1917, Mr. Veale was called upon to assume the
duties and responsibilities of both offices. Besides being an authority
on real estate values, Mr. Veale is well known in Eastern Ontario as a
breeder of White Wyandotte chickens, as a consistent exhibitor and
prize-winner. At his summer home. River Park, every year he raises
hundreds of thoroughbred fowl. Mr. Veale is the son of Philip Veale, who
for many years was manager of the Dominion Fisheries at Ottawa, and Jane
(Smith) Veale. He was born at Merrickville, Ontario, January 7, 1865,
and was educated in the public school, New Edinburgh, now a portion of
Ottawa. On April 27, 1887, Mr. Veale married Emma M. Payne, daughter of
Abraham Payne, civil servant, Ottawa, resulting in a fine family of nine
children—seven girls and two boys—Ethel Alberta, Mabel Mildred,
Kathleen Gwendeline, Philip McDougal, Beatrice Jean, Albert Newell,
Annie Edna, Lois Evelene, Constance Winifred. Mr. Veale is a member of
the following clubs and societies: St. George’s, Sons of England, Knight
of the Maccabees, and St. Matthew’s Church Men’s. In religion he is an
Anglican, in politics a Conservative, and his recreations are fishing,
and amateur gardening. His residence is at Woodroffe, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Finlayson, George Daniel, B.A., A.I.A.=, is the son of Edward
Finlayson, a farmer who was born at Merigomish, N.S., and Catherine
(Smith) Finlayson, and a brother of Professor J. N. Finlayson of
Dalhousie University, Halifax. Mr. Finlayson was born in Merigomish,
Pictou County, Nova Scotia, December 31, 1882, and received his
education in the country school, Merigomish, Pictou Academy, and
Dalhousie University, graduating in 1907 with B.A. and great
distinction. On May 6, 1907, Mr. Finlayson entered upon his duties in
connection with the Dominion Insurance Department, and at once became a
valuable acquisition to the staff of that branch of the Civil Service.
It was not long before his great ability as an authority on, and his
general knowledge of, all phases of insurance brought him prominently to
the notice of the Ottawa authorities and the heads of insurance
companies throughout Canada, and his promotion, as a consequence, was
rapid. Seven years later, from the time he entered the service on
September 1, 1914, and at the early age of 32 years, he was appointed to
the highest position in the Insurance Department, viz., that of
Superintendent, which position he holds to-day. In the execution of his
duties, he is noted for his courtesy to all who seek information from
him. In 1914, Mr. Finlayson married Isabel M. Grant, daughter of A. M.
Grant, of Moncton, New Brunswick, and has one daughter, Catherine Smith
Finlayson, and one son. Mr. Finlayson is a member of the Canadian,
University, and Riverside Golf clubs. For recreation he indulges in
tennis, golf and walking. He is a Presbyterian in religion, and his
residence is 200 Carling Avenue, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McLean, Angus Alexander, LL.B., K.C., Ex-M.P.=, Controller of the Royal
North-West Mounted Police, since 1917, was born December 17, 1854, at
Belfast, Prince Edward Island, and received his education at the Prince
of Wales College, Charlottetown, P.E.I., and Harvard Law School. He is
the son of William and Flora McLean, both of Prince Edward Island.
Having read law in the office of the late Chief Justice, Hon. Sir
William Sullivan, Mr. McLean was called to the bar in 1876, and became a
partner in the law firm of Sullivan, McLean & Morsen. Afterwards he was
senior member of McLean & McKinnon, barristers and solicitors, Victoria
Row, Charlottetown, P.E.I. In June, 1894, he was appointed Q.C., and
revising officer for East Queen’s, and was elected President of the
P.E.I. Law Society. For eight years, Mr. McLean was law clerk for the
P.E.I. Legislature, and was Official Assignee under the old Dominion
Insolvent Act for five years. During 1888, 1889 and 1900, Mr. McLean
represented the constituency of Belfast in the P.E.I. Legislature. He
was a candidate at the by-elections of 1902 and 1904 for the House of
Commons, and was elected at the General Election of 1904. In the General
Election of 1908 he was defeated, but in 1911 was elected by a large
majority. October 15, 1917, he was appointed controller of the Royal
North-West Mounted Police. In June 14, 1882, Mr. McLean married Leah
Yeo, daughter of the late John Yeo, of Charlottetown. She died in 1897.
In 1898, he married Frances H. Longworth, daughter of the late Henry
Longworth, of Charlottetown. He has two sons, both of whom served with
distinction in the Overseas forces during the great world war. In
religion Mr. McLean is a Presbyterian, in politics a
Liberal-Conservative, and he is a member of the A.F. & A.M.; the
I.O.O.F.; and the S.O.S. Societies. He resides at 312 Cooper Street,
Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robertson, Hon. Gideon Decker, P.C.=, Federal Minister of Labor, was
the first actual representative of organized labor to be called to
either the Dominion Cabinet or the Senate of Canada, He was born at
Welland, Ont., on August 26, 1874, the son of Gavin E. Robertson and
Laretto Goring, both native Canadians. His paternal grandfather was a
native of Scotland, who became a member of the bar and later went to
Jamaica, where he took an active part in the agitation for the abolition
of slavery, which became a fully accomplished fact in 1838. In this
movement Robertson was in correspondence with Clarkson, Macaulay (father
of Lord Macaulay), Wilberforce and others active in freeing the British
Empire from this reproach. Later, he came to Canada, where Gavin
Robertson, father of the subject of this sketch, was born, and where he
became a farmer and school teacher on the Niagara peninsula. Gideon
Decker Robertson was educated at the public and high schools of Welland
and as a youth took up telegraphy in connection with railroad work. A
strong believer in trades unionism, he soon became active in the Order
of Railroad Telegraphers, an international body, of which he was some
years ago elected Vice-President, an office he still holds. His duties
brought him in contact with the chiefs of organized labor on this
continent, and he won a high reputation for clear thinking and executive
ability. In 1917, when Sir Robert Borden decided to abolish party lines
and form a Union Government, he offered Mr. Robertson a position in the
Senate and a seat in his Cabinet. The offer was accepted, and in the
autumn of that year he was sworn in as a member of the Privy Council and
a Minister without Portfolio. In May, 1918, he was appointed Chairman of
the sub-Committee of the Council on Labor Problems, and also Chairman of
the National Registration Board in connection with the war. On November
7, 1918, he was sworn in as Minister of Labor in succession to Hon. T.
W. Crothers, who had announced his intention of retiring some months
previously. The appointment was made just at the psychological moment,
for the armistice, which had been signed just one week previously,
created a host of labor problems more serious than Canada had ever
previously been called upon to face; and only a statesman enjoying
practical knowledge and the confidence of organized labor could have
dealt with the situation. In the spring and summer of 1919 he was called
upon to combat a conspiracy affecting all Canada to introduce a modified
form of Russian Bolshevism, fathered by the Industrial Workers of the
World, known as the “One Big Union.” The aim was to unite all existing
labor organizations in one body, and by sympathetic strikes and a policy
of terrorism destroy capitalism, and reduce all other classes to
subjection. This movement came to a head with a general strike called in
Winnipeg early in May, on the pretext of a dispute between the metal
workers and their employers. Winnipeg was chosen as a strategic point,
because of its peculiar geographical position as the chief divisional
point of three transcontinental railways. The aim was to cut Canada in
two in the matter of communications, and then by broadening the strike
Eastward and Westward secure complete control of Canadian transportation
and industry, after which the movement was to be carried into every
section of the United States. Senator Robertson himself went to the
scene of operations, and by his fearless, though moderate handling of
the situation, and his influence with the saner labor elements, rendered
the conspiracy abortive so far as the rest of Canada was concerned, and
fruitless in Winnipeg. He thus secured a triumph for legitimate trade
unionism, of which he is the chief sponsor in Canada. He is a Freemason,
a Presbyterian, and in politics a member of the Independent Labor Party.
On June 10, 1896, he married Mary Berry Hay, daughter of Alexander Hay,
Watford, Ont., and has six children—Edwin J., John McElroy, Gain
Elliot, Alexander Lorne, Mabel Letitia, and Alma Lauretta. He formerly
resided at Welland but his home is now at Ottawa.




[Illustration: W. H. DWYER
Ottawa]




=Hutchison, Col. William= (Ottawa, Ont.), the subject of this sketch,
was born in New Edinburgh in 1843, a suburb of the city of Ottawa. He
was educated in the Public and Grammar Schools. When about seventeen
years of age Col. Hutchison commenced to learn the Milling business with
his uncle, the late Thos. McKay, who was then owner of the McKay Mills
at the Chaudiere and also a partner in the New Edinburgh Mills. At the
age of twenty Col. Hutchison left for the United States where he
followed the milling business for several years. On his return he took
charge of his uncle’s business and shortly afterwards was made a
partner. In 1885 he was elected to City Council, and served for seven
years. It was during Col. Hutchison’s service in the City Council that
the question of the proper drainage of the city attained its greatest
importance, and it is owing to his keen foresight and wise counsel and
persistence that Ottawa to-day has the excellent drainage system of
which it now boasts, and that is but one of the many happenings for the
benefit, progress and beautification of Ottawa that were brought into
existence through his instrumentality during his term of office in the
City’s Civic affairs. From 1888 to, and including the year 1905, a
period of eighteen years, Col. Hutchison was a member of the Board of
Directors of the Central Canada Exhibition Association, and from 1895 to
1905, 10 years, he was President. On retiring in 1906 he was elected
Honorary President of the Association and has been re-elected to that
position every year since. Col. Hutchison, with the assistance of
Messrs. Ahearn and Topper, was instrumental in converting the old horse
car line to electric, giving Ottawa one of the best street car services
on the continent. He ran for the Dominion House in 1896, with the result
that both he and his French colleague, Napoleon A. Belcourt, were
elected by a sweeping majority. At the time the Conservatives felt that
they had a serious grievance, but ere long the good-hearted,
good-natured and genial new Member became the friend and companion of
both Liberals and Conservatives in the House of Commons. In 1901, when
Sir Wilfrid Laurier needed a competent man to travel to all parts of the
world to exhibit Canada’s mineral, cereal and industrial resources, Col.
Hutchison was asked to accept the position of Canadian Exhibition
Commissioner. He accepted and since his appointment he has had charge of
Canada’s exhibits at the following times and places:—1901, Buffalo,
U.S.A.; 1902, Osaka, Japan; 1903-04 St. Louis, U.S.A.; 1905, Liege,
Belgium; 1906, Milan, Italy; 1907, Dublin, Ireland; 1908, Shepherds
Bush, London, England; 1909, Seattle, U.S.A.; 1910, Brussels, Belgium;
1911-12, Crystal Palace, London, England; 1913, Ghent, Belgium; 1914-15,
San Francisco, U.S.A.; 1916-17, San Diego, U.S.A. The great world war
has caused a cessation of the valuable exhibits, but the whole display
is located in commodious quarters on Wellington St. in Ottawa, under
Col. Hutchison’s special care, waiting and ready to be shipped at a
moment’s notice. In 1902 Col. Hutchison was decorated by the Emperor of
Japan with the Order of the Rising Sun (with rank of Colonel in the
Army). In 1905 he was decorated by the late King Leopold II. of Belgium,
with the Order of Leopold, and in 1906 by the King of Italy with the
Order of the Crown of Italy, in 1910 he was made Commander of the Order
of the Crown of Belgium by King Albert I. Col. William Hutchison is the
son of the late Robert Hutchison of Ayrshire, Scotland, who came to
Canada in 1830 and in New Edinburgh married Mary McKay, niece of the
late Hon. Thos. McKay, who was born in Edinburgh, Scotland. In
September, 1874, he married Electa Blanche, daughter of S. T. Willett of
Chambly, Quebec. Two sons have blessed the union. In religion he is a
Presbyterian, and in politics a high tariff Liberal. He is also a member
of the Rideau Club, Ottawa, and his residence is 443 Albert St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gibson, Brigadier-General Sir John Morison, K.C.M.G., M.A., LL.D.,
K.C.=, born January 1, 1842, township of Toronto, in the County of Peel,
and is therefore a “Peel Old Boy.” His father, William Gibson, a farmer,
came from Glamis, Forfarshire, Scotland, in 1827. His mother, Mary
Sinclair, was born in Scotland. Her people had settled in the township
of Nelson, in the County of Halton. The family removed from Toronto
township when the subject of this sketch was only eight or nine years of
age to the County of Haldimand, where he had some experience in the Log
School House education of the primitive settlements of that County in
the early 50’s. He afterwards went to the Central School in Hamilton,
the late Dr. Sangster then being Superintendent and Head Master. In due
course, and working against great disadvantages, he became head boy of
the public schools of Hamilton, a position which he maintained until he
passed the matriculation examination of the University of Toronto in
1859. As head boy of the school, he with the second boy, was selected to
open the waterworks system of the city of Hamilton in 1858. His course
at the University was a very successful one, taking scholarships all the
way through the various years, and graduating in 1863 as the highest
honor graduate with the Prince of Wales Prize, then given for general
proficiency, including honors at graduation, the Silver Medals in
Classics and Modern Languages, and the prize in Oriental languages,
including Hebrew, Chaldee and Syriac. After taking his B.A. degree, he
commenced the study of law in the office of the late Sir George Burton
in Hamilton, at the same time taking the law course of the University,
and receiving the degree of LL.B. in 1869 with the gold medal. One thing
of note in connection with General Gibson’s life is that he has always
endeavored to repay the educational institutions from which he received
his education. For many years he was a member of the Board of Education
in Hamilton, and was its Chairman for two years. During that time the
Collegiate Institute was brought into prominence as one of the leading
secondary educational institutions of the country. He served as a
Senator of the University of Toronto, being elected at the first
election of graduates in 1873 and re-elected in 1878 and 1883. He
subsequently founded a general proficiency scholarship for matriculation
candidates. When a student of the University during the Trent affair, he
joined the University Rifles, being one of the first to sign the roll of
that company in 1860. He has been in the Militia ever since, for now
nearly 59 years, and at the present time is the senior officer in the
Canadian Force among all who are not following military life as their
regular occupation. In 1863, he transferred to the 13th, and has served
from private up through all the ranks to the position of commanding
officer, which position he held for 9 years, and at the present time is
the Honorary Colonel of that corps. He was present at Ridgeway as a
lieutenant. He subsequently commanded the 15th Brigade, having
headquarters at Hamilton, and later on at the beginning of the great war
received the rank of Brigadier-General. As a marksman he always has had
a very high reputation, having been a member Canadian Wimbledon teams in
1874, ’75, and ’79, being a frequent prize winner, and taking the much
coveted Prince of Wales prize in the last-named year. He took part in
several of the early international long range rifle contests with
British, Australian, and American rifle teams. In 1881 he commanded the
team which defeated the British team in the competition for the Kolapore
Cup. He was president for three years of the Ontario Rifle Association,
was also President of the Canadian Military Rifle League, and from 1893
for thirteen or fourteen years was President of the Dominion Rifle
Association. In 1907 he again commanded the Canadian rifle team at
Bisley. He has also been President of the Canadian Military Institute,
and was President of the Canadian Red Cross Society from its original
organization throughout the South African War, and subsequently for a
period of about 14 years, and has been throughout the recent great war
one of the most active members of the Executive Board. He was for two
years President of the Hamilton St. Andrew’s Society. From an early age
he has been a very prominent Freemason—was Grand Master of the Masonic
Grand Lodge of Canada during the years 1892 and 1893, being now the
representative of the Grand Lodge of England, and for nine years was
Sovereign Grand Commander of the Supreme Council of the Scottish Rite
Masons in Canada. He has always taken a prominent part in politics. As a
young man he was Secretary of the Hamilton Reform Association, which
position he held for many years. He was first returned to the
Legislature in 1879, representing Hamilton for a period of 19 years, and
afterwards East Wellington for 7 years. He entered the Government as
Provincial Secretary in 1889, became Commissioner of Crown Lands in
1896, and Attorney-General in 1899. He was an honorary A.D.C. to their
Excellencies, Lord Aberdeen and Lord Minto, when Governors-General, and
in 1897 was selected by the Militia Department to proceed to England in
connection with the celebration of the Queen’s Diamond Jubilee; was
present by invitation, at the coronations in Westminster Abbey of the
late King Edward VII, and of the present King George V. He has always
taken a leading part at the Bar, and was made a Queen’s Counsel in 1890,
is a Bencher of the Law Society of Upper Canada, and as a young man was
an examiner in the Faculty of Law at Toronto University. In 1903 he
received the honorary degree of LL.D. from that institution, and
subsequently also from McMaster University. In 1908 he became
Lieut.-Governor of the Province of Ontario, being the last to occupy the
old Government House on King Street West, Toronto, continuing for over
six years. During his term, on the recommendation of His Royal Highness
the Duke of Connaught, then Governor-General of Canada, he was created a
Knight Commander of the Order of St. Michael and St. George. As a public
man he shrank from prominence in the public eye; he was most industrious
and faithful in the performance of any duties he undertook to discharge.
He had an excellent training for many years under the greatest of law
makers this country has ever produced, Sir Oliver Mowat. While a private
member of the Legislative Assembly he was selected as Chairman of the
Private Bills Committee, which for fifteen years he presided over with
eminent ability, fairness and impartiality. During the short period when
the license branch was under his control some of the most advanced
measures of temperance legislation were introduced by him, including the
local option law, the validity of which was stoutly contested, but in
the end affirmed by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Though
not himself a practical sportsman, almost immediately after entering the
legislature he led a movement for better protection of game birds and
fur-bearing animals, first securing the abolition of spring shooting and
other improvements in the law, and afterwards the appointment of a Royal
Commission followed by a thorough revision of the game laws and the
establishment of a departmental branch, with a chief game warden and
other provincial wardens entrusted with the enforcement of the laws
relating to game protection. While Provincial Secretary he was always an
industrious legislator. The laws relating to Joint Stock Companies were
thoroughly revised, modernized, and simplified by him. The old laws
relating to building societies and loan companies were completely
overhauled, and became the present Loan Corporations Act. It was at this
time also that he undertook to stem the tide or flood of benefit
societies, many of them of the fake order, which threatened to inundate
this Province—a subject of legislation requiring at the time very
cautious and skilful handling, but which, with the able assistance of
Mr. J. H. Hunter, M.A., was ultimately put on a very satisfactory
footing. One of the most important laws of comparatively recent years
owes to him its existence, and has generally been referred to as the
“Gibson Act”—the Act relating to neglected and dependent children—and
the establishment of the Children’s Branch, with Mr. Kelso as its chief
officer. This law has been most beneficial in its operation, and has
been followed more or less closely in most of the other Provinces.
During his comparatively short incumbency as Commissioner of Crown Lands
he introduced and carried through the House the important legislation
prohibiting the exportation of saw logs—a measure affecting very large
interests but meeting the entire approval of the public. He also dealt
with important changes in the mining laws during a period of great
mining excitement in the Province. It is probably not generally known
that while Commissioner of Crown Lands he introduced a short but very
important measure preventing any absolute alienation by the Crown of
Provincial water powers, and providing for leasing same for short
renewable terms of years subject to conditions in the public interest.
It is somewhat singular that a public man who has often been unfairly
criticized as a champion of monopolies should never have been credited
with this act directly aimed against and prohibitive of monopoly. In the
matter of forest preservation or reforesting, Mr. Gibson aimed at
carrying out a programme which probably time would justify as the most
effective and productive policy possible. He aimed at the selection and
setting apart every year a portion of the Crown domain unfit for
agricultural purposes as a timber growing reserve. Many such sections in
Northern Ontario, which have been cut over or burnt over, and now more
or less covered over by new growth, could be set apart and treated as
territory to be guarded as timber growing areas. In the Eastern part of
the Province certain old limits were repurchased from the license
holders and so set apart, and again another area in Western Ontario. The
plan of year after year reserving areas in this way would in a
generation or so result in well defined sections of the Province
producing a new crop of timber which would not fail to become an
extremely valuable asset to posterity. It was in Sir John Gibson’s time
that the first steps were taken for the establishment of the Temagami
Reserve very effectively carried out by Mr. Davis, his successor. As
Attorney-General he had, of course, the responsibility of legislation
generally. The assessment laws had been the subject of investigation and
report at the hands of two Royal Commissioners, and amid the distressing
conflict of opinion on the various questions which arise whenever this
subject is touched, the difficulty of framing a generally acceptable
measure seemed insuperable. Whatever may be thought of the present act,
Sir John Gibson’s tact as a legislator was mainly instrumental in having
it passed through the House, and probably as time has passed and the
public have become more and more familiar with its provisions it may be
considered to give general satisfaction. The collection and revision of
Imperial Statutes in force in this Province in the shape of a brief
third volume of the Revised Statutes carried out with the aid of a
committee of the judges has been a boon to law students, and a great
convenience to the legal profession. (The foregoing facts and
observations regarding Sir John’s career have been contributed by Mr.
James Innes Macintosh, who was for several years his private secretary
when a Minister of the Crown.) He was one of the pioneers, along with
the late John Patterson and the late John Moodie, in introducing
Hydro-Electric power and long distance transmission of same in this
country utilizing surplus water from the Welland Canal, and transmitting
the power to Hamilton, where very soon many of the industrial and
electric railways adopted the same, to the great advantage of the
companies. For many years he was President of the Cataract Power
Company. He is a Director of the Canadian Bank of Commerce, the Canada
Life Assurance Company, the Toronto General Trusts Corporation, the
Toronto Conservatory of Music, the Homewood Retreat at Guelph, the
Dominion Power and Transmission Company, the Canadian Westinghouse
Company, and several other industrial companies in Hamilton. He was
married first in 1869 to Emily Annie, daughter of the late Rolph
Birrell, of London, who died in 1874; second, in 1876 to Caroline,
daughter of the late Senator Adam Hope, who died in 1877; and third, on
May 18, 1881, to Elizabeth, daughter of the late Judge Malloch, of
Brockville. He had six children, viz., John Gordon Gibson, who died
shortly after taking his B.A. degree at the University of Toronto;
Eugenia Elizabeth Emily; Margaret Mary Stewart, wife of Robert S.
Waldie, of Toronto; Archibald Hope Gibson, Barrister; Captain Colin W.
G. Gibson, of the Royal Fusiliers, who was twice severely wounded; and
Francis Malloch Gibson, who went to the front as an officer of the 48th
Highlanders at the commencement of the war and was killed in action near
Armentieres. Sir John’s manner is dignified but affable, his style of
speech clear and precise; in his movements he is deliberate, but with
the elasticity of well-preserved middle age, while his expression is
kindly but alert, with evidence of unlimited determination and
unmistakable inclination and power to lead. When an active officer of
the Militia he was recognized by his fellow-officers as a master of
field manœuvres. The beautiful family residence, “Ravenscliffe,” is
delightfully situated on the lower slope of the mountain, looking down
Ravenscliffe Avenue, through a vista of stately elm trees.




[Illustration: W. C. KENNEDY
Windsor]




=Mitchell, The Hon. Walter George= (Quebec City), Treasurer of the
Province of Quebec, was born at Danby, in the County of Drummond. He is
the son of the Hon. Senator William Mitchell, his mother’s maiden name
being Miss Dora Goddard. His early education was matured at the Montreal
High School and at the Bishop’s College school of Lennoxville.
Thereafter he entered McGill University as an undergraduate, finally
taking his degree of B.C.L. in 1901. On being admitted to practice at
the Bar, he became connected with the law firm of Greenshields,
Greenshields & Heneker. Two years after he became a prominent member of
the firm of Laflamme, Mitchell and Callaghan, receiving his K.C. in
1912. In view of his being chosen by the Lieutenant-Governor to assume
the duties of the Hon. P. S. G. Mackenzie, who had died suddenly, he was
subsequently elected by acclamation as representative of the
constituency of Richmond, a county which he continues to represent as
Member of the Provincial Parliament, after a second election by
acclamation. Prior to his assuming the office of Provincial Treasurer,
Mr. Mitchell was in possession of a large and lucrative practice in
Montreal. While actively engaged with his professional duties, as a
leading lawyer, he did not fail to take an active interest in political
affairs, and came into public prominence in the administration of the
Montreal Reform Club. Through his efforts in co-operation with his
associate members, new and attractive quarters for that club were
erected on Sherbrooke Street; and, in 1913, he was chosen, by way of
reward for his active services, the President of that flourishing
institution, and in the following year was re-elected to the same
office. From the date of the famous Drummond-Arthabaska election contest
in 1910, Mr. Mitchell became more and more intimately identified with
the political life of the Eastern Townships and its various electoral
movements. During the winning of the constituency of Drummond-Arthabaska
back to the Liberal interest in 1910, he was associated with Dr. Beland,
later a prisoner of war in Germany, and was acclaimed everywhere as an
eloquent and persuasive pleader in behalf of the naval policy of Sir
Wilfrid Laurier. In fact, in 1911, it was to a large extent through Mr.
Mitchell’s influence as an organizer, not to speak of his father’s
unbroken popularity as a public man, and other influences, that the
constituency of Drummond-Arthabaska was won over to the Liberal
interest. As Provincial Treasurer, Mr. Mitchell has made a name for
himself as a most successful financier, taking a prominent rank almost
immediately as a parliamentary debater. Nor has he failed to share in
remedial legislation, whenever such came up for consideration in the
Provincial Parliament. He has interested himself particularly in
modifying the Quebec License Law, fathering amendments to that law
restricting the number of licenses, increasing the license fees,
prohibiting treating, increasing the age limit, shortening the hours of
sale, and urging an enactment to abolish the bars on the 1st of May,
1918, with immediate sanction to the Minister of Militia and Defence to
declare any or all districts throughout the Province of Quebec “out of
bounds” for soldiers and sailors. At his instance also the Quebec
Insurance Act has been amended from time to time, so as to give better
protection to the public. One of his most notable and highly patriotic
acts in parliament since the war in Europe began, was his presentation
of a Bill, asking authority to subscribe out of the public revenues in
behalf of his native province a million of dollars to the Canadian
Patriotic Fund—a proposal which met with an instant and unanimous
approval from both chambers. Under his mature financial advice the
Province of Quebec has spent millions of dollars in constructing and
improving highways of nearly every district. And yet so prudently have
the finances of the province been husbanded under his judicious
oversight, that the provincial debt has virtually remained as easy a
burden on the people as it ever has been, notwithstanding the large
amounts spent on the highways, and the large increase in the grants to
education, agriculture, and public works. Altogether Mr. Mitchell has
won the highest credit as a parliamentarian and a financier, enjoying
the full confidence of his colleagues and of many of his fellow
legislators, irrespective of party lines. He was married on February the
4th, 1907, Mrs. Mitchell’s maiden name having been Miss Antonia
Pelletier. Their family comprises two sons and three daughters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Lesperance, Albert Paneran= (Montreal, Que.), General Manager, was born
at Longueuil, Que., on September 17, 1860, and was educated at Longueuil
and Montreal Business College, he is the Executor of the Estate of Henry
Hogan, also the Estate Masson; is a Roman Catholic in religion and
styles himself an Independent in politics; is a member of the Canadian
Club, Montreal Board of Trade, and Chambre de Commerce, also Governor of
Notre Dame Hospital. On May 10, 1890, he married Delima Bovin, the
daughter of Leonard Bovin, a merchant, of St. Hyacinthe, Que., and has
ten children: Juliette, Henri, Germain, Annette, Arthur, Simmonne,
Irene, Therese, Suzanne and Paul.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Parsons, S. R.= (Toronto, Ont.), President of the British-American Oil
Co., Ltd., Oil Refineries, was born in Port Hope, Ont., in 1854. Son of
William and Margaret (Trick) Parsons. He received his education in the
Public and Grammar Schools of that town and began business with the firm
of James Campbell & Son, at that time extensive manufacturing
stationers, and publishers of Toronto. After six years’ association with
this firm he removed to Winnipeg and subsequently engaged in the
wholesale stationery business as senior partner in Parsons, Bell & Co.,
which afterwards merged with the Consolidated Stationery Co., Ltd., of
which he was President for a number of years. In 1882 Mr. Parsons
married Anne Kate Helliwell, daughter of Rev. Thomas Lord Helliwell of
Winnipeg, and has three daughters, Mrs. Chas. A. Withers, Mrs. Henry F.
Gooderham, and Mrs. Errol A. Hethrington, all of Toronto. After sixteen
years of successful business in Winnipeg, Mr. Parsons was compelled to
leave the northern climate in the interest of his health and returned to
Toronto where in 1906, along with others, he established the extensive
business of which he continues the moving spirit. He has always taken an
active interest in religious, social and philanthropic work and for many
years has been a director of the Methodist Union. Since 1900 he has been
Chairman of the Ontario Board of Directors, Canadian Fire Insurance Co.,
and is a member of the Northern Ontario Fire Relief Committee, and the
Organization of Resources Committee of the Province of Ontario, also of
the Ontario Executive of the Bonne Entente at whose meeting in the
Chateau Frontenac, Quebec, in 1916, he was one of the principal speakers
and put forward this three-plank platform: First—We ought to live
together in sincerity, friendship and justice; Second—We ought to
strive for a cleaner public life; Third—We ought to help maintain the
integrity and strength of our great Empire. But it is in connection with
his work in the Canadian Manufacturers Association that Mr. Parsons has
come most prominently before the public, for though naturally being far
from an aggressive man, when the burden of office was laid upon him he
realized his responsibilities to the full and has frequently from the
platform, in the press and in action given evidence of the reserve force
that was in him. He was elected for four successive years (1911-1915)
Chairman of the Transportation Committee of the Association; Second
Vice-President in 1915, First Vice-President in 1916, and President at
the Annual Meeting of the Association in Winnipeg in 1917. He was
Chairman in 1917 of the Committee of Employers of Labor for the Province
of Ontario to secure men to help in the harvest fields, an organization
responsible for the saving of many millions in food stuffs. On assuming
office as President of the C.M.A. Mr. Parsons delivered an inspiring
inaugural address of a thoroughly business character, but progressive,
loyal, ethical, liberal and humanitarian as well. In 1918 he was
appointed a representative of the C.M.A. on the Federal Board for the
settlement of Labor disputes. Writing of him on this occasion, “The
Monetary Times” says: “He is a capable, energetic business man, with a
frank and alert manner that wins confidence. The welfare of the Canadian
Manufacturers Association is in good hands under his care. He is a type
of Association President well able to smooth out many of the
difficulties between capital and labor, having appreciation of the
problems met by both.” Mr. William Lewis Edmonds writes at the same time
in “Industrial Canada”: “While Mr. Parsons is strong as a business man,
and particularly in the quality of executive ability, that is not the
only direction in which his strength lies. He is a strong man all the
way round. He is a man of strong opinions and particularly on subjects
that approach the ethical in character, and having cultivated the habit
of looking at controversial subjects from the other fellow’s perspective
as well as his own, it is not a difficult thing to persuade him to
change his attitude, provided the other fellow is right and he is wrong,
but when once after carefully weighing the pros and cons, he is
persuaded that he is right he’ll not surrender principles, although
where non-essentials are the issue he will readily agree to a
compromise. In judgment he is sound, and in insight keen and quick.
Although not connected with either political party, Mr. Parsons takes a
keen interest in public affairs, and practical movements which have for
their object a betterment of conditions in state and society have his
warm, and in many instances, his active sympathy.” Writing in the
“Toronto Star Weekly,” Arthur Hawkes says: “Mr. Parson’s service in the
Manufacturers Association has been real service, and not a still hunt
for glory. In committee he is as cautious as strong, and as strong as
wise. He looks often before he leaps and he can take a pretty good
leap—the fundamental condition of which is that he shall have examined
the jumping-off place and surveyed the spot where he intends to land.
When he has made up his mind he doesn’t change it, which is because he
is sound in judgment.” In concluding his quite lengthy sketch and
referring particularly to Mr. Parsons’ political platform he says: “This
is a pretty good creed. It is just like Parsons. If you know him you
know an honest manufacturer, a broad Methodist, and a friend who is with
you till daylight.” Of him, “Motoring” says: “He presented an excellent
report to the C.M.A. convention as Chairman of the Special Committee on
the Co-ordination of recruiting and production. He is a clear thinker
and speaker and could probably quote from half a hundred authors. He is
a keen business man and one who puts his best efforts into all he
undertakes.” Mr. Parsons is not only a clear thinker but an apt phraser
as may be judged from this clause in his inaugural address as President
of the C.M.A.: “These are surely days for plain living and high
thinking, days when there is a compression of life, and days which
summon all that is heroic within us to stand like men in meeting our
duties, whether they be personal, social, local or national.” In a
speech before the Canadian Club of Orillia, in February, 1918, on
“War-Time Business and Profits” which was endorsed by the C.M.A.
Executive and published in the principal papers of Canada, Mr. Parsons
said: “Canadians, let us know each other better, let us understand and
sympathize with each other’s problems, for in that knowledge lies
increased production, good feeling between city and country, prosperity
in reason and fair play to all.” A strong desire for fair play and
justice to all is the outstanding characteristic of Mr. Parsons’ whole
attitude towards any question, and, while conservatively progressive he
is so liberally and humanely so that his influence in the important
association of which he is President cannot fail to be productive of
better feeling between employer and employees. In manner Mr. Parsons is
genial and easy of approach, a good conversationalist, well-read and
with a ready and apt style of expression, but views every question
apparently through ethical spectacles—a habit unfortunately not
generally in vogue. He is a member of the National Club, Canadian Club,
and Toronto Board of Trade. He is a Unionist in politics, and a member
of the Methodist Church. His office is the 13th floor of the Royal Bank
Building and his residence 139 Crescent Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Forman, James C.= (Toronto, Ont.), Assessment Commissioner, a son of
the late James Forman, one of the 93rd Highlanders, was born November
23, 1851, and received his education in the Public and Model Schools and
British-American Commercial College. He occupied a position in a
broker’s and insurance office for about two years, and then entered the
employ of the wholesale dry goods firm of Dobbie and Carrie, remaining
there for over four years. Mr. Forman, afterwards, while in the employ
of the late George Warin, was offered a temporary position in the City
Hall by the late Stephen Radcliff, City Clerk. He was permanently
appointed in 1878 as Assessment Clerk, and gradually worked his way up
the ladder until he assumed his present position in 1905, succeeding Mr.
R. J. Fleming on the latter’s resignation. Mr. Forman has taken a close
interest in assessment matters, having read papers before the Ontario
Municipal Association and International Tax Association and is
frequently selected to represent the City Council at their meetings. In
1903 he was in close touch with former Attorney-General Sir John Gibson
in the preparing of the new Assessment Act. In October, 1908, he read a
paper before the Internation Tax Association on “Business Assessments as
a Substitute for Personal Property.” He takes the deepest interest in
town planning and represented the City Council at Philadelphia, May,
1911, and the Board of Trade at Boston, reading a short paper at the
latter city in May, 1912. He has prepared a report on the Single Tax
Situation as he found it in the West, from Winnipeg to Victoria. Mr.
Forman is in every respect a man who has done his share toward placing
Toronto on its present high pinnacle of fame, and has won the esteem of
all citizens by his safe and able administration of the office of
Assessment Commissioner. He is a man of undoubted integrity, with keen
instinct and a pleasing countenance. He is a warm adherent, an active
worker and for several years occupant of the post of “People’s Warden”
of St. Matthew’s Church, First Avenue. He has refused several flattering
offers from the leading real estate concerns of this city, preferring to
remain in his present position.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Foster, Thomas Wilfred= (Kirkland Lake, Ont.), was born in Dundalk,
County of Grey, Ontario, on February 25, 1885, and educated at the
public school of that village, his parents being John and Christina
Foster, who moved to Alberta where the father of the subject of this
sketch died in June, 1916, at Wainwright. A brother, David Albert,
enlisted in the 51st Battalion from Edmonton, in the Canadian
Expeditionary Forces. Mr. Foster carries on the business of a general
merchant at Kirkland Lake, Ont., of which place he is the Police
Magistrate and postmaster. He married Mary Greer, daughter of James and
Sofia Greer, and is the father of the following children: Leonard,
Ralph, Vivian and Irene. Mr. Foster has been for some years prominently
identified with the Masonic Order, being Past Master for Porcupine
Lodge, and also is a member of the Orange Order. In religion, he is a
Methodist and politically, is a Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Shortly, Orville Benjamin=, began his career with the Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company on July 6, 1903. In 1904 he was appointed
Superintendent of the Ottawa district. Arriving in Ottawa he immediately
entered upon his duties in that capacity. It was not long before he had
secured for his company a large number of policy-holders who, as the
days, months and years passed by, grew larger and larger in numbers
until, up to 1918, his large and greatly increased staff of employees at
the head office, The Metropolitan Life Building, corner Metcalfe and
Queen Streets, Ottawa, and his numerous agents, are kept busily and
industriously employed. Previous to his arrival in Ottawa the
Metropolitan Life Insurance Company had failed to make itself well
established. His advent in the Capital of Canada, however, changed all
this and activity and progress began and has been in operation ever
since. As a recognition of the value of his services, in March, 1918,
the General Management of The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
promoted him to the Chief Agency for the whole of Canada—a
well-deserved and well-earned promotion, while he still retained the
Superintendency of the Ottawa district, which up to the date of his
promotion controlled no less than forty-three thousand policyholders. On
October 28, 1918, Mr. Shortly was again promoted by his company, having
been transferred from Ottawa to take charge of the Toronto district of
the Metropolitan Life. He resides at 15 Whitney Ave., North Rosedale,
and his office address is 4 Richmond St. East. Although Mr. Shortly only
came to reside in Toronto on October 28, 1918, he has already been
placed on the executive of the Life Underwriters’ Association of
Toronto; has been made a member of the Association of Life Managers, and
been elected to membership in the Ontario Club, the Royal Canadian Yacht
Club, the Canadian Club, and the Scarborough Golf Club. Mr. Shortly is
the author of several essays on Life Insurance Salesmanship, and has
given addresses before several Life Insurance associations. He is a past
President of the Life Underwriters’ Association of Ottawa. He is an
enthusiastic sportsman. In his earlier days, when he was quite an
athlete, he was an expert bicyclist and captured many first prizes in
racing contests. When, in 1914, the terrible war hostilities commenced,
Mr. Shortly placed his services, such as he could give, at the services
of the State and forced his way into the midst of the greatest war
activities in the City of Ottawa. In collecting funds for the several
patriotic objects, and in helping to make the Victory Loans successful
he was one of the most active and his services were of inestimable
value. Prior to engaging in the insurance business Mr. Shortly was
salesman and manager for Eastern Ontario for the Canadian Typograph
Company of Windsor, Ontario. He has travelled considerably throughout
the continent and Europe. On August 27, 1917, Governor Whitman, Governor
of New York State, appointed Mr. Shortly Commissioner of Deeds for the
State of New York. Mr. Shortly was born in Peterborough, Ontario,
Canada, August 13, 1875, and was educated in the Peterborough Public
Schools. He is the son of Benjamin and Hattie Robertson Shortly. His
father is a merchant in Peterborough and holds the distinction of being
in business there longer than any other man. A prominent relative is
James E. Kavanagh, 3rd Vice-President of the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company. On September 28, 1904, Mr. Shortly married Mabel Louise Howe,
daughter of Etna D. Howe, 24 Whitney Avenue, Toronto, President Northrop
& Lyman Drug Company. Two children have blessed the union—Orville Dean,
born August 3, 1905, and John Benjamin, born February 24, 1910. He is a
member of the Laurentian, Canadian, the Rivermead Golf, and the Wright
Fish and Game Clubs, of the Board of Trade, the Y.M.C.A., Masonic Order,
Scottish Rite, Murphy Chapter Rose Croix. For recreation he enjoys golf,
fishing and hunting.




[Illustration: JOHN ANGUS MACKENZIE, OTTAWA
W. B. REID, TORONTO]




=Cotton, Major-General W. H.= (Toronto, Ont.), commanding 2nd Division
H.O. at Toronto, was a Lieut.-Colonel Commandant Royal School of
Artillery, was born in Montreal on January 7, 1848. He is the eldest son
of the late Henry Cotton, of the civil service of Canada. Henry Cotton
was the son of William Miles Cotton, of England, and was born in St.
Petersburg, Russia, in 1817, coming to Canada in 1836, and serving in
the civil service for upwards of forty years. The late Mr. Cotton
married in 1847, Eleanor, daughter of David Ross, Q.C., of Montreal, who
now survives him. David Ross, who died in Montreal in 1837, aged
sixty-seven, married Jane Davidson, daughter of Judge Davidson, of
Montreal. Arthur Davidson, afterwards judge, was clerk of the Court of
Appeals in the Province of Quebec, in 1778, during the period that His
Excellency Sir F. Haldimand was Governor-General of that Province. John
Ross, an officer in Wolfe’s army at the taking of Quebec, was the
great-great-grandfather of the subject of this sketch. W. H. Cotton was
educated at Toronto and Quebec, receiving a general English education,
embracing the study of classics. At the time of the organization of the
schools of artillery, and the permanent corps connected therewith, Col.
Cotton was then (1871) a Captain in the Ottawa Garrison Artillery,
having been transferred from the Quebec Garrison Artillery. He was the
first Captain of A Battery Regt. C.A., and in 1882 succeeded to his
present appointment on the promotion of Lieut.-Colonel Irwin. He twice
visited Wimbledon, in connection with the Wimbledon team, in the years
1871 and 1875. Gen. Cotton is a staunch member of the Church of England.
He married in April, 1876, Jessie, daughter of the late John Penner, of
Montreal, and granddaughter of the late Chas. Penner, of Lachine, who
afterwards resided in Kingston. He has six children living, three sons
and three daughters, and is a member of Rideau Club, Ottawa, and York
Club, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nesbitt, Arthur Russel= (Toronto, Ont.), born at Nestleton, County of
Durham, Ontario, on November 1, 1884. Son of George M. and Letitia
(Hyland) Nesbitt. Educated at Wellesley School, Jarvis Street
Collegiate, Trinity College, and Osgoode Hall, Toronto, being called to
the Bar in 1910. He commenced practising his profession at the
Provincial capital, where he has achieved a marked degree of success.
Married on July 16, 1913, to Sadie Harrison, daughter of W. J. Brown,
broker, of Toronto. Mr. Nesbitt has taken a deep interest in municipal
affairs, and is at present Alderman for Ward Four of the city of
Toronto, and Chairman of the Legislative Committee, which position he
has held for the last two years. He entered the City Council at the
elections in 1915, when he headed the poll, and has had that distinction
in the subsequent elections. He is a man of indefatigable energy, and a
very valuable member of the city council. He has been prominently
identified for several years with the Liberal-Conservative party, and is
past Secretary of the Conservative Association of Ward Four of the City
of Toronto. He is also prominent in fraternal societies. He is a member
of the Masonic and Orange Orders, being Past-Master of McKinley Lodge,
L.O.L. He is an Oddfellow, a member of the Independent Order of
Foresters, and the Canadian Order of Foresters.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marchand, Pierre= (Ottawa), Controller of Expenditure, Department of
Interior, when appointed to a position by Sir Clifford Sifton, who was
then Minister of the Interior, took office as an accountant whose
talents and ability as such had been well tested and approved on several
previous occasions. As accountant in the offices of the Lake
Temiscamingue Colonization Railway at Mattawa, Ontario; in his occupancy
of a similar position with Leblanc & Lemay, wholesale and retail
clothiers and gent’s furnishers, and afterwards with D. V. Ranger,
wholesale merchant at Ottawa, he was always found quick and reliable in
his work, and, besides gaining and retaining the full confidence of his
employers, he firmly established himself as an accountant of enviable
reputation. It was in 1899, owing to the increased and rapidly
increasing work that the Department of Interior was called upon to
handle, attributable to Sir Clifford Sifton’s able and progressive
administration, that Mr. Marchand’s services were secured, and the
expenditure branch of that Department required carefulness, watchfulness
and efficiency, and had to be placed in charge of one whose past record
had stamped on it faithfulness and reliability. Since Mr. Marchand’s
advent into that part of the Civil Service, the expenditure of the
Department of Interior has had a painstaking, reliable and efficient
public official, and one whose ever-attentive industry and care has
elevated it to a high standard of excellent management. Prior to
entering the Civil Service, Mr. Marchand was an active political worker
in the Liberal party’s interests in Ottawa. At one time, and for several
years, he was Secretary for the Club National, a French-Canadian Liberal
organization, and was recognized as a strong and effective political
worker. The late Hon. F. G. Marchand, who became Premier of Quebec, was
one of Mr. Marchand’s many prominent relatives. Mr. Marchand was born at
Ottawa, December 25, 1866, and is the son of Amable Marchand and Adelina
Belair. His father was a prominent accountant, who saw that his son
received a good commercial and classical education in Ottawa, Montreal
and Quebec. Mr. Marchand was twice married. On October 6, 1891, he
married at Ottawa, Josephine, daughter of Mrs. O. Lafleur, a widow. She
died in May, 1916. On January 10th, 1917, he married in Ottawa, Bertha,
daughter of P. Girard, whose residence is at Carillon, Quebec. By this
second marriage, his home is blessed with a son and a daughter, Rosaire
and Carmen. Mr. Marchand is a member of the Institut Canadien-Français
and Monument National. In religion he is a Roman Catholic, and he
resides at 81 Stewart Street.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Northrup, William Barton, K.C., M.A.= (Ottawa, Ont.), Clerk of the
House of Commons, is an eminent lawyer, and was for many years head of
the legal firm of Northrup and Roberts, of Belleville, Ontario. For many
years he sat in the House as the representative for East Hastings,
Ontario, and was noted for his able debates and the eloquent and
persistent manner in which he advocated the establishment of divorce
tribunals where the poor as well as the rich would be accorded fair play
and justice, and the abolition of the costly Senate procedure, which was
antiquated, unjust and farcical and unreliable. Mr. Northrup was first
elected to Parliament at a by-election to fill the vacancy caused by the
death of Mr. S. B. Burdell, who was returned to Parliament at the
general election in 1891. He was unsuccessful in his candidature in the
general election in 1896, but at the general elections of 1900-4-8 and
1911 he was successful. He did not run in the war election in 1917. In
1902 he accompanied the Rt. Hon. Sir R. L. Borden on the North-West
tour. Succeeding Dr. T. B. Flint, M.A., LL.B., D.C.L., he was appointed
Clerk of the House of Commons in 1918. Like the late Dr. Flint, Mr. W.
B. Northrup has had a long experience as a member of the House of
Commons, and is an expert in parliamentary practice. His natural
geniality and uniform courtesy made him friends on both sides of the
House. With distinguished ability, grace and dignity he fills the
position of Clerk of the House of Commons. William Barton Northrup is
the son of the late A. G. N. Northrup, Deputy-Clerk of the Crown and
Pleas, County Hastings, Ontario. He was born in Belleville, Ontario,
October 19, 1856, and was educated at the Belleville Grammar School,
Upper Canada College, and Toronto University (B.A. with honors 1877,
M.A. 1878). June 1, 1879, he married Minnie, eldest daughter of the late
J. E. Procter, Brighton, Ontario. She died June, 1905. In June, 1907, he
married Mary Schryver, daughter of the late J. C. Fitch, Toronto, and
relict of F. C. Clemow. He was created K.C. in 1902, bencher Law
Society, 1906, and was re-elected. In the House of Commons in 1892 he
moved the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, and in 1906
seconded the address inviting King Edward and Queen Alexandra to visit
Canada. In his youth he was a noted cricketer.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Braden, Norman Short= (Hamilton, Ont.), is an electrical engineer by
profession and one of the industrial chieftains of that city. He was
born at Indianapolis, U.S.A., on June 15, 1869, the son of James Braden,
a physician, and Lydia E. Braden. The Braden family are of Scottish
descent, and his ancestors emigrated from the North of Ireland to the
United States in the eighteenth century. Mr. Braden was educated at the
public schools of Indiana and at Whitman College, Walla Walla,
Washington. After leaving college in 1892 he entered the employ of the
Jenney Electric Motor Company of Indianapolis, and seven years later
joined the staff of the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company,
of Pittsburgh. Upon the formation of the Canadian Westinghouse Company,
Limited, of Hamilton, Ont., in 1903, he moved to the latter city, and
was appointed manager of the sales department, in charge of the
commercial electrical development and activities of his Company for the
entire Dominion. Under his direction the growth of the Canadian
Westinghouse Company’s business has expanded with great rapidity,
requiring an increase of capital from $1,500,000 in 1903 to $10,000,000
in 1918. It gives employment to upwards of three thousand hands, and is
the largest manufacturer of electrical apparatus in Canada. In 1919, Mr.
Braden was elected third vice-president of the company with executive
charge of its commercial organization. The subject of this sketch is
also identified with another of Hamilton’s leading industries, the B.
Greening Wire Co., Ltd. On November 29, 1906, he married Mabel, daughter
of Samuel Owen and Jennie H. Greening. The Greening family have been
prominent manufacturers of wire products in England since the year
Columbus discovered America, 1492, and have been established in Hamilton
since 1858. Of that company Mr. Braden, who entered the family by
marriage, is now a Director. He is a member of the American Institute of
Electrical Engineers and of the Jovian Order, and belongs to the
Hamilton Club, the Rotary Club of his city; the Golf and Country Club;
the Engineers’ Clubs of Toronto and Montreal; the Electric Club of
Toronto, and the Transportation Club of New York City. He is a
Presbyterian in religion, and his recreations are hunting, golf,
motoring, and motor boating. Mr. and Mrs. Braden have three children,
Eleanore Greening Braden, William Greening Braden, and Margaret Owen
Braden.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bowie, Lieut.-Colonel Henry William= (Ottawa, Ont.), Sergeant-at-Arms
of the House of Commons and a Commissioner of Parliament, is the son of
the late Captain Alexander Bowie, who, during his lifetime, was one of
the most popular men residing in the capital of the Dominion of Canada,
and Esther Shepherd, and was born at Ottawa, November 10, 1862, and
educated in the public and private schools. In 1892, Lieut.-Colonel
Bowie married Helen Louise Gouin, daughter of James A. Gouin, who for
thirty-three years was postmaster for the City of Ottawa. There are five
children, Guy Gouin, Henry William Shepherd, Louis Alexander, Marion
Faith, and Adelaide Esther—three boys and two girls. An enthusiast in
military matters, at the age of nineteen, in 1881, Lieut.-Col. Bowie
became a member of the Canadian Militia, and qualified at the Royal
Military College and the Royal School of Artillery, and for several
years was a member of the Governor-General’s Foot Guards. In 1882
Colonel Bowie entered the service of the Ottawa River Navigation
Company, in which his father was Ottawa Manager, and qualified as
Master, Marine Department, Ottawa, in 1884. From 1891 to 1896, and again
from 1911 to 1915, Colonel Bowie was Secretary to the Honourable the
Speaker of the House of Commons, and from 1891 to 1918 (for 28 years)
served as Deputy-Sergeant-at-Arms in that honourable Assembly. On the
death of Lieut.-Col. H. R. Smith, I.S.O., C.M.G., J.P., A.D.C., Colonel
Bowie was recalled from overseas, and, March, 1918, was appointed as
Sergeant-at-Arms. Shortly after the Great War was declared Colonel Bowie
made every effort to follow those who had already gone overseas, or to
join those who were preparing to go, but, owing to official and other
duties over which he had to preside he was unable to leave until 1916,
when he went as second major of the 77th Overseas Battalion. In August,
1916, he became attached to the 60th Battalion in France, but was
shortly afterwards, October, 1916, called from France to Bramshott,
England, to command a Provisional Battalion, C.E.F. It was at this time,
October, 1916, that Colonel Bowie’s eldest son, Lieut. Guy Gouin Bowie,
left Canada for overseas with the 154th Infantry Battalion, C.E.F.
Colonel Bowie remained in command of the Provisional Battalion until
July, 1917, when he was seconded for duty with the Imperial Forces and
proceeded at once to France. Arriving there he served under the
Administrative Commandant, Third Army Railheads, as Staff Officer and
O.C., Railheads Detail Detachment, till recalled to Canada in March,
1918. In the meantime his son, Lieut. Guy Gouin Bowie, who was born in
Ottawa, October 10, 1892, followed in his father’s footsteps and had
quite an eventful military career. He was appointed to the Active
Militia, G.G.F.G., as Lieutenant on December 15, 1915, and received his
certificate of qualification from the Officers’ Training School,
Kingston, on January 20, 1916. On March 5, 1916, he was appointed
Lieutenant in the 154th Infantry Battalion, C.E.F., and went overseas
with that battalion on October 20, 1916. Arriving in England, October
31, he was appointed Lieutenant in the Imperial Land Forces, and on
January 31, 1917, was transferred from the 154th Battalion to the 6th
Reserve Battalion at Seaford, Sussex. On August 7, 1917, he was
transferred to the 21st Battalion, C.E.F., France, and was dangerously
wounded in front line trenches, Lens sector, December 14, 1917. Arriving
at Clearing Station, Aubigny, December 14, 1917, he was transferred to
the 24th General Hospital, Estaples, France, January 1, 1918, and on
February 6, 1918, was transferred to Prince of Wales Hospital, London,
England, where he remained until May 6, 1918, when he was invalided
home. Lieut. Bowie was married October 10, 1916, at Ottawa to Lily
Wright Brigham, daughter of T. G. Brigham, and has two sons, Thomas Guy
and James Henry. Col. Bowie is a member of the Wellington Club, London,
England, and the Royal Ottawa Golf Club, Ottawa. His home address is 82
Park Avenue, and his official address, House of Commons, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Robinette, Thomas Cowper, K.C.= (Toronto, Ont.), enjoys an enviable
reputation as a brilliant criminal lawyer, and as such has appeared with
success in many famous cases, notably Macwherrel and Caledon wreck cases
at Brampton, Healey and Blythe at Toronto, Mrs. Kyle at Woodstock, Dr.
Robinson at Napanee and many others. Mr. Robinette is of U.E.L. descent,
his family having come from Pennsylvania to Peel County, Ontario, in
1781. He was born at Dixie, Ont., near Cooksville in 1861, the son of
the late Josiah Robinette and Esther J. Goodison. Educated at Public
Schools, Strathroy High School and Toronto University, he graduated from
the Faculty of Arts in 1884, and from that of law in 1887, with the
Governor-General’s Gold Medal. He was Silver Medallist in Modern
Languages and English Prizeman, also holding a Scholarship in General
Proficiency. Although taking an active part in politics, Mr. Robinette
has never yet represented any constituency, having contested Centre
Toronto against E. F. Clarke unsuccessfully in 1904 and again in 1908
against Edmund Bristol, also North York, in 1911. He married Edith May
Lindsay, of Pickering Township, Ont., in 1899, and has four sons,
Thomas, Jr., John, George and Allan, also one daughter, Minnie. Thomas
Robinette was made K.C. in 1902, a Bencher of the Law Society in 1911
and 1916; Member of the Royal Colonial Institute, London, Eng., in 1913;
Director of the Moral and Social Reform League, Toronto, in 1913;
President of the Methodist Young Men’s Association in 1906; President of
the University Literary and Scientific Society in 1907; Chairman of the
Young Liberal Convention, Toronto, in 1885; also Joint Secretary of the
Dominion Young Men’s Association, formed at Montreal in 1886. Mr.
Robinette is a Liberal in politics and a Methodist in religion. He is a
member of the National Club, Ontario Club, R.C.Y.C., Canadian Club and
Empire Club, all of Toronto, also of the Masonic, I.O.O.F., C.O.O.F.,
A.O.U.W., and Maccabean Societies. An ex-officer of the Queen’s Own
Rifles and 34th Regiment, he is to-day engaged in the practice of law at
Toronto as head of the firm of Robinette, Godfrey, Phelan and Lawson, in
which J. S. Fullerton, K.C., late Corporation Counsel of Toronto, is
associate counsel. “As a pleader, energetic, clear and
painstaking”—“Toronto News.” “Has a trained mind, is accessible to new
ideas, and has unusual gifts for the exposition and enforcement of his
opinions”—“Toronto Globe.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Murray, Hon. Robert, K.C.=, Provincial Secretary-Treasurer of the
Province of New Brunswick, is one of the best known and widely respected
public men of the Maritime Provinces. He was born at Chatham, N.B.,
where he still resides, on July 17, 1855, the son of Robert and Jane
Murray. His father was a millwright, and the younger Robert was educated
at the Presbyterian Academy in his native town, from which he graduated
in 1871. At school he had shown himself to be of a naturally studious
turn of mind, and decided to qualify himself for the bar. He was Police
Magistrate for the town of Chatham, N.B., from 1887 to 1891, when he
resigned. For upwards of forty years he followed his profession as a
barrister in the town of Chatham, and has built up a large practice in
the County of Northumberland, where he is held in general esteem and
confidence. Subsequently, in 1902, his standing was recognized when he
was created a King’s Counsel. In addition, he devoted himself to public
and municipal affairs, and was identified with the Liberal party. His
first public service was as a member of the County Council of
Northumberland, and he was later an alderman of the town of Chatham. In
1905 he was elected by acclamation in a by-election as one of the
representatives of Northumberland County in the Provincial Legislature,
where he served till 1908. During the past few years, there have been
several political upheavals in the province of New Brunswick, and in
1917, when the Conservative ministry, headed by Hon. G. Clarke, sought
the franchise of the people, there was a demand for new men. In that
contest, Mr. Murray was induced to stand as one of the Liberal
candidates for Northumberland, which sends four members to the
Legislature. He was elected, and at the same time the Murray
administration, of which Hon. J. A. Murray was Premier, was defeated.
Hon. Walter E. Foster, who was called upon to form a ministry, at once
sent for Mr. Murray and offered him the portfolio of Provincial
Secretary-Treasurer, in succession to Hon. D. V. Landry. The offer was
accepted, and Mr. Murray has since conducted the finances of the
province to the satisfaction of everyone. From his youth Mr. Murray took
an active interest in the militia of his district, and retired in 1910
with the rank of Major, receiving the long service decoration. During
the late war he played an energetic, useful part in promoting Canada’s
military and patriotic effort. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and is
a member of the A.F. & A.M., and the I.O.O.F. His recreations are
hunting, curling and quoit playing. On June 11, 1889, he married Jane,
daughter of Simon F. Simpson, of Negnac, Northumberland County, N.B.,
and has three children, Nina Helen, Vera Alice, and Robert Blaine, all
of whom are now married. Though his public duties compel him to spend
much of his time in Fredericton, his home is still at Chatham, N.B., and
he continues the practice of his profession there.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wood, Rev. William Robertson= (Winnipeg, Man.), General Secretary of
the Manitoba Grain Growers’ Association. Was born on June 6, 1874, at
Weir, Orkney, Scotland. Son of William Wood and Margaret Robertson. Came
to Canada in 1887. Educated at primary school in his native island, and
at Port Elgin High School, Owen Sound Model School, Toronto University
and Knox College. From this latter institution he graduated in 1904. On
his ordination, he served the Presbyterian Church as Minister in
Dunbarton, Ont., 1904-8; Claremont, Ont., 1908-13; Franklin, Man.,
1913-16. Opposed Hon. J. H. Howden, Attorney-General for Manitoba, for
the constituency of Beautiful Plains, Man., and was defeated by
thirty-two votes. First elected a member of the Manitoba Legislature for
Beautiful Plains, August, 1915, opposing J. H. Irwin, Neepawa. General
Secretary of the Free Trade League of Canada, 1916-17. Became Secretary
of the Manitoba Grain Growers’ Association, August, 1917. Married, in
June, 1904, to Margaret, daughter of Andrew and Ellen Workman, of
Rothsay, Ont., and has one daughter, Rhoda Marguerite, born in December,
1906. In politics Rev. Mr. Wood is an Independent Liberal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Weld, John=, publisher (London, Ont.), was born on a farm in Middlesex
County, Ont., on September 7, 1854. His father, the late William Weld,
son of an Anglican Church clergyman, emigrated from Tenterden, Kent,
England, in 1843, and made a home for himself amid the forests of
Delaware Township. After living the life of a pioneer farmer for twenty
years, he founded “The Farmer’s Advocate” of London in 1866 as a means
of assisting other settlers who were continually coming to him for
advice, and it is through his long association with this journal and its
colleague, “The Farmer’s Advocate and Home Journal” of Winnipeg that the
subject of this sketch became so widely known. After receiving his early
education in the London schools, Mr. Weld learned the printing business
in a local shop and completed his apprenticeship with a short
post-graduate engagement with a large New York publishing house.
Returning to Canada, he was attracted by the West, which was then
opening up for settlers, and he staked his claim in Saskatchewan, where
he “proved up” on a half-section in 1885. The growth of “The Farmer’s
Advocate” then necessitated his return to London, where he became
business manager of the publication until his father’s death on January
3, 1891. He then became general manager, and when the Wm. Weld Company,
Ltd., was organized and incorporated in July of the same year, he
acquired a controlling interest in the firm, which he has since held.
The first issue of “The Farmer’s Advocate” of Winnipeg appeared in 1890.
It was edited in the West, but a separate company was not organized
until July 31, 1905, when The Farmer’s Advocate of Winnipeg, Ltd., was
incorporated with Mr. Weld as President. A building was erected on
Princess Street in that year, but it proved inadequate to meet the
ever-growing requirements of the business, so it was sold in 1911, and a
five-story concrete, fire-proof building was constructed at the corner
of Notre Dame and Langside Streets. In order to keep the two
publications inseparably linked with practical and progressive farming,
as well as to provide means whereby the editors might keep constantly in
touch with varying agricultural conditions, a farm was purchased in the
neighbourhood of London, and, incidentally, a separated portion of this
is a part of the Weld homestead which has always been owned by the
family under the original Crown grant. The subject of this sketch spends
many enjoyable hours on Weldwood Farm, where pure-bred Yorkshire swine
and one of the largest herds of pure-bred dual-purpose Shorthorns in
Canada are maintained. The Bryant Press, Toronto, of which Mr. Weld is
President, was acquired in 1903, and he is also President of the London
Printing and Lithographing Company, Ltd. He has held various offices in
the Canadian Press Association, and was the only representative of the
Agricultural Press to visit Britain and the war zone in company with
Canadian publishers and editors, the party being the guests of the
Imperial Government in the summer of 1918. He is a member of the
Anglican Church, and a life member of the Masonic Order, Tuscan Lodge
195, A.F. & A.M.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Foster, Hon. Walter Edward=, Premier of New Brunswick, is also one of
the most prominent business men of that Province. He was born at St.
Martins, N.B., on April 9, 1874, the son of Edward H. and Elizabeth
(Pattison) Foster, and educated at the public and grammar schools of St.
John, N.B. As a boy of fifteen he entered the Bank of New Brunswick as a
junior clerk, and remained in its service until 1899, when he became a
member of the firm of Vassie & Co., Ltd., wholesale dry goods merchants,
St. John. Of this firm he is now Vice-President and Managing Director.
He is also actively connected with transportation and shipping
interests, and is President of the St. Martins Railway Co. He was
Vice-President of the St. John Board of Trade in 1906-7, and President
in 1908-9. He was Third Arbitrator and Chairman of the Conciliation
Board which successfully settled differences between the longshoremen of
the Port of St. John and the Shipping Federation, 1913. In the autumn of
1915 differences having again arisen between the Longshoremen’s
Association and the shipping companies at St. John, he was appointed
Chairman of the Conciliation Board by the Minister of Labor of Canada,
and succeeded in effecting an agreement for two years. Coming as it did
in the midst of the war, this settlement was of the highest importance
in a military sense. Hon. Mr. Foster was formerly an officer in the New
Brunswick Regiment, Canadian Artillery, retiring with the rank of
Captain in 1903. He has been for a good many years identified with the
Liberal party, and is a Past President of the Young Liberals Club of St.
John, but not until comparatively recently did he become a candidate for
political office. In 1916 the Liberal party in the Legislature decided
on reorganization, and offered the leadership of the Opposition to Mr.
Foster. He accepted, and at once threw himself with energy into the task
of putting the party on a fighting basis. At the general elections of
February 24, 1917, he was victorious at the polls, and he was shortly
afterward sworn in as First Minister. His business-like and economical
administration in a difficult period has given satisfaction to all
classes of citizens. He is a member of the Union Club, St. John, and was
President of the Cliff Club, 1915-7. In religion he is an Anglican. On
January 18, 1900, he married Jehan Mary, daughter of William Vassie, St.
John, and has one son and three daughters. His residence is at 36
Cobourg Street, St. John, and his summer residence at Rothesay, N.B.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Charlesworth, Hector=, journalist (Toronto, Ont.), was born at
Hamilton, Ont., September 28, 1872, the son of Horatio G. and Charlotte
(McEachern) Charlesworth. He is a Canadian of several generations, some
of his forbears having come to Quebec after the British conquest in the
eighteenth century. His maternal grandfather, John McEachern, whose
parents went to Manitoba with Lord Selkirk’s party, was born at Fort
Garry on the site of the present city of Winnipeg, in 1811. When he was
but very young, his parents travelled in canoes through the waterways of
Northern Ontario to Montreal, and later made their home at Chateauguay
Basin, Que. Mr. Charlesworth has lived in Toronto since 1876, and was
educated at Wellesley School and Jarvis Street Collegiate Institute. His
father was a shoe manufacturer; and in 1887 he was articled as a
chartered accountant with a view to his ultimately becoming office
manager of the firm. At seventeen he commenced writing anonymously under
the _nom de plume_ of “Touchstone” for Toronto “Saturday Night.” In 1891
Mr. E. E. Shepherd, editor of the journal, inserted an advertisement
asking the contributor to disclose his identity, and on learning it
offered him a position on the staff of that journal. He remained with
Mr. Shepherd for a year, and then resolved to qualify himself by
practical experience as a reporter. During the next eighteen years he
worked on several daily newspapers, including “The World,” “The News,”
and “The Mail and Empire,” of which latter journal he was City Editor
from 1904 to 1910. Shortly after the reorganization of “Saturday Night”
as a national weekly he was offered and accepted the post of Assistant
Managing Editor, which he still holds. Though he has been a copious
writer on political, financial and social topics, he is perhaps best
known as a musical and dramatic critic. He acted as Chairman of the
Board of Judges at the Earl Grey dramatic competitions, Toronto, 1911,
and of Winnipeg, 1912, and eliminating judge in the Duke of Connaught’s
competition, 1913. He was also chief judge in the “Collier’s Weekly”
competition to secure suitable English words for “O Canada” in 1909. He
has written essays and sketches for many publications, including the
“International Studio,” the “New York Evening Post,” “Christian Science
Monitor,” “New York Times,” the “Canadian Bankers’ Journal,” and the
“Canadian Magazine.” His name appears among the contributors to volume
one, number one, of the latter publication. He was one of the special
writers engaged in connection with the Victory Loan Campaigns of 1918
and 1919, his work being syndicated throughout Canada, and has edited
and contributed to many Canadian books of reference. His other published
work includes a treatise on modern methods of treating tuberculosis
published by the National Sanitarium Association, and the narrative
introduction to Dr. Herbert A. Bruce’s controversial book “Politics and
the Canadian Army Medical Service.” In 1900 he was personally thanked by
the family of the late Robert Louis Stevenson for two sonnets protesting
against a movement to remove the remains of that author from Samoa,
which have since been reprinted in the “Oxford Book of Canadian Verse.”
He was also one of nine accredited Canadian correspondents who
accompanied the present King and Queen (then Duke and Duchess of
Cornwall and York) on the Royal tour of 1901, and later reported His
Majesty’s visit to the Quebec Tercentenary in 1908. On February 15,
1897, he married Katherine, second daughter of Peter Ryan, Toronto, and
has two children, Constance Charlotte (born 1904) and Lionel Victor
(born 1906).

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bennett, Richard Bedford, K.C., LL.B.= (Calgary, Alta.), is one of the
leading barristers and publicists of the Canadian West. He was born at
Hopewell, Albert County, New Brunswick, on July 3, 1870, the son of
Henry J. and Henrietta (Stiles) Bennett. His father was of U.E. Loyalist
stock, and his mother’s people settled in Canada immediately after the
British conquest of 1759-60. On both sides Mr. Bennett represents the
ninth generation born on this side of the Atlantic. He was educated in
the Public and High Schools of New Brunswick and at Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, where he qualified for the law and
received the degree of LL.B. He was called to the New Brunswick Bar in
1893, and for a time practised at Chatham, N.B., as the partner of the
late Hon. L. J. Tweedie, afterward Prime Minister and
Lieutenant-Governor of the Province. In 1897 he removed to Calgary, and
was called to the Bar of the North-West Territories, forming a
partnership with Mr. (now Sir) James Lougheed, at present Government
leader in the Dominion Senate and Minister of Civil Re-establishment, a
partnership which has continued ever since. In 1907, Mr. Bennett was
created King’s Counsel. In 1898, one year after his arrival in the West,
he was elected to the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories
for West Calgary, and sat in that body until its dissolution in 1905, on
the granting of autonomy to Alberta and Saskatchewan. In 1909, he was
elected for his old constituency to the Alberta Legislature, and was
recognized as the ablest debater in that body. Among his public services
was the exposure of the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway transaction,
which led to a change from the Rutherford to the Sifton administration
and Cabinet reconstruction. At the Federal elections of 1911 he resigned
from the Alberta Legislature to run for the House of Commons as
Conservative candidate for Calgary. He was elected, and the same
campaign placed Sir Robert Borden in power. At Ottawa, Mr. Bennett was
at once recognized as one of the leading figures on the Government
benches, and in the trying period which followed the outbreak of the war
in 1914 proved a source of strength to the administration. Actively
identified with the Canadian Patriotic Fund and Red Cross Society.
President of the Alberta Provincial Branch of the latter, member of
Central Council and of Executive of Patriotic Fund. He accompanied Sir
Robert Borden to Great Britain and France in 1915 on the occasion of the
Prime Minister’s first visit of inspection to the Canadian army
overseas, and later became Chairman of the National Service Commission
to report on Canada’s war possibilities in men and resources. At the
general election of 1917 declined re-nomination, but supported Union
Government. In addition to his renowned forensic abilities, Mr. Bennett
has a deep grasp of commercial and development questions. Shortly after
going to the West he became identified with the irrigation projects of
the Canadian Pacific Railway Company. He resigned his position as
counsel to that company in Alberta on being elected to the House of
Commons. He is to-day interested in and director of several industrial
and financial corporations, including the Metropolitan Life Insurance
Company of New York. In religion he is a Methodist, and in politics an
Independent. He is a Bencher of the Law Society of Alberta, Fellow of
the Royal Colonial Institute, and a member of the following clubs:
Ranchmen’s and Golf and Country, Calgary; Rideau and Country, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Butterworth, John George Bissett=, Ottawa’s premier coal merchant, was
born at Port Hawkesbury, Nova Scotia, in 1848. His ancestors can be
traced back to the Huguenots of France, whose lives were in constant
danger in the 16th and 17th centuries, who were constantly involved in
war, who were persecuted and suffered severely in the reign of Francis
I. and his successors, and of whom from 25,000 to 30,000 suffered death
at the massacre of St. Bartholomew, August 20, 1572. In 1685, hundreds
of thousands of these Puritans went into exile, going to Prussia,
Holland, Switzerland, England, Scotland, and America, and Mr.
Butterworth’s ancestors found a resting-place, a place of safety, in
England, where they remained and industriously added to the wealth of
the country, and took part in the Peninsular War at the beginning of the
19th century. Being seafaring, enterprising, and ambitious men, and with
a desire to make their mark in the new world, where they would have
large scope to exercise their talents, they left the old country and
arrived at Port Hawkesbury, Nova Scotia, where, eventually, they became
builders and owners of merchant ships and captains in the merchant
fleet, and married into United Empire families. Tiring of seafaring
life, and in compliance with the wishes of the sons, and at the
suggestion of the mother, Mr. Butterworth, Sr., sold out his shipping
interests and the valuable lands and wharves which he owned at Port
Hawkesbury, and with his wife and family arrived in Ottawa, which was
then in its infancy, having been incorporated just one year, previously.
When they grew up, Mr. Butterworth and his two brothers, E. B. and C. A.
Butterworth, following in the ambitious footsteps of their ancestors,
not satisfied with their then existing opportunities for advancement,
left for the United States, and engaged in business and met with
success. Their love for the British Empire, however, was still dominant
within them, and they decided to sell out, return to Canada, and make it
their future home. In 1874, they entered into business in Ottawa as
hardware merchants and metal workers, and later, in 1881, started in the
coal business. Eventually, C. A. and E. B. retired from the coal
business and continued in the hardware business, while J. G. B., the
subject of this sketch, retired from both of these and remained alone as
the coal merchant, which business he has carried on to this day most
successfully, and which to-day holds the lead of all others. Mr.
Butterworth has three plants, with large storage capacity sufficient to
hold at any one time 25,000 tons, and enabling him to constantly carry a
heavy stock of coal during the summer to provide against delays in
winter transportation and during the winter season. Over $100,000 is
invested in these plants. In the severe winter of 1917, had it not been
for the provision made by and the ability of Mr. Butterworth to supply
large quantities of coal, there would have been great hardship in not
only Ottawa, but in Carleton Place, Perth, Almonte, Arnprior, Renfrew,
and many outside places in the provinces of Ontario and Quebec, to which
points he was able to and did ship thousands of tons of coal. He, in
that terrible winter, became the great provider of the people of Ottawa
and her surrounding neighbours by supplying them with the coal they
needed. For 1918 he was equally prepared to meet any emergency that
might arise, but, luckily, the winter was not of a nature so severe as
that of the previous year. In 1917, in order to cope with all demands
that were likely to be made, Mr. Butterworth practically took care of
the coal trade. He took the whole output of the Independent Coal Mine in
Pennsylvania, shipped the small sizes to N.Y. and N.J. to the textile
and munitions factories, and the prepared sizes into Canada. In so doing
he secured large quantities of coal which otherwise could not have been
obtained, and his foresight and enterprise prevented a serious coal
famine in Ottawa and the other places before mentioned. The name of John
George Bissett Butterworth will always be held high in gratitude and
esteem by the people of Ottawa and of many other cities and towns in the
Provinces of Ontario and Quebec. Mr. Butterworth is the son of William
and Matilda Catherine (Bissett) Butterworth. He is President and
Managing Director of the Ormstown Brick and Terra Cotta Co., of
Ormstown, Quebec; ex-Vice-President of the Montreal Terminal Railway;
ex-President of the Capital Power Company, of Deschene; ex-President,
Ottawa Cartage Company; and ex-President of the Capital Fuel Company. In
1879, Mr. Butterworth married Elisabeth J. Shaw, daughter of James Shaw,
Shawville, Quebec, a merchant in that place. He has two sons and two
daughters—Grace Winifred, John George Hawthorne, Ethel Gertrude, and
Wilfred Rosamond. One of his sons served as a lieutenant in the European
War. Mr. Butterworth is an Anglican in religion, and resides at 225
MacLaren St., Ottawa, Ont.




[Illustration: E. McMAHON
Ottawa]




=Bell, John Percival=, General Manager of the Bank of Hamilton,
Hamilton, Ont., is recognized as one of the ablest of Canadian
financiers. He is a native of the city in which he resides, and from
early youth has grown up with the institution of which he is now the
executive head. He was born on June 8th, 1872, the son of John and Jane
(Park) Bell, and was educated in the public and high schools of
Hamilton. In 1888, as a lad of sixteen he entered the service of the
Bank of Hamilton as a junior clerk, and during the ensuing twelve years
learned every phase of the banking business. In 1900 he was appointed
manager of the Georgetown branch, and two years later was transferred to
the Berlin (now Kitchener) branch in a similar capacity. In 1904, he
became manager of the Brantford branch, one of the most important in the
territory of the institution, and remained there until 1909, when he
returned to Hamilton to become manager of the main office in that city.
In 1914, he was promoted to the position of General Manager on the
retirement from that position of Mr. James Turnbull, who, by a
coincidence had become General Manager of the Bank in the same year
(1888) that Mr. Bell entered its service. The five years of Mr. Bell’s
incumbency as General Manager have been the most difficult in the
history of Canadian finance, owing to the disruption caused by the great
war, and he has proven a brilliant success. He has carried on the policy
which has specially endeared the Bank of Hamilton to its clientele, by
caring for the interests of the business man of moderate resources with
the same zeal as is bestowed on those of the great corporations. Mr.
Bell is thoroughly in touch with the great and constantly expanding
business interests of his native city; and his regime has been marked by
an expansion of the Bank’s Toronto custom, as witnessed in the taking
over of the great office building and premises of the now extinct
Traders’ Bank in that city. He was elected a councillor of the Hamilton
Board of Trade in 1911, and during the war acted as Treasurer of the
Patriotic Fund for his district. His recreations are golf, bowling and
curling, and he is a member of the following clubs: Hamilton; Hamilton
Thistle; Hamilton Jockey; Royal Hamilton Yacht; Hamilton Golf; and the
Toronto Club (Toronto). In politics he is independent, and in religion
an Anglican. On Oct. 11th, 1900, he married Rosalind, daughter of Rev.
Arthur Boultbee, Toronto, and has two sons and three daughters. Mr. and
Mrs. Bell reside at 78 Chedske Ave., Hamilton.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Noyes, John Powell=, Prothonotary Superior Court (Cowansville, Ont.),
was born at Potton, Brome County, Que., September 15th, 1842, the son of
Herman B. Noyes and Sarah Powell. Receiving his education in Bangor and
Fort Covington, N.Y., and St. Mary’s College, Montreal, from which last
he graduated in 1866, he studied law with the late Hon. L. S.
Huntington, Q.C., and the late Judge Laframboise. Mr. Noyes practised
his profession at Waterloo, Que., where he was also editor of the
“Advertiser,” and meeting with gratifying success became Batonnier of
Bedford District and K.C. in 1886; also Batonnier-General for the
Province of Quebec in 1887. In 1889 he was appointed a Royal
Commissioner to investigate the claim of the Hereford Railway Employees,
and in 1891 Joint Prothonotary Superior Court, Joint Clerk of the
Circuit Court, and Joint Clerk of the Crown and Peace for the District
of Bedford. In 1887 he was nominated for Shefford (Local) Constituency
in the Liberal interest but withdrew before the contest; his name has
also been mentioned as a candidate for the Judiciary. Mr. Noyes was the
first Mayor of the Town of Waterloo and for an extended period
Secretary-Treasurer of the Stanstead, Shefford & Chambly Railway Co., of
which he is now a director. He is the author of “Canadian Loyalists and
Early Settlers in the District of Bedford,” published in 1901, also of
“Some Pioneers of Shefford,” is a director of the Historical Society of
Missisquoi, and was elected President in 1904. He has been a Freemason
since 1866, having been a member of and sat in the Grand Lodges of
Canada and Quebec; he was grand Superintendent R. A. Masons, Eastern
Township District, in 1883; Grand First Principal, Grand Chapter of
Quebec in 1886-7; Deputy Grand Master, Grand Lodge of Quebec, in 1893,
and Grand Master of the above in 1894. Mr. Noyes married Lucy A.,
daughter of Joseph Merry of Magog, Que., in 1867, and has six
children—Egbert S., Jessie C., Laura M., Bertha A., Emily M. and Ralph
M. Noyes, of whom four survive. In 1913 he was named sole Prothonotary
of the District of Bedford and in 1916 was tendered a banquet by the
Judges, Bar and Court Officials of the District on the anniversary of
his admission to the Bar fifty years before, and of his appointment as
Joint Prothonotary twenty-five years before.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hughes, Brigadier-General William St. Pierre, D.S.O.= (Ottawa, Ont.).
On October 19, 1914, authority was granted to Lieut.-Colonel (now
Brigadier-General) William St. Pierre Hughes to organize an infantry
battalion to be absorbed into the Second Canadian Contingent for
Overseas Service. On the evening of May 5, the 21st was given a rousing
send-off by the citizens of Kingston, Ontario, and the following morning
the battalion embarked at Montreal on the S.S. Metagama for overseas.
Ten days later the 21st disembarked at Devonport, England, and on Sept.
15 it landed on French soil, and, in due time was under fire at
Messines, Vis-en-Artois, Neuville Villasse, Mercatel, Amiens, Bouley
Grenier, St. Eloi, Sanctuary Wood, Ancre, Vimy Ridge, Courcelette,
Mosselmark Village and Polderhook Chateau, Passchendaele, Bapaume,
Arras, Quichy-le-Chateau, the village of Damery and Parvillers, Cambrai,
and was one of the first battalions to cross the boundary at Bonn into
Germany. Before going overseas to serve in the Great War, General
William St. Pierre Hughes held the position of Inspector of
Penitentiaries, with headquarters in Ottawa. During his absence at the
front that office was abolished by Act of Parliament, and the new office
of Superintendent of Penitentiaries was established. The value to Canada
of General Hughes’ services as Inspector and as a competent and fearless
soldier during the war were well known to the Dominion Government, to
the members of Parliament, and to the general public, and when the
position of Superintendent was made public, members of Parliament, the
Press of Canada and the public in general were unanimous in General
Hughes’ favor, and he was appointed to the position. When he was
appointed to the position the “Montreal Gazette” said: “One of the
purposes of the Civil Service Commission is to select for appointment
worthy and capable men...... A case in point is the selection of
Major-General Hughes for the position of Superintendent of Dominion
Penitentiaries...... General Hughes comes of a fighting family in a
military sense, and the call of the colors has always found in him a
quick response even in the relatively remote days of 1885...... His
appointment is still more to be commended by reason of merit and
experience. He had long service in the Penitentiaries Branch of the
Department of Justice, in which he rose to the rank of Chief Inspector
before donning the uniform in defence of the Empire...... The
responsible duties of the office will be well discharged by one who
never failed in duty.” Brigadier-General William St. Pierre Hughes,
D.S.O., Superintendent of Penitentiaries, and brother of Major-General
Sir Sam Hughes, was born in Durham County, Ontario, June 2, 1863, and is
the son of John Hughes and Caroline Laughlin. From both sides of his
family he inherited military tastes, his father being the son of a
surgeon-major in the Imperial army who spent eighteen years in India,
and his mother the daughter of Colonel Laughlin of the 10th Royal Irish
Artillery and the granddaughter of Colonel St. Pierre, one of the most
famous of Napoleon’s colonels. General Hughes was educated entirely by
his father until his eleventh year, when he went to Toronto where he
remained six years. After a year at home he went to Winnipeg, where in
1885 he enlisted with the famous “Little Black Devils.” During his stay
in Winnipeg he won the amateur championship of Manitoba and the
North-West as a one-mile foot runner. After the Rebellion he returned to
Ontario, spending a year at college in Belleville; then a year in
Orillia where he played lacrosse with the Orillia team when that team
won the championship of Ontario; then to Cornwall, where he played with
the famous Cornwall lacrosse team during its years of national triumph.
In 1893, General Hughes became Warden’s Secretary and Clerk of
Industries in the Kingston Penitentiary, taking up what has become his
life’s work. After filling a number of different positions in
penitentiary work, during which he took a deep interest in criminology,
General Hughes became Inspector of Penitentiaries in 1913. With great
earnestness he started to put into effect many cherished plans for
prison reform, but the call of 1914 put an end for the time to this
work. During all the years of prison work General Hughes has kept in
close touch with military affairs. Starting as lieutenant in the old
14th Battalion of Kingston, he, in course of time, became
lieutenant-colonel commanding it, and was also brigade-major of the 7th
Canadian Infantry Brigade. General Hughes was in the West when war was
declared, and on his return in September, 1914, hurried to Valcartier,
but was then unable to get a place in the 1st Contingent, which had
already been mobilized. He then returned to Kingston and mobilized the
famous 21st Battalion. He commanded this battalion continuously until
July, 1916, when he was promoted to the command of the 10th Canadian
Infantry Brigade, which he commanded in France until the spring of 1917.
He then returned to England, where he commanded the Canadian area at
Crowborough until it was taken over by the Imperial army. General Hughes
then became president of a board for adjusting the financial differences
between the Imperial and Canadian authorities as regards barrack
damages, etc., and succeeded in writing off over $225,000 of charges
made by Imperials against Canadians, and also saving an amount of almost
$50,000 which was paid to Canadian Paymaster-General by various units in
settlement of these charges. During his service in France General Hughes
was awarded the D.S.O., and was twice mentioned in despatches. Owing to
a reorganization of the Penitentiary Branch, General Hughes was forced
to return to Canada in the summer of 1918, and was appointed
Superintendent of Penitentiaries in April, 1919. Prominent relatives of
General Hughes, besides Major-General Sir Sam Hughes, are Major John
Hughes and Dr. James L. Hughes, brothers. February 5, 1900, General
Hughes married Jessie Williams, daughter of William Macleod, of
Cornwall, Ontario. He has one son and one daughter, Major Laughlin
Macleod Hughes, R.C.H.A., and Mrs. John S. Gzowski, of Montreal, Quebec.
General Hughes is a member of the following societies: Masonic, Orange,
Odd-fellows and Foresters. For recreation he indulges in all-round
sports and big game hunting. He is a Presbyterian in religion, and
resides at 155 Stewart Street, Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Smart, Russell Sutherland, B.A., M.E.=, is a member of the firm of
Featherstonhaugh & Smart, Patent Solicitors, 5 Elgin Street, Ottawa. He
is the son of George A. and Louise Maud (Walton) Smart, of Toronto. His
father was a well-known author. Mr. Smart was born at Winnipeg,
Manitoba, June 20, 1885, and was educated in the Jarvis Collegiate
Institute, Toronto; Toronto University, 1904; School of Practical
Science; Queen’s University, 1907; honorary M.E. Toronto University
1913. In July, 1911, Mr. Smart was called to the Quebec bar, and to the
Ontario bar in 1914. In May, 1904 he was admitted Patent Attorney. He is
joint author of “Fisher and Smart on Patents,” and author of “Smart on
Trademarks.” December 24, 1908, Mr. Smart married Emma Louise Parr,
daughter of James A. Parr, lumberman, of Ottawa. He has three
daughters—Helen Louise, Elizabeth, and Jane Clayton. Mr. Smart is a
member of the Rideau, Rivermead Golf, University (Toronto), and Chemists
(New York) clubs, and of the following societies: Engineering Institute
of Canada, Chartered Institute of Patent Agents, and Patent American Law
Association. For recreation, Mr. Smart indulges in golf and tennis. In
religion he is a Presbyterian; in politics, independent; and he resides
at 15 Linden Terrace, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McMahon, James Alexander= (Hamilton, Ont.), Treasurer and Managing
Director, Union Drawn Steel Company, Limited, conducted a Commercial
College at Beaver Falls, Penn., 1887-1892; was employed with the Swan
Electric Company, Cleveland, Ohio, 1892-1893, and with the Union Drawn
Steel Company, of Beaver Falls, Penn., 1893-1905, coming to Hamilton in
1905, where he established the present business. He is a member of the
Executive Committee, Hamilton Branch, Canadian Manufacturers
Association, 1916-17; a member of the Membership Committee of the same
for all of Canada, of which latter body he was Chairman in 1911; a
member of the Technical Committee Hamilton School Board, and a member of
the Hamilton Board of Trade. Mr. McMahon was born in Venango County,
Penn., December 18th, 1859, the son of John and Margaret (Wolf) McMahon.
He was educated at the Public Schools of Pennsylvania, and took a
Commercial Course at Oberlin, Ohio. In 1889 he married Jennie G.,
daughter of Benjamin F. Beegle, by whom he has one son, Carl A., and one
daughter, Alma. He is a member of the A.F. & A.M. also of the Commercial
Club, Royal Hamilton Yacht Club, and Canadian Club, Glendale Golf and
Country Club, all of Hamilton. In politics he is a Conservative, and a
Methodist in religion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gwatkin, Major-General W. G.= (Ottawa, Ont.), has been connected with
the military system of Canada since 1905. Except for rather less than
two years—between 1909 and 1911—his service with it has been
continuous, and he has been intimately concerned alike with the
preparations which were made for the Great War and with the staff work
at Headquarters during the course of the war. A Cambridge University
man, he joined the Manchester Regiment in 1882, and served as Subaltern,
Adjutant, Company Commander and Second in Command; in 1894 he passed the
Staff College; and in 1898 he began a long career on the Staff. Early in
1899 he went to the War Office to work in what ultimately became the
Mobilization Section, the organ of the War Office which had a great deal
to do, first, with the rapid and efficient supply of troops to South
Africa, and afterwards with the careful preparations which enabled the
regular army to show to such advantage in France. In the War Office
during this period he served under Colonel (now Lieut.-General) Sir
Percy Lake. In 1904, General Lake came to Canada to be the first Chief
of the General Staff, and in 1905 he brought Colonel Gwatkin (who had
been serving with his regiment in South Africa) to Ottawa to serve as
Director of Operations and Staff Duties—in other words, to be his
principal technical assistant. The reorganization of the Canadian
Militia which followed the South African War was beginning. In the years
between 1904 and 1914 the Militia force was remodelled, and a staff
system was founded which proved able to carry through the work of
raising and sending overseas an army of half a million men. Colonel
Gwatkin’s services were so highly regarded that the Minister of Militia
specially asked the War Office for an extension of his services, and he
remained in Canada, not for the regulation three years, but for four.
After a period of staff service in England his services were again
requested by the Canadian Government, and he came to Canada early in
1911. At that time the military authorities of the Empire had become
seriously apprehensive of war with Germany, and Colonel Gwatkin’s work
largely comprised such measures of organization for this emergency as
were undertaken in the circumstances. In particular he drew up complete
plans for the raising and despatch of a contingent to England in the
event of a war in Europe in which Canada might wish to participate. The
plan drawn up anticipated a large number of the points which arose when
the war actually came. In November, 1913, he succeeded Major-General C.
J. MacKenzie as Chief of the General Staff. He was filling this post
when the war came. The work done in the Militia Department in
preparation for such an eventuality proved of the utmost service. Cable
censorship was established, harbours were closed, dangerous points were
guarded, the transition from peace to a war which the general public had
not expected was made with remarkable smoothness. When the first
contingent sailed General Gwatkin was desired by the Government to stay
at Militia Headquarters to keep the machine working. During the entire
course of the war he performed enormous labours. To recruit, give
preliminary training to and ship overseas so large an army meant
administrative ability of a very high order and the discharge of an
immense amount of thankless labour. He has done his work to the high
satisfaction of the Government of Canada, whose principal military
adviser he has been. It showed its appreciation of his services by
insisting on retaining him, though the Imperial Government repeatedly
expressed a desire to recall him for service in Great Britain or France.
The details of his career are as follows:—Major-General Willoughby
Garnons Gwatkin, C.B., C.M.G., born August 11, 1859; was appointed
Lieutenant Manchester Regiment May 10, 1882; Adjutant, Manchester
Regiment, April 18, 1888, to April 17, 1892; Captain, Manchester
Regiment, January 17, 1890; Major, Manchester Regiment, April 7, 1900;
Brevet Lieut.-Colonel, January 6, 1904; Brevet Colonel November 20,
1907; Major-General, October 21, 1914. Staff appointments—Staff Captain
Egypt, January 24, 1898, to April 20, 1898; Staff Captain, Headquarters
of Army, March 11, 1899, to January 10, 1900; D.A.A.G., H.Q. of Army
(temp.) January 11, 1900 to January 21, 1901; Staff Captain
(Mobilization) H.Q. of Army, January 22, 1901, to October 14, 1902;
D.A.Q.M.G. (Mobilization) H.Q. of Army, October 15, 1902, to October 31,
1903; Director of Operations and Staff Duties (General Staff Officer 2nd
Grade) Canadian Militia, October 5, 1905, to October 20, 1909; General
Staff Officer 1st grade Eastern Command, March 5, 1910, to February 28,
1911; General Staff Officer (Mobilization) 1st Grade Militia H.Q.,
Canada, July 14, 1911, to October 31, 1913; Chief of the General Staff
and 1st Military Member of the Militia Council, Dominion of Canada,
November 1, 1913. General Gwatkin is the fourth son of the late
Frederick Gwatkin of New Square, Lincoln’s Inn, London, W.C., and Grove
House, Twickenham, and Louisa Isabella, younger daughter of the Rev.
Ambrose Stapleton, vicar of East Budleigh, Devonshire. He was educated
at Shrewsbury School, at King’s College, Cambridge, and at R.M.C.,
Sandhurst. In 1916 he was created C.B. (Civil), C.M.G. in 1918 and Order
of St. Sava of Serbia in 1918.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ross, John Theodore, B.A.= (Quebec), is one of the leading capitalists
of the city. He was born in that city on Nov. 30, 1862, the son of the
late John Ross, a prominent merchant and his wife, Anne Runcie. The late
Senator J. G. Ross was his uncle. He was educated at Quebec High School,
at Morrin College and at McGill University, Montreal, from which latter
institution he graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1883. He entered the
wholesale business firm of his father, known as John Ross & Co., in
1884, and was admitted to full partnership in 1887, continuing in this
capacity until 1894 when the firm was liquidated. Since then he has been
widely engaged in financial and commercial operations. He was elected
Vice-President of the Quebec Bank in 1897 and President in 1908. On its
amalgamation with the Royal Bank of Canada some years later he became a
Director of the latter institution. Among his many other interests is
that of President of the Chronicle Printing Company, which publishes the
“Quebec Chronicle,” one of the historic newspapers of Eastern Canada.
His other commercial interests have at various times embraced the Quebec
Steamship Company, the Montmorency Cotton Mills Company, the McArthur
Export Company, The Quebec Improvement Company, the Trans-Canada Railway
Co., the Pacific Pass Coalfields, Ltd., the Quebec Transport Company,
the North Pacific Lumber Company. He has also taken a deep interest in
public and philanthropic affairs. He is a member of the Quebec Board of
Trade and Chairman of the Quebec High School Board, Vice-President of
the Literary and Historical Society, Quebec, President of the Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and President of the Jeffrey
Hale Hospital. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and in politics a
Conservative. He is a member of the Garrison Club, Quebec, and his
recreations are driving and tennis. On April 15, 1896, he married Mabel
Kate, daughter of John Burstall, Quebec, and has two sons and two
daughters. He resides on St. Louis Road, Quebec.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rogers, John Morrison= (Ingersoll, Ont.), physician and surgeon, has
been active in the Liberal Party for a number of years, being Liberal
nominee for the Legislative Assembly in his constituency at the present
time. He is the son of Thomas and Margaret Rogers, and was born at Mount
Forest, Ont., in 1867, where he received his early education, afterwards
graduating from Toronto University in 1893. Dr. Rogers married Edythe
B., daughter of J. B. Hambridge, Aylmer, Ont., in 1902, and has three
sons: John Reginald, Donald Morrison, and William Parke. He is a member
of the Ontario Medical Association, Vice-President Western Liberal
Association, the Ingersoll Curling Club, and the Ingersoll Bowling Club.
In religion he is a Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Colquhoun, Arthur Hugh Urquhart, B.A., LL.D.=, Deputy Minister of
Education for the Province of Ontario, was born at Montreal on December
2, 1861, the son of the late Walter Colquhoun (a native of
Dumbartonshire, Scotland,) and his wife Jane, daughter of William
Clarke, Niagara, Ont., and relict of Charles Richardson, M.P. He was
educated at Cornwall Public School, Montreal High School (where he won
the Murray Medal for proficiency and the Governor-General’s Medal for
literature and history) and McGill University, from which he graduated
in 1885 with the degree of B.A., first class honors in English
literature and history, and the Shakespeare gold medal. During his
student days he took up the calling of journalism and joined the
editorial staff of the “Montreal Star” in 1881. In 1883 he was entrusted
with the post of editor-in-chief of the “Montreal Weekly Star,” and at
the same time edited the “McGill University Gazette.” In 1886 he went to
Ottawa and accepted the post of editor of the “Journal” of that city. In
1887, when the leaders of the Conservative government founded the
“Toronto Empire” as chief organ of the party, he was appointed assistant
editor and has ever since made Toronto his home. In 1891, he was
appointed managing editor of the “Empire” and continued in that capacity
until its amalgamation with the “Mail” in 1895. In the latter year, he
entered the growing field of trade journalism with Col. J. B. Maclean,
and until 1902 edited the “Printer and Publisher” and the “Dry Goods
Review.” In 1902, he joined the staff of the “Mail and Empire” as
editorial writer, and early in 1903, when Mr. J. S. (now Sir John)
Willison reorganized the “Toronto News,” he became news editor of that
publication, and helped to make the paper temporarily famous for the
literary distinction and importance of its news columns. From the outset
of the political career of the late Sir James Whitney, Mr. Colquhoun had
been his close personal friend and adviser. One of the pledges of that
statesman while leader of the opposition in the Ontario Legislature was
a reorganization of the educational system from top to bottom, and
shortly after his elevation to the post of Prime Minister in 1905 he
appointed a Royal Commission of distinguished men to enquire into the
affairs of the provincial university at Toronto. At the request of Mr.
Whitney, Mr. Colquhoun accepted the position of secretary of the
commission, and had much to do with the drafting of its report, which
proved to be one of the most important documents of its kind produced in
this country. In recognition of his services in this capacity, the
University conferred on him the honorary degree of LL.D. in 1906. In the
latter year he was also appointed Deputy Minister of Education, a
position he still holds, and was largely instrumental in putting into
effect the reforms promised by Sir James Whitney. In 1908, he was
offered and declined the post of Chief Librarian of the city of Toronto.
Among the earlier positions that he held was that of Chairman of the
Press Committee of the British Association when it met at Toronto in
1897, an occasion which brought to Canada many of the great scientists
of that day. He was also elected President of the Canadian Press
Association for 1906-7. Both before and since his retirement from
journalism, Mr. Colquhoun has been a frequent contributor, chiefly on
historical themes, to magazines and reviews, including “The Canadian
Magazine,” “The University Magazine,” “The British Empire Review,” and
“Queen’s Quarterly.” On the political history of the provinces of
Canada, he is a recognized authority; and his published works include
“The History of Canadian Press Association”; the volume on the Fathers
of Confederation in “The Chronicles of Canada,” and “Memoir of Senator
Gowan, C.M.G.” (which he edited). His books are marked by purity of
diction, and shrewd and moderate judgments on men and events. Mr.
Colquhoun is a member of the Toronto Club and the Toronto Golf Club, and
resides at 342 Walmer Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Miller, Lieut.-Colonel John Bellamy=, Manufacturer (Toronto, Ont.),
President of the Polson Iron Works, Limited, and Parry Sound Lumber
Company, is the son of John Clausin Miller, Lumberman, Parry Sound,
Ont., and Adelaide Augusta Chamberlain; was born at Farmersville (now
Athens), July 26, 1862, and received his education at the Model School,
Toronto, and Upper Canada College. Following his educational training,
Mr. Miller entered the lumber business with the Parry Sound Lumber Co.
as clerk, and while holding this position, mastered every detail of
lumber manufacturing. In 1883, following his father’s death, John B.
Miller took complete charge of the business and was made president of
the Company, which position he still holds. He is also president of the
Polson Iron Works, Limited, of Toronto, and holds a like position in the
Polson Dry Dock and Shipbuilding Co. of Toronto. Added to the above Mr.
Miller is president of the Consumers Box Company of Toronto, and was
largely instrumental in the formation of the Canadian Lumbermen’s
Association, of which he is past-president. Mr. Miller holds membership
in the following clubs: National Ontario, R.C.Y.C., Rosedale Golf,
Scarboro Golf, Ontario Jockey Club, Canadian Military Institute, Aero
Club of Canada, all of Toronto; the Rideau Club, of Ottawa; Junior Army
& Navy Club, London, Eng.; Aero Club of America, New York; Royal
Colonial Institute, London; Associate of Institute of Naval Architects
of London, Eng. Mr. Miller was married October 3rd, 1883, to Hannah
Pollock Hunter. Mrs. Miller died in 1893. By this marriage there were
two sons, John Clausin Miller and Henry H. Miller. Mr. Miller’s second
marriage took place September 22nd, 1897, to Jessie Thompson, of
Longford, Ont., a daughter of the late John Thompson, a prominent
Lumberman of that place. One daughter survives this union, Margaret
Lumsden Miller, together with Capt. H. H. Miller, son of the first
marriage. Mr. Miller has the honor of being Lieut.-Col. of the 23rd
Regiment of Northern Pioneers, with Headquarters at Parry Sound; is a
Liberal in politics and his favorite recreations are golf, shooting and
fishing; resides at 98 Wellesley Street, and has his office at Polson
Iron Works.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nasmith, Colonel George Gallie= (Toronto, Ont.), who already enjoyed a
high reputation throughout Canada as a sanitary expert, has won added
distinction in the European War through brilliant services in his
special field. He was made Lieutenant-Colonel, August, 1914 (Colonel in
April, 1917), and Officer Commanding the Hydrological Corps, in which
capacity he had charge of the purification of the water supply at the
new Valcartier Military Camp during the mobilization of the First
Contingent. He was sent to England as adviser in sanitation in charge of
water purifications with the first contingent. While on Salisbury Plain,
he was useful in getting the remainder of the contingent inoculated
against typhoid; in installing a laboratory for the control of
cerebro-spinal meningitis, and in training men in the purification of
water. Colonel Nasmith was sent to France in March, 1915, as O.C. No. 5
(Canadian) Mobile Laboratory, where he conceived the idea of a mobile
filter unit for purifying any water supply, which has since been adopted
by the war office, and is now in general use among the British armies in
France, Mesopotamia, and elsewhere. He was present at the second battle
of Ypres, and saw the gas being discharged by the Germans for the first
time. He diagnosed its composition correctly, and reported it to General
Army Headquarters, recommending the use of masks to cover the face and
nose, saturated with hyposulphite of soda to absorb the gas. These were
adopted until experience enabled a more perfect type to be elaborated.
Other recommendations made by him in regard to gas and water
purification were also adopted. He was the representative of Canada on
the War Allies Sanitary Commission which met in Paris during 1916. In
January, 1916, he was mentioned in despatches, and made C.M.G. for
services in the field, being decorated by the King. Colonel Nasmith is a
Baptist in religion, and a Conservative in politics. He is a member of
the Academy of Medicine, of the American and Canadian Public Health
Associations, the Arts and Letters Club, and the Engineers Club, of
Toronto. Obtained the Diploma of Public Health from Toronto University
in 1918. He has published numerous general papers on foods, milk, water
purification, and sewage disposal, as well as conducting researches
which are embodied in the following papers:—“The Hæmatology of Carbon
Monoxide Poisoning,” “Changes Induced in the Blood of Guinea Pigs in an
Atmosphere of Coal Gas,” “A Simple Method of Purifying Almost any Water
Supply,” “A New Type of Trickling Filter,” “A Mobile Filter of Large
Capacity Suggested for Use in the British Army,” “The Chemistry of Wheat
Gluten,” and “Wind Driven Currents in the Great Lakes.” He is also
author of “On the Fringe of the Great Fight,” published 1918, and
“Canada’s Sons and Great Britain in the Great War,” published 1919.
Colonel Nasmith is greatly interested in music, painting, and the drama,
as well as in horticulture and sailing. From 1903 to 1909 he was Chemist
to the Provincial Board of Health of Ontario, and from 1909 to date
Director of Laboratories, Department of Health, Toronto. He was born in
Toronto in 1877, the son of Mungo Nasmith, of Greenock, Scotland, and
Jane Morrow, of Bath, England. He was educated at Jarvis Street
Collegiate and the University of Toronto, graduating as a B.A. in 1900
and as M.A. and Ph.D. in 1903, also receiving the Honorary Degree of
D.Sc. in 1917 from his alma mater in recognition of his scientific work
with the British Army in France. Colonel Nasmith married Mrs. Scott
Roff, Principal of the Margaret Eaton School of Literature and
Expression, and daughter of the late Rev. James Scott, Owen Sound,
Ontario, in 1916.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Flynn, Edmund James=, Judge of the Superior Court (Quebec City, Que.),
is the son of the late James Flynn and Elizabeth Tostivin, and was born
in Percé, Shiretown of Gaspé County, November 16, 1847. After a
distinguished career at Quebec Seminary and Laval University, he
graduated from the latter institution of learning in 1873 with the
degree of LL.L., receiving the higher honor of LL.D. in 1878. Mr.
Justice Flynn has been prominent in Provincial politics during a public
life of some thirty years, during which time he was M.L.A. for the
constituencies of Gaspé and Nicolet respectively, and held office
successively as Commissioner of Crown Lands, Minister of Railways,
Solicitor-General and Commissioner of Public Works in various
Liberal-Conservative Administrations; from May, 1896, to May, 1897, he
was Prime Minister of Quebec. From 1897 to 1904, he was leader of the
Opposition. In 1908, he was candidate for House of Commons in Dorchester
Co., but was defeated by a comparatively small majority. Between the
years 1874 and 1914 when he received his appointment as Judge, Mr. Flynn
was a practising lawyer at the Quebec Bar and Professor of Roman Law in
Laval, of which University he is to-day Dean in the Faculty of Law;
having also been Batonnier of the Quebec Bar. A Roman Catholic in
religion, Judge Flynn married Augustine, daughter of the late Augustin
Cote, Editor of the “Journal de Quebec,” in 1875, by whom he has had
eleven children; those surviving are Amelia, wife of Lt.-Col. Chauveau,
K.C., Edmund, C.P.R. Ticket Agent; Percy, Capt. Adjt., 10th Reserve
Batt., C.E.F.; and Beatrice. After the decease of his first wife he
married Cecile Pouliot, widow of Eugene Globensky, of Montreal, in 1912.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Willis, James E.= (Whitby, Ont.), is one of the best known and
progressive citizens of that town. At present he holds the position of
police magistrate for the town, but has been identified with public
affairs in various capacities for some years past. While still
comparatively young in years, he built up a successful position in the
business world, and at the time of his appointment to his legal office
in 1918, filled the office of President of the Whitby Board of Trade. He
has also taken an active part in municipal affairs, and held the office
of Mayor of the town for two terms. Another office which he has filled
with success is that of Chairman of the Public Utilities Commission of
the town. It was while Mayor of Whitby that he became identified with
the movement to extend the scope and usefulness of the hydro-electric
system of Ontario. It was the desire of Sir Adam Beck and his chief
lieutenants that the system already so widely used for manufacturing,
municipal and domestic purposes should be augmented by a great network
of radial railways. Under Mayor Willis’s advice, the town of Whitby was
the first municipality in Ontario to avail itself of these proposals by
extending municipal support to a hydro-electric radial railway linking
up Toronto with the towns of Whitby, Markham and Port Perry; and it is
expected that the road when constructed and put in operation will do
much for the entire section immediately east of Toronto. Another local
enterprise which was in the main due to Mr. Willis’s progressive spirit
was the installing of a sewerage system, which was essential to the
establishment near the town of Whitby of a great provincial hospital for
the insane, which, during the war was turned over to the military
authorities, and was the largest soldiers’ hospital in the Dominion of
Canada. When the plans which Mr. Willis has done so much to promote are
carried out, Whitby will have a close suburban connection by electric
railway with Toronto, and it is expected will become an important
residential centre for the wealthier families of that city. When the
late Major Harper, who had formerly served as police magistrate, passed
away in 1918, the Attorney-General of Ontario appointed Mr. Willis his
successor; and the choice was applauded not merely locally, but in wider
circles where the activities of Mr. Willis for the development of Whitby
had rendered his name familiar. He is recognized as one of the most
forceful and progressive municipal authorities in Canada. In his younger
days he took an active interest in outdoor sports, such as foot racing,
cricket, baseball, and was secretary of the Whitby Curling Club for many
years, and took part as skip in many Tankard and friendly matches. He
has been from his youth a reader, and is one of the best posted men on
general and scientific subjects in his native town. It has been his
policy to strongly advocate any movement that would be for the good and
uplifting of the people as a whole; and he has often been heard to say:
“I wish I could do some lasting good for my fellow man, and leave the
world a little better than I found it. If I can do no permanent and
lasting good, I feel that I have lived in vain.”




[Illustration: ORVILLE B. SHORTLY, TORONTO
WILLIAM MCINENLY, OTTAWA]




=Nicholls, Lieut.-Colonel The Hon. Frederic= (Toronto, Ont.), Dominion
Senator; born in England, November 23, 1856. He received his education
at Stuttgart, Wurtemburg, Germany, and came to Canada in 1874, where he
organized the first electric company—The Toronto Incandescent Electric
Light Company—which adopted the first underground system of electric
distribution in Canada. Senator Nicholls was elected President of the
National Electric Light Association of America in 1896, being the only
Canadian to hold that honor, and has since been elected an honorary
member. He was for seven years Secretary of the Canadian Manufacturers
Association, and founded the “Canadian Manufacturer,” of which he was
editor and proprietor until 1893. Senator Nicholls is President and
General Manager of the Canadian General Electric Company, Toronto;
President and General Manager of the Canadian Allis-Chalmers, Limited;
President of the Canadian Sunbeam Lamp Co.; President of the Toronto &
Hamilton Railway Company; Vice-President of the Dominion Coal Company;
Vice-President of the Dominion Iron & Steel Co.; Vice-President of the
Dominion Steel Corporation; Vice-President of the Electrical Development
Co. of Ontario; Vice-President of the Sao Paulo Tramway, Light & Power
Company; Vice-President of the Toronto & Niagara Power Company;
Vice-President of the Toronto Power Company; Vice-President of the
Toronto Railway Company; Vice-President of the Toronto & York Radial
Railway Company; Director of the British American Assurance Company; of
the Canadian Lake & Ocean Navigation Company; of the Confederation Life
Association; of the Niagara, St. Catharines & Toronto Railway Company;
of the Toronto Electric Light Co.; of the Toronto Hunt, Limited, of the
Western Assurance Company, and of The United States Fidelity and
Casualty Company. In 1890 Senator Nicholls was President of the Toronto
Press Club; in 1893 President of the Athenæum Club; in 1911 F.R.C.L.,
and in 1914 gazetted Honorary Lieut.-Colonel. He is Consul for Portugal;
life member of the Toronto Board of Trade; Honorary Member of the
Canadian Press Association; Member of the Executive Committee Canadian
Manufacturers Association; and a Justice of the Peace. Appointed to the
Senate January 20, 1917, and is Chairman of the Standing Committee on
Finance of the Senate. In 1875 he married Florence, daughter of
Commander Graburn, who died in 1909. He had two sons on active service:
Captain Walter Nicholls, who went overseas with the first contingent,
served in France, and after being invalided home was Senior Supply
Officer at Shorncliffe, and Lieut. Fred Nicholls, attached to the Horse
Transport. Two sons-in-law, Capt. J. E. Proctor and Capt. J. B. Allen,
and five nephews also served in the overseas forces. Senator Nicholls’
recreations are hunting, fishing, motoring, yachting and golf. Among his
clubs are the Bankers’ Club of America, New York; the York Club, the
Toronto Club, Toronto Hunt Club, Albany Club, Engineers Club, Ontario
Jockey Club, Rosedale Golf Club, Toronto Golf Club, Scarborough Golf and
Country Club, and the Royal Canadian Yacht Club, Toronto, Ont.; the
Hamilton Golf and Country Club; Caledon Mountain Trout Club; the Mount
Royal Club, Montreal; the Rideau Club, the Country Club, Ottawa; the
Manitoba Club, Winnipeg. Since the outbreak of the war he has devoted
himself to patriotic work, and is a member of the Executive Committee of
the General Council of the Canadian Patriotic Fund; Vice-President and
Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Toronto Branch of the
Canadian Red Cross Society; and President of the Toronto Municipal Loan
Association, a society formed to relieve distress.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Helmer, Brigadier-General Richard Alexis, C.M.G.=, entered the Canadian
Militia in 1883 as a private in the ranks of the 43rd Regiment, D.C.O.R.
Eight years later he was made a Lieutenant, and in 1896 was appointed
Captain. In 1899, he was promoted to the rank of Major. In 1885, General
Helmer graduated as a chemist for the Province of Ontario, and in 1886
for the Province of Quebec. He successfully practised his profession in
Hull, Quebec, up to 1904, when he retired therefrom. He was energetic,
popular, and progressive, and for twelve years was alderman and twice
mayor (1896 and 1900) of the city of Hull. April 27, 1906, be was
appointed Deputy Assistant-Adjutant-General for Musketry on the
Headquarters Staff, and Assistant Adjutant-General for Musketry, October
1, 1908, which post he held until May 17, 1910, when he was appointed a
Lieutenant-Colonel and Assistant-Adjutant-General. On January 1, 1911,
he was appointed Director of Musketry, and February 24, 1916,
Director-General of Musketry. This latter post he still holds, together
with that of Acting-Director of Military Training, to which he was
appointed September, 1914, and that of Commandant of the Canadian School
of Musketry, to which he was appointed in 1907. General Helmer has for
years been prominent in rifle shooting in Canada, and has many fine
trophies to prove his skill. In 1899, he was Adjutant of the Canadian
Rifle Team at Bisley. In 1903, Adjutant of the Canadian Palma Team at
Sea Girt. In 1907, Adjutant of the Canadian Palma Team at Ottawa, and in
1912, Commandant of the Canadian Palma Team at Camp Perry. General
Helmer is the eldest son of the late Nathaniel and Melissa (Johnson)
Helmer, of Ottawa. He was born in Russell, Ontario, October 12, 1864,
and was educated at Ottawa and Toronto, Ontario. He married Elizabeth I.
Hannum, of Hull, Quebec. Their only child and son, Lieutenant A. H.
Helmer, Canadian Artillery, was killed in action, May 2, 1915. General
Helmer is in possession of the Colonial Auxiliary Forces long service
medal, and for services rendered in the great war was awarded the C.M.G.
in 1918. He is a member of the Laurentian Club, and resides at 122
Gilmour St., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McCurdy, Fleming Blanchard, M.P.= (Halifax, N.S.), Financier, began
business in the service of the Halifax Banking Company, Truro, N.S., in
1890, which he left in 1901 to embark in financial business under the
firm name of F. B. McCurdy & Company, which has seven branch offices at
the present time. He is a Past President of the Halifax Board of Trade,
was elected to the House of Commons in 1911, and was appointed
Parliamentary Secretary of the Department of Militia and Defence, July,
1916. His recreations are fishing, hunting, and motoring. Among his
clubs are the Halifax City; Wanderers A.A.C., of which he is an
ex-President; Royal Nova Scotia Yacht Squadron; Halifax Golf; Halifax
Automobile Association (ex-President); St. James, Montreal; Royal
Automobile, London, Eng.; Rideau, Ottawa; and Royal Ottawa Golf Club.
Mr. McCurdy was born at Old Barns, County Colchester, N.S., February 17,
1875, the son of James and Amelia J. (Archibald) McCurdy, and was
educated in the public schools. In 1902 he married Florence Bridgman
Pearson, daughter of the Hon. B. F. Pearson, M.P.P., Halifax, and has
two sons. Mr. McCurdy is a Conservative and a Presbyterian.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Langton, Brigadier-General Joseph Graham=, Paymaster-General of the
Militia Department, Ottawa, is the son of Thomas Langton, a merchant,
and Fannie McKim Langton, and was born at Toronto, October 14, 1868,
where he received his education in the public schools and the Jarvis
Street Collegiate Institute. He has had an extensive military career,
and has served continuously in the active militia of Canada since 1886.
He joined the Queen’s Own Rifles in May, 1886, and served continuously
until December, 1896. He served for two and a half years as regimental
drill instructor, and in 1895 organized the Queen’s Own Rifle Cyclist
section. In 1897, he received a commission as Lieutenant in the 20th
Lorne Rifles, was promoted as Captain in 1898, and held appointment as
Adjutant until 1903. He was selected by Militia Headquarters to organize
No. 2 Company Canadian Army Service Corps, and in 1903 at Niagara Camp
commanded the first Army Service Corps unit to go under canvas in
Canada. In June, 1905, he was appointed Senior Army Service Corps
Officer, Western Ontario Command, on the Staff of Brigadier-General W.
D. Otter, C.B., and held that appointment until June, 1911, when the
tenure of appointment expired. In 1898, he instituted the first
regimental system of messing at the Canadian Militia Training Camps at
Niagara Camp. At the Tercentenary Celebration at Quebec, July, 1908, he
was appointed as Deputy-Assistant-Quarter-Master-General, and had charge
of the railway transportation of troops. A field order issued by the
late Lord Roberts conveyed the congratulations of the present King, then
the Prince of Wales, to the late Sir Frederick Borden on the success of
the transport arrangements. General Langton instituted the first use of
mechanical transport by the Canadian Militia at the Fall manœuvres at
Toronto in October, 1910. He was appointed railway transport officer for
mobilization of the first Canadian contingent at Valcartier in August,
1914, and in co-operation with Sir William Price had charge of the
embarkation of the first contingent at Quebec in September of the same
year. In December, 1915, he was appointed Inspector of Supplies and
Transport for the Second Divisional Area, and by Order-in-Council,
February, 1916, he was attached to the Staff of the Inspector-General
and appointed as Chief Supply Inspector for Eastern Canada. In the
following June he was appointed as Deputy Inspector-General. February 8,
1918, he was appointed as Paymaster-General and as a member of the
Militia Council. As Deputy Inspector-General, General Langton had
supervision over receipts, supplies, stores, clothing, accounting,
regimental funds, mess accounts, and canteen funds. In the matter of
canteens, General Langton is recognized as the leading authority in
Canada on their administration. The booklet of rules for the management
of canteens, regimental funds, etc., issued by the Militia Department as
a text-book for the troops, was prepared by him. The branch under his
administration effected a saving during the war of over one million
dollars without depriving the troops of anything to which they were
entitled. In his capacity as Paymaster-General he has entire charge of
the finances—separations allowance and assigned pay branch of the
Militia Department, etc. General Langton is Vice-President of the
Military Service Department of the Young Men’s Christian Association.
This department was first attached to the Canadian Military Camps at
Valcartier in August, 1914, by General Sir Sam Hughes on the
recommendation of General Langton. In recognition of his services
General Langton has been recommended for distinguished services in
Canada. Until he entered upon his duties as Deputy Inspector-General,
General Langton has been engaged in banking and other financial
pursuits. General Joseph Graham Langton, on Oct. 7, 1891, married
Margaret J., daughter of John Pearey, contractor, of Toronto. Five
children have blessed the union: Percy (deceased), Ernest Pearey
(deceased), Olive V., Joseph McKim, and Florence Margaret. General
Langton is a member of the Rideau Club (Ottawa) and of the Canadian
Military Institute (Toronto), Ashlar Lodge A.F. & A.M., No. 249, and St.
Paul’s Royal Arch Chapter, No. 65, Toronto. His recreations are curling
and lawn bowling. In religion an Anglican. His address is Militia
Department, Ottawa, Ontario, Can.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Graham, Hon. George Perry= (Brockville, Ont.), is one of the leading
public men of Canada, and a former cabinet minister. He was born on
March 31, 1859, at Eganville, Ont., and is of Irish descent. He was
educated at Iroquois and Morrisburg High Schools in the St. Lawrence
Valley. He early became identified with journalism, and as editor and
manager of the Brockville “Recorder,” made it one of the best known
provincial papers in the Dominion. An earlier newspaper enterprise of
his was the Morrisburg “Herald,” which he successfully conducted for
eleven years; and he was for a short time associate editor of the Ottawa
“Free Press.” As a young man, Mr. Graham became identified with the
organization of the Liberal party in his district, and was in great
demand as a platform speaker. Entry into public life was a logical
outcome of his career as a moulder of public opinion. During his
residence in Morrisburg, Ont., he was Reeve of the village and a member
of the County Council, and in 1894 the Liberals nominated him for the
riding of Dundas against no less an opponent than J. P. Whitney,
afterwards Prime Minister of Ontario. At the general elections for the
Legislature in 1898 he was Liberal candidate for Brockville, and was
more successful, securing election by a substantial majority. He at once
achieved a prominent position in the Legislature owing to his wit and
skill as a debater. Those were the days when Mr. Whitney was making his
long and ultimately successful fight for the overthrow of the Ross
Government, and the former contestants in the riding of Dundas
frequently crossed swords in debate. At the Legislative elections in
1902, Mr. Graham was re-elected for Brockville, though his party
suffered heavy losses elsewhere, and on November 25, 1904, on the
resignation of the late Hon. J. R. Stratton from the post of Provincial
Secretary, he was called to the cabinet as his successor. At the general
elections of the ensuing winter he was again returned for Brockville,
but the Ross Government, of which he was a member, was defeated. On
January 25, 1907, the Liberal caucus elected him leader of His Majesty’s
loyal opposition, but he served in that capacity for only one session of
the Legislature. In August of 1907, Sir Wilfrid Laurier induced him to
abandon the provincial field, and offered him the portfolio of Railways
and Canals in the Federal cabinet. He was sworn in as a member of the
Privy Council on August 29, and on September 18, 1907, was elected by
acclamation to the House of Commons for the Federal riding of
Brockville. He continued as Minister of Railways for four years, and
took an active part in the organization of his party in Ontario. In
September, 1911, the Laurier administration was defeated at the polls.
Mr. Graham was elected in a by-election in South Renfrew, and for the
next six years continued to sit in opposition as the desk-mate of Sir
Wilfrid Laurier. He did not seek re-election at the general elections of
1917, but has retained active connection with the Liberal party, and in
many quarters his name was urged as the fitting successor of Sir Wilfrid
Laurier in the party leadership. In addition to his journalistic and
political activities, Mr. Graham is widely known in connection with
fraternal insurance organizations. He was Grand Master of the Ancient
Order of United Workmen for two years, and for a considerable period a
member of the Finance Committee of that body. He is President of the
Travellers’ Life Assurance Company of Canada, a Director of the Canada
Foundries and Forging Company, Vice-President of Delaney Forge Company,
and President of the “Recorder” Printing Company. In religion he is a
Methodist. In 1882, he married Carrie, a daughter of Nelson Southworth,
Morrisburg, Ont., and had two sons, Captain Perry M., who died some
years ago, and Captain W. N., who was killed in the Great War.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Leonard, Lieutenant-Colonel Reuben Wells=, Corps of Guides (St.
Catharines, Ont.). Born at Brantford, Ont., February 21, 1860, son of
the late Francis Henry Leonard (one time Reeve of the town of Brantford
and Warden of the County of Brant) and Elizabeth, daughter of the late
Captain Richard Catton. He was educated at the Brantford Collegiate
Institute and Royal Military College of Canada, Kingston, from which
latter he graduated in 1883, winning the Silver Medal.
Lieutenant-Colonel Leonard has had a wide experience in several branches
of his chosen profession of engineering, having occupied positions of
increasing importance in railroad, hydro-electric, and mining
development. After completing his education in 1883, he took service
with the Canadian Pacific Railway as instrumentman on surveys and
resident engineer on construction of the Lake Superior Division. At the
outbreak of the North-West Rebellion in 1885 he was appointed Staff
Officer of Transport, and served in other capacities during the
uprising. After the Rebellion he re-entered the service of the Canadian
Pacific as engineer of surveys and construction in Manitoba and Ontario.
From 1886 until 1890, he was chief engineer of the Cumberland Railway
and Coal Co., in Nova Scotia. 1890-1891 he was again with the Canadian
Pacific Railway on surveys of important branch lines in Ontario, Quebec,
and British Columbia. In 1891-92 he was engaged in railway contracting.
In 1892-93 he was in charge of the construction of the first
hydro-electric development at Niagara Falls, Ont., for the Park and
River Railway Co. In 1893-94 he was engineer-in-charge of railway
surveys for the Canadian Pacific Railway. From 1895 until 1899 he was
chief engineer and manager of construction of the St. Lawrence and
Adirondack Railway, and of the Montreal and Ottawa Short Line (C.P.R.)
respectively, and consulting engineer for the Canadian Rutland Railway.
His next step was again in the field of mining engineering, being
engaged as engineer with the Lake Superior Corporation in developing
their iron and nickel mines in the Sudbury and Michipicoten districts.
In 1900, he returned to railroading as chief engineer and manager of
construction of the Cape Breton Railway. From 1902 to 1904, he was
engineer in charge of the construction of a hydro-electric plant at
DeCew Falls, near St. Catharines, for the Hamilton Cataract Power Co.,
and in 1905-06 he was engaged in similar work at Kakabeka Falls, near
Fort William, for the Kaministiquia Power Co. In 1905, when silver was
first discovered in Northern Ontario, Colonel Leonard was one of the
first prospectors in the Cobalt district and staked the Buffalo mine,
and in the following year he acquired a controlling interest in the
Coniagas mine, and promoted the Coniagas Mines, Ltd., of which he is
President. This mine has been one of the largest and most consistent
producers of silver ore in the rich Cobalt district, and during its ten
years of operation has produced 25,000,000 ounces of silver, and is
still one of the few silver-producing mines of Canada. In 1908 a
subsidiary company—the Coniagas Reduction Co., Ltd., was formed
primarily for the purpose of treating ore from the Coniagas mine, but a
large custom trade has also been developed in the smelting and reduction
of cobalt ores for the production of silver and lesser products. In
1911, Lieutenant-Colonel Leonard was selected by the Dominion Government
for the position of Chairman of the National Transcontinental Railway
Commission at Ottawa, with jurisdiction over the construction of the
Government Railway from Moncton, N.B., to Winnipeg. This position he
occupied, at much personal sacrifice, until the practical completion of
the railway in 1914. Next to the mining industry, Colonel Leonard’s
principal interest would appear to lie in the direction of the steel
business, as his name appears on the directorate of several industries
engaged in the manufacture of steel and steel products. He has recently
promoted the organization of a new steel company, under the name of
Electric Steel and Engineering Ltd., which is an amalgamation of several
engineering enterprises in which he is interested, and whose different
lines of manufacture he found could be co-ordinated to advantage. He is
also a Director of the Toronto General Trusts Corporation. It may be
said here that he is one of those men of business who are not content to
be Directors in name only, but who believe in the principle that a
Director should take a part in the actual direction of the enterprises
with which he permits his name to become identified, and in conformity
with this rule he has consistently declined to accept office as Director
of commercial enterprises when he felt he was not in a position to give
the necessary time and attention to the affairs of the business. Colonel
Leonard has always taken a keen interest in the welfare and advancement
of the engineering profession, and is an active member and past
vice-president of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineers and the
Canadian Mining Institute; President Engineering Institute of Canada,
1919-20. He has always been the friend of the young engineer, and ever
ready to lend a hand in helping him along the road to success. He is
also a past corresponding member of the Council of the Institute of
Mining and Metallurgy, London, England, and a member of the American
Institute of Mining Engineers. Member Institution of Civil Engineers,
London, England. In spite of his many business activities, he finds time
to devote to educational interests, and is a close student of all
questions involving the well-being and good government of the State. He
is a true Imperialist and advocate of closer unity between the component
parts of the Empire; and any movement which promises to assist in
attaining this end has his moral and financial support. He is a member
of the Board of Governors of the University of Toronto; the Kingston
School of Mining; Wycliffe College, Toronto; and Ridley College, St.
Catharines, Ont. He has recently established scholarships under “The
Leonard Foundation” in several of these Institutions to assist in the
education and support of sons of clergymen, school teachers and officers
and men of the Canadian and Imperial army and navy who require
assistance in order to complete their education. His other benefactions
are widely distributed and unheralded, and it is safe to say that few
appeals on behalf of deserving objects are made to him in vain. A
characteristic which strikes one forcibly is his ability to quickly
analyse and grasp the essentials of things, and this faculty enables him
to get through a large amount of work in a limited time, and also to
readily appreciate the merits or demerits of things, whether in
business, politics or the various public movements with which he may be
asked to become identified. Since the outbreak of war, he has given much
of his time and means to patriotic movements and other work tending to
promote Canada’s whole-hearted participation in the war.
Lieutenant-Colonel Leonard is in command of No. 2 Detachment, Corps of
Guides. He is a member of the Mount Royal Club, Montreal; Rideau and
Country Clubs, Ottawa; National Club and the Engineers’ Club, Toronto,
and the Tourilli Fish and Game Club, Quebec. He is an ardent advocate of
all outdoor sports, especially in the woods. He is an independent in
politics, and in religion an Anglican. Married in 1889 to Kate Rowlands,
daughter of the late John Rowlands, of Kingston, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hare, Rev. John James, M.A., Ph.D.=, Principal Emeritus of Ontario
Ladies’ College (Whitby, Ont.), is one of the most distinguished of
Canadian educationists. He was born in Nepean township, Ontario, on
October 3, 1847, the son of Robert and Barbara (Shillington) Hare. His
early education was received in the public school of his district, and
later he entered Victoria University, at that time situated at Cobourg,
Ont., with a view to entering the Methodist ministry. He graduated in
1873 with the degree of B.A., winning first prizes in metaphysics,
Hebrew, Scripture and debating, also a scholarship for highest standing
in his sophomore year. In 1876, he qualified for the M.A. degree of his
alma mater, and subsequently was awarded the degree of Ph.D. by the
Illinois Wesleyan University. Incidentally he had served as a public
school teacher for two years, and was ordained for the ministry in 1873.
For one year he served as a pastor at London, Ont., but in 1874 was
appointed principal of the Ontario Ladies’ College at Whitby, Ont., an
institution founded for the education of Methodist young women, but by
no means exclusively denominational. That position Dr. Hare held
continuously for forty-one years. In 1915 he resigned, and was appointed
principal emeritus. In 1879 he became governor as well as principal. In
the conduct of the institution he has shown rare executive ability, and
to this asset, combined with his indefatigable energy and spirit of
devotion to the interests of his pupils, the great success of the
college is attributable. During his regime, the institution was four
times enlarged by the addition of Ryerson Hall, private residence with
connecting passage, Frances Hall, gymnasium, swimming pool and hospital
to provide against an outbreak of a contagious disease. By a vast number
of Canadian women, some of whom are now in middle age, the name of Dr.
Hare is held in honor and veneration. His educational attainments were
some years ago recognized by his selection as examiner in geology by the
University of Toronto. In September, 1874, he married Katherine
Isabella, daughter of the late Rev. D. C. McDowell, a well-known
Methodist divine, and has one son. Mrs. Hare was for some years lady
principal of the college, and discharged the duties of her position with
efficiency. His recreations are riding, driving and tennis; and in
politics he is an independent. His permanent address is 164 Bird Ave.,
Miami, Florida.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Morin, Pierre Alphonse= (St. John’s, Quebec), Prothonotary Superior
Court, was born in St. François, Montmagny, 1st August, 1855, and
educated at Montreal College and McGill University, graduating with the
degree of B.C.L. He is the son of Louis Edouard Morin and Catherine des
Trois Maisons, and married Rachel, daughter of the late Senator J. O.
Villeneuve, ex-Mayor of Montreal, by whom he has eight children, Paul,
Josephine, Louise, Suzanne, Villeneuve, Lucie, Madeleine and André.
After practising as an Advocate for some time Mr. Morin became editor
and proprietor of “Le Canada Français,” a Liberal paper which is still
in existence, and with which he retained his connection until receiving
his present appointments as Prothonotary of the Superior Court of
Iberville, and Clerk of the Crown and of the Peace, and of the Circuit
Court of the District of Iberville, Com. per dedimus potestatem and
Commr. in Extradition. He is a Past Grand Knight of Columbus, a Roman
Catholic in religion and a Liberal in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Ashton, Major-General Ernest, M.D., C.M.G.=, is one of those Canadian
soldiers who won high rank and distinction during the great war, but was
originally a physician by profession. He was born at Brantford, Ont., on
October 28, 1875, the son of Rev. Robert and Alice Mary Ashton. His
father was formerly Principal of the Mohawk Institute, Brantford, and
incumbent of His Majesty’s Chapel of Mohawks. He was educated for the
calling of a physician at Trinity Medical School, and graduated in 1898
with the following degrees and honours: F.I.M.C., M.D., C.M. of Trinity
University, and was medallist of both Trinity Medical School and Trinity
University. On graduation he became house surgeon of the Hospital for
Sick Children, Toronto, holding that position for one year, after which
he was appointed superintendent of the Muskoka Cottage Sanitarium, near
Gravenhurst, Ont., remaining there for two years. In 1901 he returned to
Brantford, Ont., and built up a large general practice. He also entered
municipal politics and served as alderman and as a member of the Board
of Education. He was one of the Board of Governors of Brantford General
Hospital and the Brantford Sanitarium. The volunteer militia likewise
claimed much of his energy and enthusiasm, and he holds a first class
school of infantry certificate. When but eighteen years of age he joined
the Dufferin Rifles of Brantford as second lieutenant, and was gazetted
on January 20, 1893. He became a full lieutenant in September of that
year; Captain on August 7, 1896; Major, December 29, 1902; and
Lieutenant-Colonel on January 8, 1907, being at that time one of the
youngest militia commanders in Canada. On completing his five years’
tenure on January 7, 1912, he gave up his command, and was transferred
to the Reserve of Officers of the Canadian Militia. The following year
he was returned to the active list on the organization of the 13th
Brigade, Canadian Field Artillery, and raised and on July 1, 1913,
assumed command of the 32nd Howitzer Battery, C.F.A., with the rank of
Lieutenant-Colonel. On the outbreak of the great war in the following
year he at once offered his services, and on January 2, 1915, was
appointed to raise and organize the 36th Battalion, C.E.F., and within
six months had so effectively performed his task that he was able to
proceed overseas with his battalion on June 19, 1915. On arrival in
England, the organization was broken up and sent to France as
re-inforcements for other battalions; and its commanding officer was
appointed Brigadier of the 9th Reserve Infantry Brigade, and promoted to
the rank of Colonel. On November 7, 1916, he was appointed O.C. of the
Canadian Training Division, and about the same time acted as one of the
Board headed by Surgeon-General Sir William Baptie to investigate the
charges preferred by Colonel Herbert A. Bruce against the organization
of the Canadian Army Medical Corps. On March 16, 1917, he became
temporary Brigadier-General and on April 2 of that year was appointed
General Officer Commanding of the 15th Canadian Infantry Brigade. His
valuable services were the subject of official mention on February 24,
1917 and August 7, 1917. In the autumn of that year he was recalled to
Canada, and on January 1, 1918 appointed Acting-Adjutant-General and
Major-General. At the same time he received the honour of C.M.G. from
His Majesty the King. On June 8, 1905, General Ashton was married to
Helen Margaret, daughter of Oswald Weir, banker, of the Bank of North
America, Brantford, Ont.; he has one child, Amy Corcaire Ashton. He is
an Anglican in religion, and in politics a man of strongly Imperialistic
leanings. He is a member of the Rideau Club, Ottawa, and the Ottawa Golf
Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Duff, Hon. Lyman Poore=, is one of the Justices of the Supreme Court of
Canada, and one of the mostly widely-known of Canadian jurists. He was
born at Meaford, Ontario, on January 7, 1865, the son of Rev. Charles
and Isabel (Johnstone) Duff. He was educated in the public and high
schools of the province and at the University of Toronto, from which he
graduated with the degree of B.A. in 1887 and first class honors in
mathematics and metaphysics. He also took up the study of law at Osgoode
Hall, Toronto, and received the degree of LL.B. at Toronto University in
1889. For a time he was teacher of mathematics at Barrie Collegiate
Institute, but was called to the Bar of Ontario in 1893, and in the same
year to that of British Columbia in 1895. He first practised in Fergus,
Wellington County, Ont., for two years, and in 1895 removed to Victoria,
B.C., where he built up a large and important practice. He was created a
King’s Counsel in 1901, and in that year represented the province of
British Columbia in the famous Deadman’s Island case. In 1903, he was
one of the counsel in the enquiry into the Columbian and Western land
subsidies, a matter which attracted a great deal of attention on the
Pacific Coast at that time. In 1903, he had the honor of being
associated as counsel with the late Hon. Edward Blake, K.C., and the
late Christopher Robinson, K.C., in representing the Dominion of Canada
before the joint high commission on the Alaskan Boundary dispute, which
sat in London, England. He received appointment as Puisne Judge of the
Supreme Court of Canada in 1904, and in 1906 was elevated to his present
position as one of the Justices of the Supreme Court at Ottawa. In that
capacity he had made important decisions on questions of the highest
moment, and in 1918 was appointed as supreme authority in connection
with appeals against the operation of the Military Service Act. He is a
man of strong and striking personality as well as of the highest
judicial attainments, and in many quarters it has been suggested that he
leave the bench to enter political life, which, however, holds out no
attraction for him. When in private practice he was a Liberal, and for a
time held the position of President of the Victoria Liberal Club. He is
a member of the Rideau Club, Ottawa, Ottawa Country Club, Union Club,
Victoria, B.C., Vancouver Club. In July, 1898, he married Elizabeth
Eleanor, daughter of Henry Bird, Barrie, Ont, and resides on Goulborn
Ave., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hurdman, George Charles, M.P.P.=, is a prominent lumberman of Ottawa,
and one of the representatives of that city in the Ontario legislature.
He was born in Ottawa on September 23, 1870, the son of George and Agnes
C. (Fraser) Hurdman. On both sides he is of United Empire Loyalist
stock, and is of Irish and Scottish descent. He was educated at the
public and Model schools of his native city, and as a lad of nineteen
became connected with the wholesale lumber industry, with which he has
ever since been identified. He first entered the service of Beull, Orr,
Hurdman & Co., with which he was connected for five years; after which
he was associated with the lumber firm of Shepherd and Morse, Boston,
Massachusetts, for another five years. In 1899 he established the
Hurdman Lumber Company, Limited, of which he is the head. He has offices
in Canada Life Building, Ottawa, and conducts an extensive wholesale
business. He is also Secretary-Treasurer of the Canada Quarries and
Construction Co. of Ottawa. From earlier manhood, Mr. Hurdman has taken
a strong interest in public affairs, and was for several years an active
officer of the executive of the Liberal party in Ottawa. At the general
elections for the Ontario Legislature in June, 1914, he was the
candidate of his party for the riding of Ottawa West, and succeeded in
defeating his opponent, ex-Mayor Ellis, a strong candidate, by a safe
majority. As a member of the opposition he has proved most useful, his
counsel being especially valued in committee work, and in the party
caucus. He has also taken an active interest in military affairs, and as
a young man served with the 43rd Regiment, Ottawa, and Carleton Rifles.
When the war broke out in 1914, he decided to resume military service,
and qualified as an officer in the Princess Louise Dragoon Guards, which
sent many recruits to the front. He is a Methodist in religion, and a
charter member of the Laurentian Club, Ottawa, and his chief recreation
is horsemanship. On June 21, 1899, he married Katherine, daughter of
Thomas J. Lynton, Ottawa, and has three sons, George Charles, Thomas
Lynton, and Herbert Russell Hurdman. He resides at 412 Daly Ave.,
Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bates, Thomas Nathaniel=, is one of the leading business men of Ottawa,
and holds the position of Vice-President and Manager of the
International Land & Lumber Company, of 285 Bank Street, in that city.
He is also Vice-President of the British Canadian Industrial Company,
Limited. He was born at L’Orignal, Ontario, in 1881, and is a son of
Joseph Lever Bates. He was educated at the public and high schools of
Hawkesbury, Ont., and as a lad of nineteen went into the insurance
business as an agent for the New York Life Insurance Company at Ottawa.
He proved one of the most successful writers of policies that this
country has produced, and in 1904 made the Canadian record for his
company by obtaining one hundred and seven applications for insurance in
the space of thirty-five days. He was appointed Superintendent of
Agencies for the company, and continued in that position until 1907. In
that year the International Land and Lumber Company and the British
Canadian Industrial Company were organized, and he was connected with
them from their inception. Under his energetic and enterprising
direction, they have developed a large and substantial business. In
politics Mr. Bates is a Conservative, and in religion a Methodist. He is
a member of the Laurentian Club; the Britannia Boat Club and the
Canadian Club, Ottawa. On September 21, 1909, he married Maud, daughter
of Thomas Askwith, Ottawa, and has two sons. Mr. and Mrs. Bates reside
at 248 O’Connor Street in the capital.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rose, George Maclean=, President and Manager of the Hunter-Rose
Company, Limited, Toronto, comes of a family which has been identified
with the printing and publishing industry in Canada since the
pre-Confederation era. He was born at the city of Quebec on October 30,
1865, the son of the late George Maclean Rose and his wife, Margaret
Levack Manson, both natives of Caithness, Scotland. Sir Oliver Mowat,
the famous Liberal statesman, who was for nearly a quarter of a century
Prime Minister of Ontario, and held other very important public offices,
was a cousin of the late Mrs. Rose. The subject of this sketch was
educated at the Model School and the Wellesley School, Toronto, and
later took a course at the Ontario Agricultural College, Guelph, with a
view to embarking in a career of scientific agriculture, a project
subsequently abandoned. He began his business career with the Williams,
Greene & Rome Company, Ltd., manufacturers of men’s wear at Kitchener
(then Berlin), Ont., and became secretary and a director of the company.
Severing connection with the enterprise, he went to New York, and was
engaged in business there for ten years, returning to Canada in 1902 to
join the Hunter-Rose Company, established many years previously by his
father. He acted as secretary of the company for two years, and in 1904
became President and Manager, the position he holds to-day. The
Hunter-Rose Company is one of the historic commercial concerns of
Canada. Its founder, the late George Maclean Rose, was a native of Wick,
Caithness, who, as a young man in Scotland acquired complete familiarity
with every phase of the printing and publishing business. In the middle
fifties he came to Canada, and settled in Montreal, but in 1857 went to
London, Ont., and in company with the late Hamilton Hunter established
the printing firm of Hunter & Rose. This partnership was, however,
short-lived, and in 1859, Mr. Rose joined forces with the late Samuel
Thompson, of Toronto, who had received the contract to execute the
printing for the parliament of Canada. This necessitated removal to
Quebec, at that time capital of Canada. It shortly became necessary for
Mr. Thompson to retire from business, and to carry on the work of
government printing Mr. Rose formed the firm of Hunter-Rose & Company,
in the ancient capital, taking into partnership Robert Hunter, a
practical accountant. The completion of the parliament buildings at
Ottawa in 1865 and the establishment of the government there,
necessitated removal to that city, which remained the headquarters of
the firm for several years. Confederation, in the meantime, having
become an established fact, Hon. John Sandfield Macdonald, the first
Premier of Ontario, induced Mr. Rose to establish a branch in Toronto,
to take charge of the provincial printing. In 1871, Mr. Rose came to
Toronto to reside permanently, and since that time the name Hunter-Rose
& Company has been identified with the commercial life of Toronto. In
1877, Mr. Robert Hunter died, and Mr. Rose became sole proprietor. The
firm was incorporated under its present name in 1895. Government
printing ceased to be the staple of its business many years ago, and
book publishing became a very important part of its activities. From its
plant have been issued many reprints of the leading authors of the past
and present century. Incidentally, it may be mentioned that the first
volume of “Representative Canadians,” edited by the late George Maclean
Rose, was published in 1886. The present head of the company, who has
carried on the historic traditions of the firm, is a member of the
Canadian Manufacturers Association and of the Toronto Board of Trade. As
a young man, he took a deep interest in military matters, and was a
Lieutenant in the 48th Highlanders of Toronto, when that regiment was
first established. He was also a lacrosse enthusiast, and played with
the old Ontarios of Toronto and the Crescents of Brooklyn, N.Y. His
present recreation is golf, and he is a member of the Ontario Club, the
Simcoe Club, the Lakeview Golf Club, and the Ontario Jockey Club. In
religion he is a Unitarian, and in politics independent.




[Illustration: CHARLES M. BOWMAN
Southampton]




=Blair, Lieutenant James K.= (Ottawa, Ont.), who was killed in action at
the Somme October 2, 1916, was born September 11, 1890, at Truro, Nova
Scotia, the only son of Lieutenant-Colonel H. C. Blair, Inspector of
Customs, Ottawa, and Grace Ewart Blair. He received his education in the
common schools of Truro, and was a commercial traveller when he enlisted
at Saskatoon as a private on the outbreak of the war. He was married
early in 1916 to Dulcie, daughter of Captain Brooks of the Indian Army,
and Mrs. Brooks, and is survived by one son, James K. Blair, whom he
never saw. After enlisting, he trained with the 28th Battalion in
Winnipeg, and on receiving a commission in February, 1915, joined the
46th Battalion at Moose Jaw, and left for England with a draft from the
battalion in July, 1915. He qualified at Hythe as a musketry instructor,
and was attached in that capacity to the 32nd Reserve Battalion, where
he served for one year. He went to France on August 2, 1916, where he
joined the 2nd Canadian Entrenching Battalion, and then went to his old
battalion the 28th. The following extract from a letter written by the
Commanding officer of the 28th is a tribute to Lieutenant Blair’s
military abilities:—“Poor Jimmie Blair never had a chance to do more
than show he had the grit to stick the worst the Boche could do. He
joined us when we were on our way south, and fitted easily into the very
happy family our mess then was. He did what he had to do well, and gave
entire satisfaction. As our Battalion was then in a high state of
efficiency, that is a good recommendation to any officer. In the big
attack of September 15, we only took in half our officers, and
Lieutenant Blair was left out, so he did not get the chance which two of
the officers of his company got, and which resulted in the award to them
of the M.C. We went in again on September 24-25, and Blair’s platoon was
in the centre, and was subjected to very severe shelling during all of
which he carried himself coolly and bravely, and came through in good
shape. After a couple of days back we went in again on another sector to
hold. Blair’s company was in Kenora trench, just where it joins Regina
trench, of which so much has been said in the papers. This was really a
communication trench, but had to be held on account of the command it
gave us for future operations. It was, however, badly enfiladed, and we
had practically all our casualties there. The battalion we relieved had
just captured it, and it was subjected to a good deal of shell fire, and
it was during one of these poor Blair was killed by a small shell which
landed in the bay in which he was posted. I gave orders that his body be
brought out for burial, but a heavy rain and resulting mud, together
with the exhausted condition of our men, made this impossible. He was,
therefore, given a soldier’s grave near where he fell, and on ground
which should be considered sacred to Canadians, as many of our officers
and men had fallen, and have fallen since, before Regina trench was
finally captured. He died, therefore, as so many have, just ”holding the
line,“ nothing spectacular; just a matter of duty well and bravely done
under very trying circumstances. He gave promise of doing well, but he
was not given the opportunity which the real attack gives. His people,
however, will have the satisfaction of knowing that he did his duty
well, bore himself bravely in the face of fire, and died like a
soldier.” Another officer friend. Captain Quinan, writes:—“I well
remember Jim when he left England for France, as full of spirits as old
Allan Richardson before him, who, too, has been killed. Jim was full of
life, and only asked for a chance to help to avenge his chum. He will, I
assure you, always remain in my memory as ‘Jim,’ a very fine and gallant
gentleman.” He was a Presbyterian and a Liberal Conservative. Lieutenant
Blair was very proud of the Canadians, and in a letter to his parents,
said;—“The Canadians have no black marks against them, and do not
intend to have.” He had a high reputation both as an instructor and as a
soldier. One of Lieutenant Blair’s ancestors, Captain William Blair,
fought at the siege of Louisburg in 1745, and his father joined the
militia.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bell, Clarence A. H.= (Toronto, Ont.), Clerk in Chambers, Supreme Court
of Ontario, Osgoode Hall, son of Alexander Bell, M.D., whose father,
James B. Bell, was for many years Registrar of the County of Lanark at
Perth. Born at Oshawa, May 3, 1869, removing shortly thereafter to
Lakefield, Co. Peterborough. Educated at Lakefield public school and
Peterborough Collegiate Institute. He married Louise Ella, daughter of
the late John Brown, of Lloydtown, June 24, 1893, and has two children,
Sybil Irene and Arthur Armstrong (formerly a signaller in France). He
entered the Department of Attorney-General under the late Sir Oliver
Mowat, May, 1887, and was transferred to the Central Office, Osgoode
Hall, 1896, receiving the appointment of Clerk in Chambers, June, 1917.
Mr. Bell is an active member of many fraternal societies, being P.C.,
Knights of Pythias; High Chief Ranger, Independent Order of Foresters;
representative on several occasions at the National Fraternal Congress
of America; member of Ionic Lodge, A.F. & A.M. and St. Patrick’s
Chapter; member Royal Arcanum; Chosen Friends; L.O.L. and Preceptory,
R.B.K. For many years he has been active in church work (Anglican
Church), being a member of the Executive Committee, Diocese of Toronto;
Dominion President for several years of Anglican Young People’s
Association; Secretary of Diocesan Lay Readers’ Association; President
many years of Progressive Bible Class—at one time one of the largest
Bible classes in Canada. He is publisher of the “Circuit Guide,” a
compendium issued half-yearly for the use of judges and lawyers. To the
average man, the above-mentioned associations would appear almost
sufficient to occupy his spare time; but not so with Mr. Bell, whose
activity seems almost infinite, for he is an enthusiastic student of
astronomy and the history of ancient Egypt, upon both of which subjects
he has given frequent lectures. But the safety-valve of his unusually
active life is probably to be found in the even balance he maintains
between mental, social, and religious pursuits on the one hand, and an
ardent—always ardent and active in everything—love of wild animals,
wild birds, wild flowers, camping, woodmanship and canoeing, at which he
is an expert. All his available holidays are spent near nature’s heart
at his summer house in the northern part of Peterborough County where he
breathes in ozone, puts on tan, relaxes and strengthens his muscles, and
augments his optimism in preparation for the following season of busy
city life. His city residence is 563 Gladstone Avenue.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Brossoit, Numa Edouard, K.C.= (Valleyfield, P.Q.), son of Thomas
Brossoit, K.C., Advocate, and Rose Anne Sabourin, daughter of late Dr.
Moise Sabourin of Beauharnois, P.Q. He is brother-in-law of Hon. Justice
Wilfred Mercier; G. A. Marsan, K.C., Advocate; Ludger Codebecq, K.C.,
Advocate, and Dr. Charles Ovide Ostiguy. Was born at Melocheville on the
23rd of August 1875. Educated at the Seminaire de St. Hyacinthe and
McGill University, Montreal, from which latter institution he graduated
in June, 1897, with the degree of Bachelor of Civil Law. Married to
Hectorine Mailloux, daughter of late Ovide Mailloux, Architect of the
City of Montreal, on the 26th day of September, 1899. His wife died on
the 31st day of October, 1915. Mr. Brossoit is the father of the
following children: Laurette, Hermance, Irma, Pauline Eliane and
Marcelle. He belongs to the Knights of Columbus Council 1180, 4th Degree
Member; Catholic Order of Foresters; Canadian Order of Foresters;
Alliance Nationale; Artisans; Union St. Pierre, and Union St. Joseph. He
is Vice-Provincial Chief Ranger of the Provincial Court of Quebec of the
Catholic Order of Foresters. He is one of the promoters—and is
Vice-President—of the society, “The Fonds de Secours des Foresters
Catholiques de la Province de Quebec,” organized on the 17th day of
January, 1917 and duly incorporated on September 19, 1918. He is a Roman
Catholic in religion and a Liberal in politics. He practised his
profession with his father, the late Thomas Brossoit, K.C., from 1897 to
June, 1905, and since the death of his father in that year he has
practised alone. He has a large practice and is an advocate. King’s
Counsel April, 1914. For many years he was one of the editors of “La
Revue de Jurisprudence” and is a contributor to “Le Progres de
Valleyfield.” Was Crown Attorney for the District of Beauharnois in
1907; Revisor of Electoral List for the city of Valleyfield since 1915
and Recorder of the City of Valleyfield since June 28th, 1909. His
principal recreations are motoring, yachting, hunting and fishing.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Petrie, Harry David=, is one of the leading barristers and financiers
of Hamilton, Ont. He was born at Oakville, Ont., in 1869, the son of
Adam and Margaret (Paterson) Petrie. He was educated at the Simcoe
(Ont.) High School and the Ontario Law School, Toronto. He read law with
C. E. Barber of Simcoe in 1888, and was called to the Ontario Bar in
1893. In 1898 he formed a legal partnership with Lieut.-Colonel
Atkinson, M.P.P., at Simcoe, which continued until 1902, when he removed
to Toronto, and for two years practised as partner of the late Hon. S.
C. Biggs, K.C. Since 1904 he has practised in Hamilton, and has offices
at 28 James Street. During his residence in Simcoe, he was a town
councillor from 1900 to 1902, but has not since been a candidate for
public office. His commercial and financial interests in the Hamilton
district are very wide. He is Vice-President of the Ontario Yarn
Company, Ltd., and also very extensively interested in real estate. He
is director of the following realty companies:—Graham Land Company,
Ltd.; the Oakwood Realty Company, Ltd.; the Oakley Heights Realty
Company, Ltd.; Bronte Heights, Ltd.; Beechwood and Company, Ltd.;
Roxboro Gardens, Ltd.; Lawrence Park, Hamilton, Ltd.; and several other
land and building companies. He is a member of the Royal Arch Masons,
and of the following clubs:—Commercial, Fernleigh Bowling and Athletic;
Canadian (Hamilton), and Country (Burlington). In politics he is a
Liberal, and in religion a Presbyterian. In 1896 he married Laura,
daughter of the late Jonathan Ellis, Port Dover, Ont., and resides at
322 Queen Street, Hamilton.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Bowman, Charles Martin, M.P.P.= (Southampton, Bruce County, Ont.), is
one of the veteran members of the Ontario Legislature. He was born at
St. Jacobs, Waterloo County, Ont., the son of Isaac Bowman, M.P. and his
wife, Lydia Erb, on May 7, 1863. He is of Swiss descent, and his father
represented North Waterloo in the House of Commons for several years. He
was educated at the public school, St. Jacobs and at the High School,
Berlin (now Kitchener), Ont. In 1880 he removed to Southampton, Ont.,
and engaged in the tanning business under the firm name of Bowman &
Zinkan, in which he continued until 1900. From 1880 until 1890 he was
also President of the Southampton Lumber Company, Limited, operating on
the Bruce peninsula. He was engaged in the contracting business for
twelve years, and from 1904 to 1910 was President of the Great Lakes
Dredging Company, Limited, of Port Arthur, during which he carried out
in the harbour of Fort William the largest contract for dredging ever
awarded in Canada. He is a director of the Bell Furniture Company, Ltd.,
Southampton; of the Stevens Hepener Co., Ltd., manufacturers of brushes
and brooms, Port Elgin, Ont., and of the Durham Furniture Co., Ltd.,
Durham, Ont. In 1894-5 he was a member of the Southampton Council, and
afterward Reeve, and was also President of the Southampton Board of
Trade, 1894-5. In 1898 he was nominated for the Legislature in the
Liberal interest for the riding of North Bruce, and elected. Despite the
vicissitudes of his party, he was re-elected at each succeeding
election—1902, 1905, 1908, 1911 and 1914. As a member of the Standing
Committees of the Legislature dealing with private and municipal
measures, he has rendered much valuable service. In 1911 he was chosen
Opposition whip by the Liberal caucus, a position he resigned in 1919.
He was also named for the leadership of the party in the Legislature,
but declined. He has long been a prominent member of the Executive of
the Ontario Reform Association, and presided over the Liberal convention
held at Toronto in July, 1919, at which Mr. H. H. Dewart, K.C., was
elected leader. On October 20, 1886, he married Lulu, daughter of Julius
Hesse, Howell, Michigan, and has one son and two daughters. He is a
Methodist in religion, and a member of the A.F. & A.M., the I.O.O.F. and
the Ontario Club, Toronto. His recreations are curling and bowling.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Dewart, Herbert Hartley, K.C., M.P.P.= (Toronto), son of the late Rev.
Edward Hartley Dewart, D.D., formerly editor of the Christian Guardian,
and was born in St. John’s, Quebec, November 9, 1861. He received his
education in Toronto at the Model School and Toronto Collegiate,
graduating from the University of Toronto with B.A. degree in 1883. He
was called to the Bar in 1887, and created a K.C., in 1899. He was for
several years examiner in English at the University of Toronto, and was
elected a Senator of the University in 1906. He has been counsel in many
big criminal trials, and was junior counsel with B. B. Osier, K.C., in
the Ford and Hyans murder trials. Later he prosecuted for the Crown,
being appointed Crown Attorney for the County of York in 1891. He held
this position until 1904, when he resigned to engage in general counsel
work. He was engaged in many big trials, both criminal and civil.
Notable among these were the defence of Carrie Davies and McCutcheon
brothers. He was also retained in big inquiries, and as Liberal counsel
at the small arms ammunition inquiry at Ottawa, had interesting passages
with Sir Sam Hughes. He has also written and spoken on law matters.
These are regarded as authoritative, and attracted much attention in
legal circles. Mr. Dewart has been actively interested in politics for
many years, although he has been a member of Parliament but a short
time. Mr. Dewart’s first official connection with the Liberal party was
in 1887, when he was President of the Young Men’s Liberal Club in
Toronto. He held this position also the following year. His first
attempt to get into the active arena as a member of Parliament was in
1904, when he contested South Toronto in the Liberal interest. He was
defeated by A. C. Macdonell (now Senator) by a majority of 409. The next
attempt was in 1911, when he was defeated in Centre York by Tom Wallace,
M.P., but was successful in 1916, when he contested Southwest Toronto
for the Legislature. He was a familiar speaker “on the hustings”
throughout Ontario for years previous, and had taken a keen interest in
Liberal organizations. As a lawyer he is famous throughout Canada, and
has been in some of the biggest cases in the history of the courts.
Success came in the by-election in Southwest Toronto for the Legislature
in 1916. The seat had previously been Conservative by a majority of
about 4,000. Mr. Dewart, running against Mr. James Norris, turned this
into a Liberal majority of over 600. It was the first time in many years
that Toronto had elected a Liberal. Mr. Dewart represents this riding in
the Legislature at present. Since entering the House he has been one of
the foremost in its affairs, and has tackled the Government on many
problems. His speeches on the nickel question have received attention
all over the Dominion. At the big Liberal Convention in Toronto in June,
1919, Mr. Dewart was selected as the Provincial Liberal Leader, by a
most decisive majority, succeeding William Proudfoot, K.C. The new
Liberal Leader is a speaker of logic and grace. His genial personality
has made him many friends. He is also a good debater, as would be
expected after a long and successful legal career. Mr. Dewart is senior
member of the firm of Dewart, Harding, Maw & Hodgson, a Bencher of the
Law Society of Canada, and also a member of the Bar of Manitoba. He
married Emma Smith, daughter of the late H. B. Smith, of Sparta,
Ontario. Mr. Dewart lives at No. 5 Elmesley Place, Toronto, and has a
country place near Uxbridge.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Drayton, Philip Henry, K.C.=, Official Arbitrator and Chairman of the
Court of Revision for the city of Toronto, was born in Barbados, West
Indies, the son of Henry Drayton, a landed proprietor, and Jane
(Holinsed) Drayton. He was educated in England by private tuition at
Cheltenham College and the Royal Military College at Sandhurst, from
which he graduated with honours. On leaving Sandhurst, he was appointed
to a commission in the 16th Regiment, from which he exchanged into the
Royal Canadian Rifles. On their disbandment by the Imperial Government,
he commanded a company in the Army Service Corps at Woolwich, England.
Having sold out his commission, he spent some time on his estate in the
West Indies, then came to Canada and studied law with the well-known
firm of Bethune, Osier and Moss. During his student career he achieved
the remarkable record of winning a scholarship in each of four
successive years. On graduating, he entered into partnership with the
late W. B. McMurrich, who was Mayor of Toronto in 1881-2. He
subsequently practised for a number of years as head of the firm of
Drayton & Dunbar, and was appointed to his present position in
September, 1907. He first married Margaret Coverton, daughter of C. W.
Coverton, M.D., by whom he had two sons and four daughters, the eldest
son being Sir Henry Drayton, K.C., formerly Chief Commissioner of the
Board of Railway Commissioners for Canada, and now Minister of Finance
at Ottawa. In 1907, he married Isabel Griffith, daughter of the late W.
E. Griffith, of the Ontario Civil Service, the issue being one daughter,
deceased. For some time he was alderman for old St. Thomas’ Ward, and
for three years chairman of the Board of Health. He was six years
lecturer and examiner of the Ontario Law School. He is a member of the
Sons of England and of St. George’s Society, of which he is a
past-president. His position as official arbitrator is very onerous and
responsible. While at college and in the military, Mr. Drayton was an
ardent devotee of athletics, and won many prizes in different classes of
sport, still retaining his reputation as a crack shot. His recreations
are fishing and shooting. The family reside at 296 St. George Street,
Toronto.




[Illustration: JACOB L. ENGLEHART
Petrolia, Ontario]




=Wright, George Craig= (Hamilton, Ont.), Manufacturer, was born in
Hamilton, January 11, 1891, the son of H. G. Wright, manufacturer, and
Kate Wright. He was educated at the Hamilton Collegiate Institute,
graduating from there in 1908. In 1910 he became Lieutenant of the 13th
Royal Regiment and, when the war broke out, enlisted with the First
Contingent in the 4th Battalion and served continuously in France from
February 11, 1915, until wounded in April, 1916. He went to the front as
a Lieutenant and was made a Captain, April 23, 1915. Since July 5, 1916,
he has been employed on Staff work in Canada. Mr. Wright is a member of
the Barton Lodge of Masons, attends the Centenary Methodist Church, and
belongs to the Hamilton Golf and Country Club.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Detwiler, Noah Bechtel= (Kitchener, Ont.), was born June 3, 1858, at
Roseville, Waterloo Township and County, Ontario, the son of the late
Rev. Enoch R. Detwiler, preacher and farmer of that place, and Abigail
Bechtel. He received his education in the public schools and then took a
course in a Toronto Business College. He married, December 14, 1880,
Mary, the daughter of the late Jacob Y. Shantz, manufacturer in Berlin
(now Kitchener), and a pioneer in the development of the Canadian
North-West in the eighties and early nineties, and has one son and three
daughters—Elden, Doctor of Osteopathy, London, Ont.; Lenora and Ethel
at home, and Elizabeth, the wife of Prof. Herner, of Manitoba
Agricultural College, residing in Winnipeg. Mr. Detwiler is a
Protestant, worshipping with the United Brethren in Kitchener. In
politics he is a real Independent, favoring no party, but always for to
support the right man and the right principles if fortunate enough to
have the opportunity of doing so. He was an early advocate of public
ownership and his brother, D. B. Detwiler, of Kitchener, is the pioneer
Hydro promoter in Canada, and is President of the Algoma Power Co.,
Ltd., and Chairman of the Great Waterways Union of Canada, and the proud
father of two sons, with the Canadian Expeditionary Force in France. Mr.
Noah B. Detwiler is actively engaged as President and Treasurer of the
Hydro City Shoe Manufacturers, Limited, with office and works at No. 117
Weber Street, and as Secretary-Treasurer of the Algoma Power Co., with
head office in Kitchener and plant at Michipicoten, Ont. When not
engaged in business, Mr. Detwiler’s pursuits lie very largely along the
line of social and religious work. He has been a director of the
Y.M.C.A. for many years, also for a long time Sunday School
Superintendent. Is local Secretary of the Social Service Council of
Canada, and has always been an advocate of temperance. His reputation
for good judgment and reliability is shown by his being executor or
trustee for several estates, and while Mr. Detwiler is mild and affable
in manner his clear cut style shows that confidence in him will not be
misplaced. The family reside at No. 105 Queen Street North, where at
this point the environment is quite in harmony with its name.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Pullan, E.= (Toronto, Ont.), wholesale merchant, was born at Telz,
Russia, in 1866, the son of Bernard and Emily Pullan. Leaving home at
the early age of fourteen, he went to England and migrated to Canada
four years later, where he worked in different capacities for two years
in various parts of Western Ontario, and started in his present business
of dealer in paper stock and sterilized wiping rags in 1888. Mr. Pullan
married Bertha, daughter of Abraham Helman, by whom he has ten children:
Martha, Harry, Joel, Dora, Bessie, Jennie, Rita, Gordon, Helen, and
Emmanuel. He is a Hebrew in religion, independent in politics, and a
member of the Board of Trade, of the Jewish Board of Arbitration and of
the United Hebrew Charities, all of Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nicholson, Arthur Edwin, O.A.A.=, of 46 Queen Street, St. Catharines,
Ont., is one of the leading architects of the Niagara peninsula. He was
born at Buffalo, N.Y., on June 22, 1881, the son of Edwin Charles
Nicholson and his wife Alice Richings. The father was a builder and
contractor, and the subject of this sketch was educated at the public
schools of St. Catharines. Deciding to adopt the profession of
architect, he went to Toronto in 1901, and on October 14 of that year
was articled for three and a half years to the firm of Gordon &
Helliwell, architects of that city. His articles expired in April, 1905,
and on the eighth of May in that year he was admitted to membership in
the Ontario Association of Architects. Returning to St. Catharines he
has built up a large and lucrative practice and designed many of the
handsomest buildings and residences in his district. He is a member of
the Public School Board in that city, and belongs to the Masonic order,
the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, and the Sons of England. In
religion he is an Anglican, and on June 12, 1906, married Viola,
daughter of Archibald MacGregor, a manufacturer, of 236 St. Clarens
Avenue, Toronto. He has two daughters, Alice and Viola.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Rutherford, Colonel, The Hon. Alexander Cameron, K.C., B.A., B.C.L.,
LL.D.=, Barrister-at-law (Edmonton, Alta.), is recognized as one of the
chief citizens of the Province of Alberta. He was born at the village of
Osgoode, Carleton County, Ont., on Feb. 2nd, 1857, the son of James
Rutherford, a farmer, and Elizabeth (Cameron) Rutherford. He was
educated at the Public School, Metcalfe High School, Woodstock College
and McGill University. From the latter institution he graduated in 1881
with the degrees of B.A. and B.C.L. In addition he holds the honorary
degree of LL.D. in three universities, McGill (Montreal), 1907; McMaster
(Toronto), 1907; and the University of Alberta, 1908. He was called to
the Bar of Ontario in 1885 and first practised at Ottawa as a member of
the firm of Hodgins, Kidd & Rutherford. In 1895 he decided to go to the
West and located in Strathcona (now South Edmonton) where he became
Solicitor and Secretary-Treasurer of the Municipality, and
Secretary-Treasurer of the School Board, offices he held for a
considerable number of years. He was elected to the Legislative Council
of the Northwest Territories in 1902 and was Deputy Speaker of that body
from 1902 to 1905. In the latter year the Province of Alberta having
been created he was elected to the Legislature and became the first
Premier of that Province on Sept. 2nd, 1905, administering also the
portfolios of Provincial Treasurer and Minister of Education. He
represented Alberta at the Inter-provincial Conference of Premiers held
at Ottawa in 1906, and was delegate to the Imperial Conference on
Education in London, England, 1907. He was responsible for the
foundation of the University of Alberta and has been a member of its
Senate since its establishment; in 1912 he represented it at the
Conference of the Universities of the Empire in London, Eng. On May
26th, 1910, he resigned his position as Premier owing to a division in
the ranks of the Liberal members of the Legislature, although as leader
he had carried the general elections of 1905 and 1909. Under his regime
as Premier all Provincial institutions were established as in the older
Provinces of Canada, and in addition to the University he founded a
Normal college for teacher-training. He also encouraged railway
expansion and the development of the agricultural and coal-mining
industries, and since 1909 has been a member of the Conservation
Commission of Canada. In 1916 he was appointed a Director of the
National Service Board of Canada and he is also Honorary Colonel of the
194th, Edmonton Battalion, a Highland Battalion of the C.E.F. He is a
member of the Edmonton Hospital Board and of the Board of Public
Welfare, and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, and the Royal
Colonial Institute. His business interests are wide. He is
Vice-President of the Great Western Garment Co., Ltd., Edmonton; and a
Director of the Great West Permanent Loan Co.; Canada National Fire
Insurance Co., the Imperial Canadian Trust Co., and other financial
institutions. He is a Liberal in politics, a Baptist in religion, and a
member of the A.F. & A.M., I.O.O.F., I.O.F., and St. Andrew’s Society.
In 1888 he married Mattie, daughter of the late William Birkett of
Ottawa, Barrister-at-law, and has two children, Cecil, who served
overseas in the late war as a Lieutenant of artillery, and Miss Hazel
Rutherford. His recreation is motoring and he is a member of the
Edmonton Club and the Canadian Club of his city.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Neill, Charles Ernest= (Montreal, Que.), General Manager of the Royal
Bank of Canada, with Head Office at Montreal, was born at Fredericton,
N.B., on May 27th, 1873, the son of James Stewart and Eliza Caroline
Neill. He was educated by Dr. G. R. Parkin in the Collegiate School of
his native town and graduated in 1889. After receiving his education he
entered the banking business, and has risen to his present high position
by promotion. He was Manager of the Royal Bank at Vancouver, B.C.;
Supervisor of B.C. Branches; Chief Inspector Montreal; in 1907 was
appointed Assistant General Manager, and in 1916 to his present
position. To gain such rapid promotion in one of the largest banking
institutions in the British Empire means something, and no person will
dispute the qualifications of Mr. Neill to fill the same. He is a man
with a large vision, knows business life thoroughly and has keen
foresight and action. In October, 1901, he married Mary Louise Crerar,
daughter of John Crerar, K.C., of Hamilton, Ont., and has no issue. Mr.
Neill is a member of the following clubs:—St. James, Mount Royal,
Forest and Stream, Montreal Hunt, Royal Montreal Golf, Montreal Curling,
M.A.A.A., all of Montreal. Since the outbreak of the war Mr. Neill has
taken an active part in all Patriotic work and has devoted much time and
given freely of his money on all occasions. In religion he is a
Presbyterian and resides at 503 Sherbourne St. West.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Panet, Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Louis= (Ottawa, Ont.), son of the
late Colonel the Honorable Charles Eugene Panet, who was for many years
Deputy Minister of Militia and Defence, and one of a very distinguished
French-Canadian family, which has given many distinguished soldiers,
judges and legislators to the service of Canada. Born at Quebec City on
December 15, 1870. Moved to Ottawa five years later, when his father,
who had been a member of the Senate of Canada, resigned that position to
accept the above-named office. Educated at Ottawa University, and at the
age of nineteen entered the Civil Service of Canada as a junior in the
Department of Militia and Defence. In 1904, Sir Frederick Borden,
Minister of Militia and Defence, appointed Colonel Panet his private
secretary, in which capacity he acted for seven years, attending three
Imperial conferences in London, Eng., with his chief. In 1898, he became
Secretary of the Canadian Defence Committee. In 1908, he was appointed
Secretary of the Department. The outbreak of the war added enormously to
Colonel Panet’s responsibilities, and he was officially mentioned in
despatches for services rendered in Canada during the war period,
1914-1919. At present he holds the office of Secretary of Department of
Militia and Defence and of President of the Pensions and Claims Board.
In 1912 he was appointed President of the Board of Enquiry _re_ claims
of applicants for the Fenian Raid Volunteer Bounty. Among his brothers
are Brigadier-General A. E. Panet, C.B., C.M.G., D.S.O., Royal
Engineers, Imperial Army; Brigadier-General H. A. Panet, C.B., C.M.G.,
D.S.O., Royal Canadian Artillery; Brigadier-General E. de B. Panet,
C.M.G., D.S.O., Royal Canadian Artillery; Lieutenant-Colonel A. de L.
Panet, Canadian Ordnance Corps; and Lieutenant-Colonel A. H. Panet, of
the same branch of the service. A. P. E. Panet, another brother, is a
barrister. The subject of this sketch was married on October 25, 1899,
to Muriel, daughter of Major-General Sir D. A. Macdonald, Kt., C.M.G.,
I.S.O., etc., and has one son. He is a Roman Catholic in religion, and
his recreations are shooting, fishing, and golf. He is a member of the
Royal Ottawa Golf, Ottawa Country, and Ottawa Hunt Clubs. His private
address is “The Roxborough,” Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Fielding, Hon. William Stevens, LL.D., D.C.L., P.C., M.P.=, one of the
leading Liberal statesmen of Canada, was born at Halifax, N.S., November
24, 1848, the son of Charles and Sarah (Ellis) Fielding. He was educated
in the public schools of Halifax, and at the age of sixteen entered the
office of the “Chronicle” of that city as a reporter, and ultimately
became managing editor, a post from which he retired in 1884. He early
developed a rare talent as a public speaker, with a special aptitude for
the handling of financial topics. At the Nova Scotia elections of 1882
he was elected to the Legislature for Halifax County as a Liberal, and
two years later became Premier and Provincial Secretary. He was
successful in carrying his party to victory in the general elections of
1886, 1890 and 1894, gaining an ever-increasing fame as an orator and
administrator. When Sir Wilfrid Laurier, became Prime Minister of
Canada, after the Federal elections of 1896, he induced Mr. Fielding to
leave the provincial arena and become Minister of Finance in his
cabinet. The new Minister was elected to the House of Commons for the
riding of Shelburne and Queens by acclamation on August 2, 1896, and was
re-elected at the general elections of 1900, 1904, and 1908. In 1911, he
was personally defeated in the contest which resulted in the general
defeat of the Laurier administration on the reciprocity issue. The great
historic act of Mr. Fielding’s career as Minister of Finance was his
establishment of an Imperial British trade preference in 1897, which has
since become a permanent factor in Canadian tariff policies, and which
won him fame throughout the Empire. In 1907, he also negotiated a
reciprocity treaty in certain commodities with France; and during the
fifteen years that he was Minister of Finance was a notable figure at
Colonial and Imperial conferences in London. In 1910, he conducted on
behalf of Canada the negotiations with President Taft to avert tariff
war between Canada and the United States, and in the spring of 1911 was
one of the commissioners who negotiated the reciprocity agreement with
the United States, which, in the following September was rejected at the
polls, and which became known as the Knox-Fielding pact. On the defeat
of the Laurier administration, he re-entered journalism as President and
Editor-in-Chief of the “Journal of Commerce,” Montreal. In 1917, he
returned to politics as an Independent Liberal, supporting the Union
Government on the question of conscription, and was elected by
acclamation for his old constituency. At the National Liberal Convention
of August, 1919, his election to the party Leadership was strongly urged
by supporters in all parts of Canada; and despite his reluctance to
accept the honour he was only defeated by the narrow majority of 38 in a
poll at which more than 900 votes were cast. In religion Hon. Mr.
Fielding is a Baptist, and on September 7, 1876, married Hester,
daughter of Thos. A. Rankine, of St. John, N.B., by whom he had four
daughters and one son. He resides at 286 Charlotte Street, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Nash, Charles William= (Toronto, Ont.), Provincial Biologist, is an
Englishman who came to this country to engage in farming, and was called
to the Manitoba Bar in 1883. Since January, 1899, he has been a Lecturer
in Biology of the Farmers’ Institutes Bureau, Department of Agriculture,
Ontario, and is Biologist of the Provincial Museum, Department of
Education. He has been a frequent contributor to Canadian Magazines, as
also to “Farming World,” of which he was Associate Editor, writing
regularly for many years under the title “Nature About the Farm.” Among
other publications he is the author of “Birds of Ontario in Relation to
Agriculture” (5th edition, 1913); “Check List, Birds of Ontario”; “Birds
of the Garden”; “Ways of the Woodcock”; “Passing of the Pigeons”;
“Migration of Birds”; “Humming Birds of Ontario”; “Wild Fowl of
Ontario”; “The Bass of Ontario”; “Farmers’ Handy Book”; “Manual of
Vertebrates of Ontario”; “Fishes of Ontario”; “Reptiles and Batrachians
of Ontario”; “Mammals of Ontario”; and “Fishes of Toronto Region.” He
has presented collections of Birds and Fishes of Ontario to the
Provincial Museum, and is a member of the American Ornithologists’
Union; as also a Director of the Entomological Society of Canada. Mr.
Nash was born at Bognor, Sussex, Eng., August 15, 1848, the son of Wm.
H. and Louisa L. H. Nash, and received his education in England and the
Isle of Jersey. He married Harriette B., daughter of Judge E. C.
Campbell, Niagara, February, 1877, and has two daughters, Mrs. Eleanor
E. Lacey and Mrs. Isabella L. Sweatman. He is an Anglican in religion,
and a Conservative in politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Foran, Joseph Kearney, K.C., Litt. D., LL.B.=, Montreal and Ottawa, is
one of the legal staff of the House of Commons, and also one of the
leading litterateurs of Canada. He was born at Aylmer, Que., on
September 5, 1857, the son of John Foran, a prominent lumberman, and his
wife, Catharine F. Kearney. The latter was a lady of pronounced literary
talent, and in her younger days was on the staff of the Dublin “Nation.”
After coming to America, she for a time edited the “Ladies’ Literary
Journal,” of Philadelphia. The subject of this sketch was educated at
St. Joseph’s College, now known as Ottawa University, graduating in
1877. He then entered Laval University, Quebec, to equip himself for the
practice of law, and in 1880 received the degree of Bachelor of Laws.
During this three-year term he also obtained practical experience of his
profession in the offices of Andrews, Caron, Andrews and Fitzpatrick, of
which the late Sir Adolphe Caron and Sir Charles Fitzpatrick, formerly
Chief Justice of Canada, were members. From 1880 to 1883, he practised
law at Aylmer, Quebec, but in the latter year ill-health compelled him
to spend three years in the woods of the north. In 1886 he was
sufficiently restored in health to return to civic conditions, and for
two years he acted as secretary to the Speaker of the House of Commons.
He also became active as a writer of poems, essays and other forms of
literary effort which were accepted by numerous Canadian and American
publications, and in 1891 he became editor of the “True Witness,” of
Montreal, which won an honorable place in Catholic journalism by the
literary distinction of its contents and the breadth of its outlook. At
the same time he began to acquire fame as a speaker and lecturer, and
has been heard in many parts of Canada and the United States. His
addresses are marked not only by rare eloquence, but by a spirit of
toleration that makes them acceptable in all assemblages. In 1894, the
University of Ottawa conferred on him the degree of Doctor of Letters,
and his address on that occasion won tributes from the Earl of Aberdeen
and other distinguished men who were present. He also speaks with equal
facility in French and English. He has published a number of volumes,
including “Obligations,” a legal treatise; “Poems and Lyrics”; “Simon
the Abenakis,” a novel; “The Spirit of the Age,” an historical and
philosophical essay; and “Irish Canadian Representatives.” The latter
publication won high tributes from both Sir John A. Macdonald and Sir
Wilfrid Laurier. He is a strong advocate of the cause of Irish freedom
and in 1882 drafted the first Home Rule resolution presented in the
House of Commons, for which the late Hon. John Costigan stood sponsor.
In 1902 he entered the office of the Secretary of the Law Branch of the
House of Commons as English translator; in 1908 he became Assistant Law
Clerk; and in 1912, when the Parliamentary Counselship was created he
was attached as Legal Officer to the Law Branch. In 1911 he was created
King’s Counsel, and in 1914 appointed a Commissioner of the High Court
of Ontario Dr. Foran is a Roman Catholic in religion; and in 1892
married Louisa, eldest daughter of the late Edwin Davis of Ottawa, who
built many of the lighthouses on the Great Lakes. Mrs. Foran is a lady
of literary culture who has been of great assistance to her husband in
his work. They have two surviving children, Lieut. Herbert P. Foran, a
student of McGill University, and Miss Ethel U. Foran.




[Illustration: J. G. Brennan, Ottawa
John L. Garland, Ottawa]




=Easson, Robert Henry= (Toronto, Ont.), is one of the most prominent
figures in the musical manufacturing industry of Canada. He is
Vice-President of the Otto Higel Company, Ltd., manufacturers of piano
actions and keys and pneumatic actions for player-pianos, with factories
at King and Bathurst Streets, Toronto, and also Vice-President of the
Otto Higel Company, Inc., of New York City, N.Y. With its Canadian and
American branches, this enterprise is one of the largest industries of
its kind in America. He is also President of the Canada Action & Key
Company, Ltd., Toronto. Mr. Easson was born in Toronto, January 10,
1873, the son of Robert F. Easson, one of the pioneer telegraphers of
this country, identified with the Great Northwestern Telegraph Company
from its earliest days, and his wife, Millicent Easson. He was educated
at the Toronto public and high schools, and began his business career as
cashier and office assistant in the firm of M. & L. Samuel, Benjamin &
Company, wholesale hardware merchants, Toronto, in 1890. He continued
with this firm for ten years when he became manager of the Audit
Department of Jenkins & Hardy, assignees and chartered accountants,
Toronto. In 1904, he retired from that position to associate himself
with the growing business of the Otto Higel Company, and became
Vice-President in 1906. Since then the business of the Company has been
greatly extended. The musical industries of Canada are now splendidly
organized institutions for the development of music in the home, and Mr.
Easson has been one of those most influential in bringing about this
spirit of co-ordination. He is a member of the National Club and the
Royal Canadian Yacht Club, and also of the Masonic order. In politics he
is a Liberal, in religion a Presbyterian, and his recreations are
bowling and motoring. On December 28, 1904, he married Winnifred,
daughter of the late John Garvin, and has two sons and one daughter. He
resides at 407 Palmerston Boulevard, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hunter, Major W. E. Lincoln=, of Hunter & Deacon, Barristers and
Solicitors, 2 Toronto Street, Toronto, was born in London, Ont., January
13, 1870, the son of Rev. W. J. Hunter, M.A., D.D., and Mary J.
(Robinson) Hunter. He was educated at Hamilton Collegiate Institute and
Osgoode Hall, graduating as barrister at the age of twenty-one. He
joined the firm of Ince & Hunter, 1891, continuing this connection for
four years, when he became associated with former Mayor A. R. Boswell,
K.C., who is now Superintendent of Insurance for the Province of
Ontario. He formed his present partnership in 1900. In 1901, he was
appointed Census Commissioner for Centre Toronto. He married June 1,
1904, Mary Edith, daughter of Henry Smith, Superintendent of
Colonization Roads, Toronto, and has four daughters—Kathleen, Madeline,
Norah and Aileen. He is an ex-Vice-President of Centre Toronto Reform
Association, and ex-President North Toronto Liberal Club. He is the
author of “The Woman in Blue,” a satirical novel published in 1895. His
military career began at an early age, and he was gazetted Lieutenant in
the 10th Regiment, Royal Grenadiers, in 1901, became Captain in 1907,
and Major 1915, being now second in command. When war broke out, he at
once became active in every way at his command, speaking constantly at
recruiting meetings, associating in many other military and patriotic
activities. For two years he was constantly in khaki, and for nearly a
year was in command of Filtration Guard, with over 300 men under him. In
his patriotic work, he had a most enthusiastic associate in Mrs. Hunter,
who is Regent of the Royal Grenadier Chapter, I.O.D.E., whose efforts on
behalf of the boys overseas were unceasing and indefatigable. On August
18, 1919, a formal ceremony took place in the Armouries, when the colors
of the Regiment were handed over to Major Hunter, who accepted them on
behalf of the Regiment, from Major Andrew Duncanson, D.S.O., commander
of a guard of 100 men, all of whom had been overseas. These colours were
carried by the guard of honour for the Prince of Wales, Colonel in Chief
of the Regiment, on his visit to Toronto in August, 1919. Major Hunter
has large real estate interests in the city. He is a member of the Royal
Canadian Yacht Club, the Ontario Club, Military Institute, Mississauga
and Scarboro Golf Clubs, Lake Shore Country Club, Toronto, and the
Junior Army and Navy Club, London, England. He is a Liberal and an
Anglican. The family reside at 113 Walmer Road, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Henry, Hon. George Stewart, M.P.P., B.A., LL.B.=, Minister of
Agriculture for the Province of Ontario, is not only a practical farmer
but an agricultural expert of wide academic training. He was born at
King Township, York County, Ont., on July 16, 1871, the son of William
and Louisa Henry, the mother’s parents being from Ulster, as was also
his father. The subject of this sketch was educated at the public
schools of Toronto, Upper Canada College and the University of Toronto,
of which he holds the degrees of B.A. and LL.B. He also spent a year at
the Ontario Agricultural College, Guelph, Ont., and though equipped for
a professional career decided to adopt the vocation of farmer in East
York, near Toronto. In this field he proved himself extremely
successful, and as a young man took an active part in the public affairs
of his district. He was a member of York Township Council from 1903
until 1910, holding the position of Reeve during the last four years of
that interval. This carried with it membership in the York County
Council, and in 1909 he was elected by his colleagues warden of York, an
old and historic office. A vacancy in the Ontario Legislature for the
riding of East York necessitated a by-election, and he was nominated in
the Conservative interest. He was returned at the head of the poll on
September 8, 1913, and at the general elections of the following June
was again successful. In the spring of 1918, Sir William Hearst, Prime
Minister of Ontario, invited him to enter the Ontario cabinet as
Minister of Agriculture, a portfolio he had himself filled for some
months after the death of the late Hon. James Duff. This necessitated a
by-election in the summer of that year. Mr. Henry was again elected for
East York, for the third time in five years. In that office he has
pursued a vigorous progressive policy, not only with regard to the
development of agriculture in the outlying districts, but in stimulating
production in the older settlements. He has also been a leader in the
Good Roads Movement; he is a member of the Toronto and York Roads
Commission, and is Secretary-Treasurer of the Ontario Good Roads
Association. He was also a prominent figure in the All-Canada Roads
Conference held at Quebec under the Presidency of Sir Lomer Gouin in
May, 1919. In addition to conducting a farm of a model character, Mr.
Henry is President of the Farmers’ Dairy Company, Ltd., of Toronto. He
is a Methodist in religion, and on January 29, 1902, married Anna Ketha,
daughter of Rev. F. W. Pickett, of the Toronto Methodist Conference. He
resides at Todmorden, on the outskirts of Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Butler, Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Page, K.C., B.C.L.=, is one of the
leading advocates of Montreal, where he practises at 81 Union Avenue. He
was born at Kingsey, Que., on August 3, 1845, the son of the Rev. John
Butler, M.A., and educated at the University of Toronto and McGill
University, Montreal, taking the B.C.L. degree in 1865 and receiving
that of D.C.L. in 1880. During 1862 and 1863, he acted as Private
Secretary to Sir John Abbott, afterward Prime Minister of Canada, and at
that time Solicitor-General of Quebec Province. He was called to the
Quebec Bar in August, 1866, and created Queen’s Counsel in 1887. He was
first associated with the firm of Rose (late Sir John Rose) & Ritchie,
Advocates, Montreal, and later with the late E. J. Hemming, Q.C., at
Drummondville, Que. After residing at Melbourne, Que., for a time, he
returned to Montreal in 1870, where he has ever since practised. Until
1881 he was in partnership with the late John Monk, and since then has
practised for the most part alone. He was Councillor for the
municipality of Longueuil from 1874-77, and also served as School
Trustee there. Col. Butler long took an active part in military affairs,
and commanded the Prince of Wales’ Regiment from 1889 to 1898. He
organized and became the first president of the Montreal Amalgamated
Rifle Association and the Montreal Military Institute. In politics he is
a Conservative, and in religion an Anglican, having been a member of the
Diocesan and Provincial Synods over thirty years. In Free Masonry, he
was Grand Master in 1894, and has been for many years Chairman of the
Committee on Jurisprudence of the Grand Lodge of Quebec. In August,
1870, he married a daughter of the late Valentine Cooke, of
Drummondville, Que., and his home address is 52 Fort Street, Montreal.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McEvoy, John Millar, B.A., LL.B.= (London, Ont.), is one of the best
known barristers in the Western section of the province, and a man of
unusual scholastic attainments. He was born at Caradoc, Middlesex
County, in 1864, the son of A. M. and Sarah (Northcott) McEvoy—his
father coming of a family in County Down, Ireland. He was educated at
the Strathroy Collegiate Institute, the University of Toronto, and the
Ontario Law School, taking the B.A. degree in 1892 and LL.B. in 1893. As
a student, he was a marked man among the faculty, because of his
originality of mind and intellectual power, and on graduation was
elected a Fellow in Political Science at Toronto University, and in that
capacity taught Canadian constitutional history there. On the retirement
of Prof. W. J. Ashley, who had been at the head of the Political Science
Department, he was placed in temporary charge pending the arrival of
Prof. Mavor, the new incumbent from Scotland. He afterward continued as
lecturer under Prof. Mavor for one year. At this period he was a
prolific writer of pamphlets and magazine essays. He is the author of
“The Ontario Township: a History of the Growth of Municipal Institutions
in the Province,” printed under Government auspices as the first of the
Toronto University studies in political science. He also wrote an “Essay
on Currency and Banking,” which was awarded the Ramsay Scholarship and
printed at the request of the leading bankers of Canada. Another essay
of his on “Karl Marx’s Theory of Value” was declared by Prof. Ashley to
be the ablest exposition of the abstract theory of value that it had
been his good fortune to have heard or read on any occasion. At the
invitation of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, he
contributed a series of articles to their publication, “Annals,” upon
subjects of economic and historical importance—to Canadians especially.
On giving up his academic career in the middle nineties he returned to
Middlesex County, and settled down to the practice of law in London,
Ont., where he has ever since resided. As a barrister, he has been
identified with many important cases. He was associated with the late E.
F. B. Johnston, K.C., in the defence of Gerald Sifton, charged with the
murder of his father, which ran through three trials and finally
resulted in the acquittal of the accused. He was also associated with
Mr. Johnston and Mr. W. R. (now Justice) Riddell, K.C., as one of the
counsel for Hon. J. R. Stratton in the Royal Commission to investigate a
charge of attempted bribery, preferred by the late R. R. Gamey, M.P.P.
for Manitoulin. This was a political _cause célèbre_, and resulted in a
victory for the defence. For a quarter of a century, Mr. McEvoy has been
intimately associated with the fortunes of the Liberal party in his
district. He was an unsuccessful candidate for the House of Commons in
East Middlesex in the general elections of 1904, and for London in the
general elections of 1911. At the Ontario elections of 1908 he also
contested the London seat against Sir Adam Beck, but was defeated. Mr.
McEvoy is a strong advocate of the tariff-for-revenue-only principle and
of an Anglo-Saxon alliance, and is a member of the Ontario Club,
Toronto, a headquarters of Liberalism. In 1894 he married a daughter of
John Anderson, of East Williams, Ont. He has one son, Captain A. M.
McEvoy, of the C.E.F., and one daughter, Miss Gladys, at home.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Chambers, Col. Ernest John.= Col. Ernest John Chambers, Gentleman Usher
of the Black Rod, was appointed to that position March 1st, 1904. He is
the son of Edward Thomas and Louisa Percy (Davies) Chambers and was born
in Penkridge, Staffordshire, England, April 16th, 1862, coming to Canada
in 1870. He was educated at the Prince Albert School, St. Henri, Quebec,
and the Montreal High School. Col. Chambers belongs to the same family
as Captain Chambers, R.N., who commanded the flotilla on Lake Champlain
during the Revolutionary War with the now United States of America.
Captain Chambers, afterwards Admiral, served as a midshipman under
Captain Cook at the great siege and taking of Quebec. Another of the
same family was an officer in the British Army, took part in most of the
fighting in the Niagara Peninsula, 1812-13, and was taken prisoner.
When, February 3, 1916, fire destroyed the Parliament Buildings at
Ottawa, the Black Rod, the emblem of authority carried by the Gentleman
Usher of the Black Rod, was burnt, and Col. Chambers was ordered to
procure a new one. The new emblem, which was subscribed for by the
members of the United Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary
Association, is similar to the Black Rods of the House of Lords and the
Senates of Australia and South Africa, is made of ebony with the “Lyon”
crest, butt piece and knob of solid gold, and bears wreaths of maple
leaves. The shield is engraved with the royal monogram, and the butt
piece contains a sovereign of the year 1904, when Col. Chambers was
appointed, and the coin is to pass to his family as an heirloom. In 1885
Col. Chambers acted as field correspondent for the “Montreal Star”
during the Riel insurrection, and served as a volunteer galloper to
General Middleton at Batoche and Fish Creek, and wears the medal and
clasp, the Long Service Medal, and the Colonial Auxiliary Forces
Officers’ Decoration. He participated in the operations against Big
Bear’s band of Indians. In 1888-9 Col. Chambers was Managing-Director
and Editor of the “Calgary Herald,” and for two years was joint
proprietor and editor of the Canadian “Military Gazette.” Since 1912
Col. Chambers has been Secretary of the Canadian Branch Empire
Parliamentary Association. Since 1908 he has been editor of the Canadian
Parliamentary Guide. He has done good work in the field of Literature
and is the historian of several of our most distinguished Canadian
Regiments. In fact he has been a prominent and clever contributor to a
variety of publications on Parliamentary, historical, military, hunting
and yachting subjects. He is the author of many books on historical and
military subjects. He was connected with the Canadian Militia for many
years. When but a boy Col. Chambers commanded the Montreal High School
Cadet Rifles. Later, in 1902, he became Captain and Adjutant of the 6th
Fusiliers, Montreal, now the Grenadier Guards of Canada. In 1910 he was
appointed District Intelligence Officer, Montreal, with the rank of
Captain in the Corps of Guides and was promoted to Major in 1911,
Lieut.-Col. in 1915, Colonel in 1917. In August, 1914, at the outbreak
of the great war, Col. Chambers was appointed Censor at the Military
Headquarters in Ottawa, and July 15th, 1915, Chief Press Censor for
Canada, and continued to perform his duties as such. In the discharge of
his duties he proved an ideal officer, and his name was brought to the
attention of the Secretary of State for War for distinguished service.
August 31, 1898, Col. Chambers married Bertha Macmillan, of Kingston,
Ontario. He has one son and one daughter. He is a member of the Royal
Ottawa Golf, the Rivermead Golf and the Coulonge Fish and Game Clubs.
For recreation he indulges in shooting, fishing, yachting, and golf. He
resides at 325 Daly Ave., Ottawa, Ontario.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Elliot, Maj.-General Harry Macintire, C.M.G.=, Master-General of
Ordnance, Headquarters Staff, Ottawa, is one of those officers
originally trained in the Imperial Army, who did much to create the
machinery which enabled Canada to play her part as a fighting element
from the earlier stages of the great war. He is a son of General Elliot,
a retired officer of the Imperial Army, and was born at Bangalore,
India, where his father was at that time stationed, on December 3, 1867.
He was educated at Carshalton School, England, and the Royal Military
Academy, Woolwich. He was gazetted as a Second Lieutenant in the Royal
Artillery, February 17, 1888, and a Lieutenant three years later. He was
promoted to the rank of Captain in the Royal Artillery on August 17,
1898. He saw active service in South Africa 1900, and China (Boxer
Rebellion) 1900-1901. On return to England he was appointed Instructor
in Gunnery, Chatham (Eng.), in 1901, and on June 1, 1905, was made an
Instructor of the First Class, continuing in that capacity until March
29, 1906, when he was attached to the Military Forces of Canada as
Instructor in Gunnery. He continued in that capacity until March 29,
1909. On June 9, 1908, he was promoted simultaneously to the rank of
Major in the Royal Artillery (Imperial) and the Canadian Permanent
Forces. He returned to England in 1909, and was stationed in Ireland
till 1911. On May 1, 1911, he became Director of Artillery on the
Headquarters Staff, Ottawa. He was promoted to the rank of
Brevet-Lieutenant-Colonel, on June 9, 1912, and became
Assistant-Adjutant General of Military District No. 2 (Toronto) on March
1, 1913. On May 17, 1915, he became full Colonel, and on March 31, 1916,
was appointed Master-General of Ordnance with the rank of
Brigadier-General. On November 29 of the same year he became temporary
Major-General. During the war he was for a short time on active service
overseas, and was honoured by his Majesty with the decoration of a
Companion of the Most Distinguished Order of St. Michael and St. George.
On January 10, 1899, General Elliot married a daughter of Dr. W. N.
Wickwire, of Halifax, N.S. Mrs. Elliot died in 1911, leaving four
children—Irene (b. 1900, died 1916), William (b. 1902), Aileen (b.
1905), Violet (b. 1908). His favourite recreations are riding and
golfing, and he belongs to the Army and Navy Club (London, Eng.) and the
Rideau and Country Clubs (Ottawa). In religion he is an Anglican.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Duclos, Arnold Willard, B.A., B.C.L., K.C.= (Ottawa, Ont.),
Deputy-Registrar of the Exchequer Court of Canada, is the son of Rev. R.
P. Duclos (Canadian) and Sophie Jeanrenaud, of Geneve, Switzerland. He
was born at Ste. Hyacinthe, Quebec, April 7, 1873, and was educated at
the High School and McGill University, Montreal, and graduated in arts
in 1894 and in law in 1897, and received the degrees of B.A. and B.C.L.
Called to the Quebec Bar in 1898, he practised in Montreal for a short
time and then left for Ottawa, where he practised with Mr. Henry Aylen,
K.C., under the firm name of Aylen & Duclos, barristers, advocates,
etc., and was associated with Mr. Aylen in several important cases in
the districts of Ottawa and Pontiac. He was made a King’s Counsel in
1911. In 1915, Mr. Duclos joined the legal firm of Devlin & Ste. Marie,
Hull, Quebec, and in 1918 assisted, in various professional capacities,
in the matter of exemptions in the Central Court of Appeal (Judge Duff).
In January, 1919, he started to practise alone, and in the following
June was appointed Deputy-Registrar of the Exchequer Court of Canada,
and Official Law Reporter of the Exchequer Court Reports. Mr. Duclos
practised before the Supreme and Exchequer Courts, and acted as counsel
in divorce matters before the Senate Divorce Committee. From 1905 to his
appointment as Deputy-Registrar, he was Assistant-Editor of Official
Reports of the Province of Quebec. He also revised and edited the sixth
edition of “How Canada is Governed,” by Sir J. G. Bourinot. Having
previously held various other offices, in 1918 Mr. Duclos was elected
President of the Ottawa Valley Graduates Society of McGill. He is an
officer of the University Club of Ottawa, President of St. Andrew’s
Church Choir; a Director of the Ottawa Choral Society, and a prominent
figure in the several musical organizations of Ottawa, and is a member
of the Rideau Lawn Tennis Club. Hon. Mr. Justice Duclos is a brother.
September, 1900, Mr. Duclos married Grace Van Dusen, daughter of the
late Thomas J. Gillelan, of the American Bank Note Company. They have
two daughters, Elise Adrienne and Madeleine G. For recreation, he takes
pleasure in tennis, fishing, and music. He is a Presbyterian in
religion, and his residence is 152 James Street, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hogg, William Drummond, K.C.=, barrister-at-law, Ottawa, is one of the
most distinguished figures in Canadian legal circles. He was born at
Perth, Lanark County, Ont., on February 29, 1848, the son of David Hogg,
a prominent furniture manufacturer of that town. His father was a son of
Lieut. David Hogg, of Edinburgh, Scotland, who became an officer of the
Royal Artillery, and in that capacity took part in the siege of
Copenhagen, and was present at the Battle of the Pyramids, the Battle of
the Nile, and other historic engagements of the Napoleonic wars. James
Hogg, the Scottish poet and the “Ettrick Shepherd” of “Noctes
Ambrosianæ,” was a relative. David Hogg (who died in 1882) came to
Canada just fifty years previously and became one of the pioneer
settlers of Lanark County, where, at the village of Perth, he
established the industry above-mentioned. The mother of the subject of
this sketch, Isabella Inglis, was a native of Clackmannan, Scotland, who
came to Canada in 1831 and settled with relatives in Lanark village.
These relatives were the Hall family, with branches in many parts of
Upper Canada, and whose name is identified with the early history of
such towns and cities as Peterboro, Sarnia, Brockville, and Perth. She
died in 1881. Mr. Hogg was educated at the High School, Perth, Ont., and
commenced the study of law in the office of E. G. Malloch, Crown
Attorney for Lanark County. Subsequently, he spent several years in the
offices of Paterson, Bain & Paterson, Toronto, and was called to the
Ontario Bar at Hilary term, 1874. He commenced practice at Ottawa in
1875 in partnership with the late Daniel O’Connor. For some years after
the death of the latter he practised alone, but on the admission of his
son to the Bar the firm became Hogg & Hogg. The practice of Mr. Hogg has
largely lain in the Supreme and Exchequer Courts of Canada, and he is a
recognized authority on questions of prerogative and constitutional law.
Though a Conservative in party leanings, he has never sought political
office, and one of the convincing proofs of his professional standing is
the fact that during the Liberal _régime_ of Sir Wilfrid Laurier his
services were frequently sought in connection with important and
intricate Government litigation. He is a member of St. Andrews Society
of Ottawa, and was for many years solicitor of that body. He has also
had the honour of being elected by his fellow barristers a Bencher of
the Law Society of Upper Canada and is now a life Bencher of that
Society, and was some years ago created King’s Counsel. When the late
James Bethune, K.C., of Toronto, a relative by marriage, passed away, a
long friendship of the most intimate personal, and professional
character was severed. Mr. Hogg holds very strong views on the subject
of temperance, and at various times held all the executive offices of
the Sons of Temperance. He married Louisa Agnes, daughter of Dr. Charles
Rattray, of Cornwall, Ont., and has two sons. His business address is
the Trust Building, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gwynne, Brigadier-General Reginald John, C.M.G.=,
Deputy-Adjutant-General for Canada, Headquarters Staff, Ottawa, is a
native of the motherland, but has been intimately identified with the
marvellous development of Canada’s military power during the past few
years. He was born in London, England, on September 16, 1863, the son of
the late J. E. A. Gwynne, J.P., F.S.A., F.R.S., etc., of Folkington
Manor, Polegate, Sussex, England, and his wife, Mary Earle Purvis. He
was educated at Cheam, Eton, and Pembroke College, Oxford. After coming
to Canada, he became identified with the Active Militia of this country,
and commanded the 16th Horse, a Western organization, from 1907 to 1911.
In 1911 and 1912, he was in command of the 7th Cavalry Brigade, and in
1913 he was appointed to the Headquarters Staff at Ottawa as Director of
Cadet Services for the Dominion. In 1914, the year of the outbreak of
the great war, he became Director of Mobilization, with the rank of
Brevet-Colonel and in that capacity performed very important services in
connection with the organization of Canada’s overseas forces. In 1916,
he was promoted to the rank of Director-General of Mobilization, a post
he filled until the close of the war, and in the following year raised
to the rank of Brigadier-General. In 1919 he was appointed
Deputy-Adjutant-General for Canada. In recognition of his services he
was created by His Majesty a Companion of the Most Distinguished Order
of St. Michael and St. George. On May 16, 1894, he married Mary Mayall,
daughter of S. Taylor, J.P., and Janet Mayall Taylor, of Hathershaw,
Oldham, England, and has one daughter, Evelyn Violet. In religion he is
an adherent of the Church of England, and he is a member of the Rideau
Club, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=King, Hon. William Lyon Mackenzie, C.M.G.= (Ottawa, Ont.), Leader of
the Liberal Party of Canada, was born at Berlin (now Kitchener), Ont.,
on December 17, 1874, the son of John King, K.C., and his wife, Isabel
Grace, daughter of William Lyon Mackenzie. He was educated at Toronto
University (B.A. 1895; LL.B. 1896; M.A. 1897), the University of
Chicago, and Harvard University (A.M. 1898; Ph.D. 1909). He was one of
the first Canadian students to specialize in social science. For a time
he was a reporter on various Toronto newspapers. In 1900, when Sir
William Mulock, then Postmaster-General in the Laurier Cabinet,
established the Federal Department of Labour, Mr. King was chosen as
Deputy-Minister to organize it. In 1908, he was elected to the House of
Commons for the riding of North Waterloo, and subsequently was promoted
by Sir Wilfrid Laurier to the post of Minister of Labour. He was
defeated, in company with the majority of Liberal candidates, in the
Federal elections in 1911. During his years of service in the Labour
Department, Mr. King was responsible for much important permanent
legislation with regard to industrial disputes, immigration, and the
opium traffic, and served on numerous Royal Commissions on matters
pertaining to Labour and to the problem of Oriental Immigration. On
different occasions, he represented Canada on important missions to
England. In 1909, he was appointed by the Imperial Government one of the
British representatives on the Anti-Opium Commission, which met at
Shanghai, China. In June of 1914, he was appointed Director of an
Investigation of Industrial Relations under the auspices of the
Rockefeller Foundation. In this position, he was instrumental in
bringing about better relations between employers and employees in the
coal mines of Colorado, where for years there had been serious
industrial strife. Throughout the period of the War, he rendered a like
service to several other of the largest industries in America engaged in
the production of war necessities. His researches were subsequently
incorporated in a volume entitled “Industry and Humanity,” which has
obtained international recognition as one of the most searching and
advanced considerations of an all-important question. Mr. King has
always maintained his connection with the Canadian Liberal Party. From
1911 to 1914, he was President of the Ontario Reform Association. In
December, 1917, he was the Liberal candidate in North York. At the
National Liberal Convention, held in Ottawa, August, 1919, he was
elected Leader of the Liberal Party in succession to the late Sir
Wilfrid Laurier. He is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, and a
member of the following clubs—Rideau (Ottawa), Ontario (Toronto),
Century (New York), Harvard (Boston and New York). He is a Presbyterian
in religion and unmarried.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hanna (the late), Hon. William John, K.C., M.P.P.= (Sarnia Ont.), was
born in Adelaide township, County of Middlesex, Ont., on October 13,
1862, the son of George and Jane (Murdock) Hanna. The son of a farmer,
he was educated at the local schools and soon developed great capacity
as a student, and decided to put himself through for the legal
profession, graduating from Osgoode Hall, Toronto. He was called to the
Bar in 1890, and commenced the practice of law as a barrister at Sarnia,
Ont., eventually becoming head of the firm of H. Le Sueur and McKinley
of that place, and was created a K.C. in 1908. He soon became active
with the Conservative party, and in 1896 became the candidate of that
party for the House of Commons in West Lambton against the late Justice
Lister, and was defeated. His party still had confidence in him, and in
1900 he was again nominated for the Federal House and again defeated,
West Lambton always having been a great Liberal stronghold. Two years
later, in 1902, Mr. Whitney, then leader of the Opposition in Ontario,
in looking for a strong man to help him in Western Ontario, prevailed
upon Mr. Hanna to run for the Provincial Legislature and undertake the
work of organizing Western Ontario. He accepted, made an amazing
turnover in that portion of the Liberal stamping grounds, was elected,
and came to Toronto in 1905. When the Conservative government came into
power, Mr. Whitney invited him to become one of his cabinet, and he
chose the portfolio of Provincial Secretary, as in this position his
duties would neither come in contact or conflict with the position he
held as chief legal adviser to the largest oil corporation in Canada.
His public life was free from reproach of mixing up private interests
and friendships with his public duties, and as a legal practitioner an
extraordinary fact is recorded of him: that while representing one of
the most important corporations in the country, no case he had to handle
ever went into court; he had a singular and commendable theory that it
was the duty of a lawyer to keep his clients out of court. He was
elected again to the Ontario Legislature in 1908 and 1911, and appointed
a member of the Inter-Provincial Conference held at Ottawa in 1910. His
desire for a rest and to complete his great work in connection with his
pet hobby of prison reform led him to decline a portfolio when the
Hearst government was formed, although he remained in the cabinet as
minister without portfolio; and in connection with his services as a
public servant in Ontario, it may be said that, though not a
prohibitionist by conviction, he was the most efficient administrator of
the liquor license system that this country has ever known. He created
the machinery for the administration of the prohibition law, which has
proved as effective as was possible. His natural taste for politics did
not die out on his retirement from office, and he became one of Sir
Robert Borden’s most trusted private advisers on public policy. He
perfected a system of prison reform which, perhaps, is the most sensible
and humane prison system in the world; in fact, his ten years or more of
service given to the Province of Ontario as administrator of its public
charities, its license laws, its prisons, asylums, and other
institutions, constitute a record so progressive and enlightened that
the full value of his services will long continue to be recognized by
sociologists with a habit for research. In 1917, Sir Robert Borden
induced him to accept the post of Food Controller of Canada; and Mr.
Hanna at once applied himself to the task of organizing that department,
making his single aim the increase of production and the conserving of
foodstuffs in order to ensure a steady supply to the soldiers in the
field and the civilian populations of Britain, France and Italy. He
encountered great difficulties owing to the misapprehension of the
public, which demanded a reduction of prices, a measure that, by
increasing consumption, would have defeated the above-named object. He
however, refused to be moved by popular clamor, and in co-operation with
Mr. H. H. Hoover rendered great service toward relieving the overseas
populations of the danger of starvation. His exertions told on his
physique, and early in 1918 he resigned this office, leaving it well
organized for his successor. On the retirement of Mr. Walter C. Teagle
from the post of President of the Imperial Oil Company to become
President of the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey, Mr. Hanna was
elected his successor. In that capacity, he, in December, 1918,
introduced the Industrial Relationship plan in all the plants of the
Company from coast to coast, and also a series of sickness, death and
insurance benefits for workmen. Grief at the death of his only son,
Flight-Lieutenant Neil Hanna, who was killed by accident in Italy in
November, 1918, a few days after the signing of the armistice,
undermined his health, and on March 20, 1919, he died suddenly while on
a vacation in Georgia. When he was borne to his last resting-place at
Sarnia, his funeral was attended by public men from all parts of Canada
and many sections of the United States. The late Mr. Hanna was twice
married: first to Jean J. Neil, who died in 1891, leaving one son, the
late Neil Hanna; and secondly to Maud McAdams, by whom he had two
daughters. In religion he was a Methodist, and a member of many
important clubs and philanthropic organizations.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gale, Robert Henry=, one of the leading public men of Vancouver, of
which city he has been a resident for nearly a decade, is a native of
the city of Quebec. After an excellent business training in the ancient
capital of Canada, he went to British Columbia in 1910, and located at
Vancouver. He engaged in business as a contractor, and is at present
manager of the British Columbia Contractor’s Supply Company, Limited,
one of the largest enterprises of its kind in the province. Less than
five years ago he entered municipal politics, and was elected alderman
for 1916 and 1917. His services during his comparatively brief term on
the City Council made him so widely popular that his friends urged him
to run for Mayor in 1918. He accepted the nomination, and in January of
that year was elected over the retiring mayor, Mr. Malcolm McBeath, who
had sought re-election, by a majority of 300, the largest ever given to
a mayoralty aspirant in the history of Vancouver. In January, 1919, he
was re-elected by acclamation, it being generally conceded that it would
be futile for any rival to contest the office with him. In April of
1919, the provincial government of which Hon. John Oliver is the head
appointed him to the newly-created office of Public Utilities
Commissioner for British Columbia. By the tax-paying public, the
appointment was considered an admirable one, because of the high
capacity Mr. Gale had revealed as a municipal administrator. The Great
War Veterans’ Association, however, made a vigorous protest on the
ground that all new offices within the gift of the government should go
to returned soldiers. The Oliver administration deemed it necessary to
yield to the agitation, and cancelled the appointment of Mr. Gale,
accepting the nominee of the G.W.V.A., Lieutenant-Colonel Retallick, a
civil engineer by profession, who had rendered excellent service
overseas. Under the circumstances, the cancellation of the appointment
was in no sense a reflection on the character or capacity of Mr. Gale.
In politics the latter is a Liberal, but has never sought election as a
political candidate. During the general strike that was started in
Vancouver during the early summer of 1919 as an outgrowth of a general
strike at Winnipeg and other Western towns, Mr. Gale showed great tact
and firmness in handling a very difficult situation, so that the attempt
to disorganize municipal government and upset the present economic
system was of comparatively brief duration.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Elson, John Melbourne= (St. Catharines, Ont.), was born in Byron, Ont.,
Dec. 25th, 1880. Son of George and Charlotte (Wilkin) Elson. Educated at
London, Ont., Collegiate Institute and Western University of that city.
He entered journalism in 1903 as a member of the staff of the London
“News,” since merged, and thereafter his rise was rapid. Shortly joined
the staff of the Montreal “Gazette” and in 1905 during the late Joseph
Chamberlain’s Tariff Reform Campaign he went to Great Britain to study
political and economic conditions and wrote special articles thereon to
Canadian papers. On his return to Canada he became a member of the staff
of the Toronto “Globe” and in 1907 was appointed editor of the Toronto
“Sunday World.” Subsequently in 1909 he became Assistant Managing
Director of the World Publishing Company, and in 1910 purchased the St.
Catharines “Evening Journal” which he has ever since conducted. Mr.
Elson is a terse and gifted writer, with a wide fund of information. He
has travelled considerably on this continent and abroad, and is a gifted
public speaker. When acting as a newspaper correspondent he secured the
only interview granted by Baron Komura, the Japanese plenipotentiary,
who negotiated the peace treaty between Japan and Russia at Portsmouth,
New Hampshire, except the official statement given to the Associated
Press in the United States. Since becoming a resident of St. Catharines,
he has been active in public affairs, and in patriotic objects like the
Red Cross and the Canadian Patriotic Fund. He was elected Mayor of St.
Catharines, Jan. 1st, 1919, by an unusually large majority. He is a
member of the Council of the Board of Trade; and has served as President
of the St. Catharines Canadian Club, and was for seven years President
of the Lincoln County Liberal Association. He was formerly
Vice-President of the Niagara District Hydro Radial Union, and has been
an active member of Soldiers’ Aid Commission ever since it was organized
in St. Catharines in the early part of war. He is a member of the
Masonic Order. In 1911 he published a brochure, “Reciprocity, The
Outcome of Evolution” which had a wide circulation in Canada and the
United States. For two years he was a member of the Collegiate Institute
Board. Was made member of the Advisory Council of the Repatriation
Committee of the Dominion of Canada. In religion he is an Anglican and
in September, 1907, married Wilhelmina M., daughter of W. M. Faulds of
Mount Brydges, Ont., and has two children: a son and a daughter.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Gill, Robert=, of Ottawa, a gentleman well known to the seniors of
Canadian finance, is one of the best known citizens of the Canadian
capital, where he has resided since 1876. He has been especially
identified with the history of the Canadian Bank of Commerce, of which
institution he was a trusted officer for over forty years. He was born
at Dundas, Ont., on September 30, 1851, the son of William and Alison
(Sanderson) Gill, both his parents being of Scottish Border origin. He
was educated at Upper Canada College, Toronto, and entered the service
of the Bank of Commerce at the age of nineteen. This was in 1870, and
the Bank was but three years old. In its expansion during the next few
years Mr. Gill actively participated; his promotions were rapid, and in
1874 he was appointed manager of the Galt, Ont., branch. In 1876 he was
transferred to the Ottawa branch, which was regarded as one of the most
important in the Bank of Commerce chain of agencies. In 1880 he was
appointed an Inspector of the Bank and retained that position until 1887
when he was appointed Manager of the Ottawa branch, which had attained a
very important position in the financial life of the capital. Under his
regime it attained a wide expansion of business and he continued to
direct its affairs until 1911, when he retired on pension after
forty-one years’ service. During his career with the Bank of Commerce he
proved himself not only a practical banker with a complete understanding
of the needs of the business community, but an able thinker and essayist
on financial questions. Among his publications was one on the subject of
Post Office Savings Banks reprinted in the “Canadian Banker’s Journal”
for the use of the United States Currency Commission. Since his
retirement from active business he has lent his services and influence
to the promotion of patriotic and other objects of public welfare, and
during the late war was Vice-President of the Executive of the Ottawa
branch of the Canadian Patriotic Fund. He is also a Life Governor and
Vice-President of St. Luke’s Hospital in that city, and in June, 1916,
was appointed a member of the Military Hospitals Commission. From 1899
to 1906 he was honorary captain and paymaster of the Governor-General’s
Foot Guards. He is a prominent figure in the social life of his chosen
city, and in 1914 was elected President of the Rideau Club of Ottawa, a
position he still holds at the time of writing. He is also a member of
the following other clubs: Country (Ottawa), St. James (Montreal), York
(Toronto), Ottawa Golf, R.C.Y.C. (Toronto) and the Constitutional
(London, Eng.). He is a Past President of the Ottawa Literary and
Scientific Society, member of St. Andrew’s Society (Ottawa), the Royal
Canadian Institute and the Archæological Society of America, and a life
member of the Royal Colonial Institute (England). His recreations are
golf and angling; in religion he is an Anglican and in politics, a
Conservative. Mr. Gill was first married on September 20, 1881, to
Caroline, daughter of John Gilmour of “Marchmont,” Ottawa, by whom he
has one surviving son, Major Allan Gilmour Gill, who during the late war
commanded the 45th Battery, Canadian Field Artillery, overseas. This
lady passed away on April 19, 1884, and Mr. Gill married again on
November 20, 1899, Anna Louise, daughter of the late W. R. Thistle, by
whom he has three sons, Henry Robert Thistle, Evan William Thistle and
Francis Egan Thistle. His permanent residence is at 281 O’Connor Street,
Ottawa, and he has a summer residence, “Gillcairn,” at St. Andrew’s,
N.B.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wright, Alexander Whyte=, late Vice-Chairman Workmen’s Compensation
Commission of Ontario, was born in the township of Markham, York County,
Ontario, December 17, 1847, the son of George and Helen (Whyte) Wright,
who came to Canada from Glasgow, Scotland, some years previously. He was
educated in the public schools of New Hamburg, and after a short time in
a drug store, learned the woollen business, later engaging in the
woollen manufacturing business at Linwood, Waterloo County, and
subsequently in Preston, St. Jacobs and Guelph. At an early age he
joined the 29th Battalion, and responded to the call to arms for the
Fenian raid. When the first Riel rebellion broke out he joined the Red
River Expedition under General Sir Garnet Wolseley (afterwards British
Commander-in-Chief Earl Wolseley), serving as a sergeant. On returning
he rejoined the 29th Battalion as sergeant-major. In his later teens and
early twenties he had quite a local reputation as a fine lacrosse player
and fast runner. He had always been a great reader and taken an interest
in politics, and in 1873 left the woollen business to become a reporter
on the Guelph “Herald,” soon after being engaged as editor of the
Orangeville “Sun.” He next edited the Stratford “Herald,” then the
Guelph “Herald.” In 1878 he came to Toronto as editor and joint
publisher of “The National,” making it an ardent advocate of the
national policy, which the late Sir John A. Macdonald had adopted as his
platform after having been urgently pressed to do so by a deputation
consisting of the late Hon. Isaac Buchannan of Hamilton the late William
Wallace, M.P. for Simcoe, the late John Maclean (father of W. F.
Maclean, M.P. of the “World”), the late Thomas Cowan of Galt, the late
W. H. Fraser and Mr. Wright. During the election campaign, he wrote many
articles in the “National” that were extensively quoted by the
Conservative press. Shortly after his return to power, Sir John A.
Macdonald wrote Mr. Wright a letter in his own hand, in which he
said:—“I wish to thank you most sincerely for your splendid work in the
campaign which has just ended so satisfactorily. Your speeches and
writings did more, I believe, than anything else to convert the people
to protection. I only had the good fortune to hear you once—in the
amphitheatre—but I was then struck with your wonderful grasp of the
question and the extraordinary fund of information you possessed, and no
less struck with the admirable way in which you marshalled your facts
and presented your arguments. I hope to be able to express my gratitude
to you in a more substantial way, and will be delighted if you will give
me an opportunity to do so.” Mr. Wright returned to Guelph in 1879 as
editor and joint publisher of the “Herald.” The proposed Government
agreement for the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway did not meet
with Mr. Wright’s approval, and, as the “Herald” had always been a
Conservative paper, he gave up his interest in it, and wrote a series of
articles published in the “Mercury,” advocating its being built and
owned by the Government and paid for by a national currency—not notes
or promises to pay, but bills of different denominations, reading “Legal
tender for all debts, public and private.” He called a meeting to
explain his plan in Guelph city hall, which was packed. At the
conclusion of his address he moved a resolution calling on the
Government to adopt the plan. On sitting down, the late Mr. Donald
Guthrie—father of Hon. Hugh Guthrie, and at that time member of the
legislature—arose and said that he had attended for the purpose of
opposing the scheme, but Mr. Wright’s explanation had so clearly
demonstrated its feasibility and incalculable value that he was
converted to it, and had much pleasure in seconding the resolution. On
those in favour being asked to raise their hands, the audience, with the
exception of one man, rose to their feet and cheered for several
minutes. In thanking the audience for their almost unanimous endorsation
of this plan, Mr. Wright declared that the one exception was an
unlooked-for further compliment. For his independent thought and action
the “Mail” undertook to read Mr. Wright “out of the party.” Sir John A.
Macdonald wrote Mr. Wright, repudiating its assumed authority,
recognized his right to personal opinion, good standing as a
Conservative, and assured him of his personal friendship, and continuing
said: “I have read a report of your speech at Guelph, and, while I am
sorry you saw occasion to make it, I confess I was struck with the plan
you outline for the building of the railway. Possibly, under different
conditions it might be practicable, but do not think it could be carried
out now.” His ideas, however, were over a generation in advance of the
people’s desire for public ownership, and, as a consequence private
capitalists draw some $40,000,000 in bond interest and dividends yearly,
besides adding large sums to reserve, which the people pay; while the
people are out a huge land and money bonus, have neither the national
railway nor a national currency, but instead a huge octopus of
capitalists that dominates our legislation and is an ever-watchful and
valiant defender of “vested rights”—whether rightly or wrongly
obtained. Mr. Wright was invited to speak at the convention of the U.S.
Greenbackers in Chicago in 1880, and accepted, as well as during the
subsequent campaign. He returned to Toronto in 1881, and became
editorial writer on the “World.” The following year he became Secretary
of the Canadian Manufacturers Association, continuing till 1886, when,
owing to the lines of cleavage between capital and labor becoming
marked, he resigned and established the “Labor Reformer,” the first
paper in Canada to advocate public ownership and a workmen’s
compensation act. While secretary of the Canadian Manufacturers
Association he drafted a factory act which he urged the Dominion
Government to pass, providing equal protection and conditions to the
workers in all provinces, as well as for manufacturers against unequal
labor conditions. This the Government failed to adopt. The draft,
however, was made the basis of the Factory Act passed by the Ontario
Government shortly after; but this, of course, could give no protection
to the Ontario manufacturer (and indirectly to the workers as well)
against the longer hours and lower labor conditions obtaining in the
Province of Quebec. In 1886, he was appointed Dominion Government agent
for the Antwerp and the Indian and Colonial Exhibitions, and acted as
one of four commissioners representing Canada in London at the latter.
In 1887, he represented Toronto District Assembly at the General
Assembly of the Knights of Labor, and was the first Canadian elected
member of the General Executive Board, and immediately after was
appointed editor of the “Journal of the Knights of Labor,” Philadelphia,
official organ of the order, continuing to hold both positions till
1892, when he removed to New York as editor of “The Craftsman.” In 1896,
he was appointed by the Laurier Government special commissioner to
investigate and report on the sweating system in Canada, and was
subsequently asked by that Government to investigate and report on the
Japanese difficulties in British Columbia, but was unable to accept.
From 1898 to 1904, he was organizer of the Conservative party in
Ontario, engaging in three campaigns, being in charge of the campaign
that resulted in Sir James Whitney becoming Premier. For a number of
years he was president of the Canadian Public Ownership League, which
did valuable work in educating the public as to the advantages of the
idea now so firmly rooted in the Province of Ontario. He was a candidate
for the Ontario Legislature in West Toronto, on the public ownership
platform in 1908, but was defeated in the three-cornered contest. In
1910-11, he spent about eight months in Britain writing and speaking in
the interest of Imperial preferential trade. On the Ontario Government
in 1914 constituting a commission to put in operation the Workmen’s
Compensation Act, Mr. Wright was appointed Vice-Chairman of the Board,
his appointment said to be the last in which Sir James Whitney took any
personal interest. The appointment met with the unanimous approval of
organized labor. During the recruiting campaign, Mr. Wright took a very
active and effective part in speaking throughout the city and elsewhere.
He married, January 26, 1876, Elizabeth R., eldest daughter of the late
Robert Simpson, at that time of Guelph, but formerly and latterly of
Toronto. Mrs. Wright died in 1913. He is survived by his daughter, Mrs.
W. E. Hunter of Toronto, a grandson and granddaughter, and a brother,
Daniel W., of Cashmere, Washington, U.S. For some time he had been
troubled with blood pressure and in September, 1918, sustained a slight
stroke at his place in Niagara-on-the-Lake, where he delighted in birds,
flowers, and fruit, in the cultivation of which he was well versed. In
April he had a severe attack of neuritis, which, together with heart
trouble, resulted in his death, June 12, 1919, at his home, 105
Macdonnell Avenue, Toronto. Of him, Dr. James L. Hughes wrote: “A. W.
Wright was a vitally progressive force in Canada for half a century. He
was a true democrat who recognized the right of women as well as men to
freedom. Few men of his time so fully represented and so powerfully
expressed justice and consideration for others as the basis of
brotherhood. He was a charming comrade, a faithful friend, and an
eloquent orator. All who knew him were better for his influence. No man
could think a mean or base thought in his presence.” In a touching
letter to Mrs. Hunter from Washington, D.C., T. V. Powderly, formerly
General Master Workman of the Knights of Labor, wrote, in answer to a
notification of Mr. Wright’s death:—“It was withheld from me until this
morning; for a good reason, I suppose. . . . Anyway, I want to remember
your father as I last saw him at my home here four years ago. His going
was a blow to you and all his friends. He drew his sunshine from no
niggard store, and spread more of it across life’s dark pathway than any
man I ever met. His picture, framed, had a vase of Marie Pavia roses
before it this morning. I understood—for your father gave that rosebush
to me thirty years ago, and when we moved here from Scranton in 1899 we
took it with us; we call it Marie Pavia Wright. I have known your father
for forty years, and though for part of that time we were officially
associated in the K. of L., our friendship was confined within no
official band. . . . For years I had a dream. It was that some day I
could so manage as to live close to your father and John Devlin. D. died
a year ago. Perhaps we may live together yet—who knows? Soon I shall
take up the journey they have begun, and when that hour comes I hope it
may be said of me as I now say of your father:—

        “Out through the portals of death he passed
        To that ultimate, Unknown land;
        The chart of right and of deeds well done,
        Held in his cold, dead hand.
        For the words he traced to his latest breath
        Are unclouded by wrong or ruth;
        And stamped on all, as he met his death,
        Was the seal of love and truth.”

Writing in the “World,” W. F. Maclean, M.P., said “The late A. W. Wright
was an able man who played a leading part in making the destiny of
Canada. . . . He had wit, a beaming way, and a radiant kind of
sociability.” The “Hamilton Herald” said:—“Few Canadians of the last
generation contributed more to the upbuilding of Canada than A. W.
Wright. Much of the success of the Workmen’s Compensation Act is due to
his sagacity and clear, swift insight. As a newspaper writer Alex.
Wright was one of the most forceful of his time. As a platform speaker,
when dealing with a subject with which he was familiar, he was
unsurpassed. He had bright, incisive style and a talent for keen
analysis. He was at his best when heckled. He courted interruption, for
no one could get the better of him in a clash of wits.” In a review of
his career, “Saturday Night” spoke of him as “a man of remarkable
intellectual powers and charming personality,” and of his youth, “he
made a hobby of economics and by the time he was thirty was recognized
as one of the ablest writers and speakers on such subjects in this
country.” When nickel was discovered in Ontario he urged on the
government to establish a customs smelter to treat it, to sell at cost
to actual users of it in Canada, and to place a heavy export duty on it,
thereby giving Canadians a great advantage in manufacturing high-grade
machinery of nickel steel, thus greatly stimulating industry here, and
assuring Canada millions of dollars annually from export duty on nickel
which outsiders must have at any cost. Instead of this a foreign concern
was given a practical monopoly to refine Canadian nickel in the U.S.
with the right to sell to Germany or any other enemy of Canada and the
empire. Both as writer and speaker he was keenly analytical, logical,
and constructive in his chosen style, but in dealing with an unfair
opponent he was equally at home in using forceful denunciation, bitter
irony, scorching sarcasm, or ludicrous burlesque, while in flashing and
apt repartee he was unrivalled. He was widely read in prose and poetry,
and, possessing a remarkable memory and facile power of expression, was
a charming conversationalist, usually the centre of a group of
appreciative auditors in any informal gathering. As raconteur he was
inimitable. Continual optimism, constant cheerfulness, and unvarying
kindliness were his outstanding characteristics, and won for him the
friendship of all who knew him.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Roche, Francis James= (Toronto, Ont.), Clerk of Assize of the Supreme
Court of Ontario, was Conservative candidate for Parliament in West
Ontario in 1900, as also for North Toronto 1904, opposing Sir William
Mulock, then Postmaster-General. He practised law in Toronto for several
years, and served as a member of the Collegiate Institute Board of
Trustees of Toronto from 1902 to 1905. He was appointed Official Referee
of the Supreme Court in 1914. Mr. Roche was born at Whitby, Ont.,
October 10, 1865, the son of John R. Richmond Roche, M.A., and Sarah
Danford Bryan Roche. He was educated at the Toronto Collegiate Institute
and University College, graduating as B.A. in 1886 and as M.A. with
honours in Natural Sciences in the following year. He married Lena,
daughter of Hon. Theodore Bruere, attorney-at-law, St. Charles, Mo.,
U.S.A., and State Senator of Missouri, November 28, 1894. Mr. Roche is a
Past-President of the United Irish League of Toronto, and is a member of
the Canadian Military Institute and Empire Club of Toronto. He joined
“K” Company, Queen’s Own Rifles in 1882, and served later in the
Cavalry, retiring in 1910 from the Governor-General’s Body Guard with
the rank of Major. An Anglican in religion and a Conservative in
politics.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Whitney, Edwin Canfield= (Ottawa, Ont.), one of the leading capitalists
of that city, and especially identified with the Canadian lumbering
industry. He was born at Williamsburg, Ont., in the St. Lawrence Valley,
on October 29, 1844, the son of Richard Leet and Clarissa Jane (Fairman)
Whitney. The Whitney family is of United Empire Loyalist stock and
descended from Henry Whitney, who came to New England from
Herefordshire, England, in 1640. The late Sir James Whitney, Prime
Minister of Ontario from 1905 to 1914 was an elder brother of the
subject of this sketch. Edwin Canfield Whitney was educated at the
public schools of his district, and subsequently moved to Minneapolis,
Minn., where he engaged in the lumbering industry, and in the course of
years built up a substantial fortune. He later removed to Ottawa, where
he engaged in the lumber business as General Manager of the St. Anthony
Lumber Company, Ltd., until 1912, when he retired from active business
with the winding up of the company. He is also Vice-President of the
Crow’s Nest Pass Coal Company. He was also one of the directors of the
Keewatin Flour Mills Company, Ltd. He is a Director of the Bank of
Ottawa and of the Toronto General Trusts Company, Ltd. The
philanthropies of Mr. Whitney have been of a most enlightened character.
He is one of the Governors of Protestant General Hospital, Ottawa, and
in 1905 erected at an expense of $68,000 and presented to the University
of Toronto a residence for male students. In the same year he was
appointed a Trustee of the University Residence Fund, and in 1906 became
one of the Governors of the University proper. Among his other gifts to
the institution have been a valuable collection of works on Egypt and
its antiquities, now in the University library. In 1911, he made a
standing offer of $30,000 toward the erection of a general hospital in
Ottawa, if the balance of the required sum could be raised. The
good-heartedness and generosity of Mr. Whitney in connection with
charities is indeed proverbial with all who know him, and during the
great war his gifts to patriotic and other funds were on a generous
scale. In association with Mrs. Whitney, he gave $5,000 to Trinity
University (of which his brother, Sir James Whitney, was a distinguished
graduate), and also a memorial church to the Anglican parish of
Williamsburg, Ont., of which he was a member when a boy. Mr. Whitney is
an adherent of the Anglican communion, and has on many occasions been a
delegate to the Synods of that church. In March, 1879, he married Sarah,
widow of the late Glossop McQuire, C.E., and daughter of the late J. P.
Chrysler, M.P.P. Mrs. Whitney is also interested in philanthropic
effort, and has been especially active in the Ottawa Humane Society. In
politics Mr. Whitney is an independent. He is a member of the Masonic
order and of the Country and Hunt Clubs, Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Vaughan, Marshall= (Welland, Ont.), is one of the leading business men
of the Niagara peninsula, and was born at Elcho, Gainsboro township,
Lincoln County, Ont., on March 16, 1884. His father was Wilford Vaughan,
and his mother’s maiden name was Orpha Augusta Evans. The Vaughans and
the Evans were United Empire Loyalists, who came to Canada from New
Jersey and Virginia after the American Revolution, and the names in both
cases indicate Welsh descent. The subject of this sketch was educated at
Smithville Collegiate Institute, and later commenced his business career
in Welland, where his firm deals extensively in wholesale seeds and are
growers, re-cleaners and exporters of those commodities. Mr. Vaughan has
also taken an active part in the municipal affairs of Welland. He had
the honour of being elected Mayor of that municipality for 1917, the
year in which it achieved the status of a city, and on July 1, of that
year presided over the inauguration proceedings in connection with that
happy event. He also filled the office of Mayor for the year 1918,
having been re-elected by acclamation. He takes an active part in all
movements for the advancement of Canada from every standpoint, and is
especially interested in proposals to obtain increased agricultural
production. Mr. Vaughan is an Anglican in religion, and a
Conservative-Unionist in politics, and during the great war was the
representative of the Royal Flying Corps for the promotion of recruiting
in his district. He is a member of the Masonic and Orange orders, and
also of the Knights of Pythias, and belongs to the Welland Club, the
Temple Club, the Country Club of Lawrence County, N.Y., and the Buffalo
Automobile Club. On December 13, 1911, he married Evelyn Maud, daughter
of Albert House, of Ancaster, Ont.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Wylie, Newton= (Toronto, Ont.), Journalist and Student of and Lecturer
on Social and Political Economy and Affairs, son of John H. Wylie and
Mary Jane Bernhardt, was born on September 12, 1892, at Toronto, and
received his education at the Orangeville High School, Calgary Normal
School, University of Toronto and Harvard University, graduating in
1917. When but a boy in his early student days, he interested himself in
public affairs, and early gave evidence of talent both as a writer and a
public speaker. Mr. Wylie is noted particularly for his work as a
prohibition propagandist. He was the chief instrument in organizing the
Ontario Young Manhood Association, which in 1914 presented a petition
signed by 10,000 young Conservatives in Ontario to the late Sir James P.
Whitney, then Prime Minister of the Province, asking provincial
prohibition, and which contested unsuccessfully the constituency of
Parkdale in the general election of June in that year. Mr. Wylie is also
credited with having originated the Citizens’ Committee of One Hundred,
of which he became General Secretary, and organized the six months’
whirlwind campaign throughout Ontario which resulted in the passing of
the Ontario Temperance Act in March, 1916. Previous to that he had
participated in the provincial prohibition campaign in Alberta in 1915,
touring that Province and speaking in all the chief cities, as well as
invading some of the mining districts. Mr. Wylie is a close personal
friend of “Billy” Sunday, and has spoken on “No Booze” in the noted
evangelist’s tabernacles in Trenton, Baltimore, and Boston. For some
years he was a member of the staff of the “Globe,” Toronto, and wrote
over the pseudonym of “Will Silo.” He has also contributed to several
other newspapers and magazines. Twice since the outbreak of the war he
offered his services to the army, but each time was rejected on account
of injuries received in a serious automobile accident in 1913. He has,
however, taken a prominent part in recruiting work, giving his services
freely as a speaker and as an organizer in various schemes for raising
funds, especially in connection with the 126th, 182nd and 201st
Battalions. He is a member of the following clubs:—Canadian Club,
Toronto Board of Trade, Walt Whitman, Harvard Union, Toronto Press Club,
Toronto Canoe Club, Ontario Young Manhood Association, Citizens’
Committee of One Hundred, Canadian Suffrage Association, National
Brotherhood Federation, Social Service Council of Canada, Canadian Red
Cross Society, Canadian Patriotic Fund Association, Y.M.C.A., A-R Men’s
Association. In religion Mr. Wylie is a Presbyterian, and in politics an
independent.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Mackenzie, Daniel D., M.P.= for the riding of North Victoria, Cape
Breton, Nova Scotia, is one of the most prominent representatives of the
Liberal party in the House of Commons, and served as Parliamentary
leader of that party following the death of Sir Wilfrid Laurier in
February, 1919, until the return to the House of Hon. W. L. M. King, the
leader elected by the National Liberal Convention which assembled in the
summer of the same year. He was born on January 8, 1859, at Lake
Ainslie, in the heart of the Highland Scottish settlements of that
island, the son of Duncan and Jessie (McMillan) Mackenzie. He was
educated at the Public Schools and at the Sydney (C.B.) Academy, and
became a barrister and attorney-at-law, practising at North Sydney. He
early became prominent in politics, and has been a most successful
candidate. In nearly a score of elections, municipal, provincial and
federal, where he has been a candidate, he has never met defeat. He
served as Commissioner of Schools for Cape Breton for a time, and was
elected ten times to the Municipal Council of North Sydney, serving as
Mayor for five years. He was elected to the Nova Scotia Legislature in
1900 as a Liberal, and again at the general elections of 1901. Prior to
the general elections for the House of Commons in 1904, he resigned his
seat in the Legislature to become a Federal candidate and was elected.
He resigned, and was appointed Judge of District No. 7, County Court of
Nova Scotia, on February 16, 1906, continuing in that office until
October 15, 1908, when he retired and became again a candidate for the
House of Commons. He was elected, and was equally successful at the
general elections of 1911 and 1917. When the House assembled after the
latter contest, he was the chosen desk-mate of Sir Wilfrid Laurier, then
leader of the Opposition; and on the death of that statesman was elected
by the Liberal caucus to the Parliamentary leadership. At the National
Liberal Convention of August, 1919, he unwillingly allowed his name to
go before the delegates chosen to elect a leader, yielding to pressure
from his Scottish friends in Nova Scotia, but on the election of Mr.
King extended to the latter his heartiest co-operation and support. At
the conclusion of the regular Parliamentary session of 1918-9, he had
the honour of seconding Sir Robert Borden’s resolution of thanks to the
Canadian troops who had fought and died on the battlefields of France
and Flanders. In religion he is a Presbyterian, and on January 28, 1891,
he married Miss Florence N. McDonald, by whom he has one son, Charles
Russell Mackenzie, born May 5, 1895. His home is at North Sydney, C.B.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Coristine, Major Stanley B.=, is a member of the Board of Pension
Commissioners for Canada, with headquarters in Ottawa, and had a
distinguished career in the great war. He was born at Montreal, Que.,
the son of James Coristine, a prominent business man of that city; was
educated at the Royal Military College, Kingston, Ont., from which he
graduated in 1906, and also took a course at McGill University,
Montreal. After graduation he was for a time connected with James
Coristine & Co., Ltd., but on the outbreak of the war immediately
offered himself for service overseas, and on September 10, 1914, was
gazetted Captain of the 5th Royal Highlanders of Montreal, becoming
Adjutant of the regiment on October 1 of that year. On permission being
granted to organize the 42nd Battalion, R.H.C., he was appointed
adjutant for the period of organization and when the Battalion went
overseas was at his own request placed in command of a company. The 42nd
Battalion was transferred to France in October, 1915, and took part in
much heavy fighting. In June, 1916, during the heavy fighting at Ypres,
known as the “June show” he was seriously wounded and after two months
in hospital was sent home to Canada. In April, 1917, he was discharged
as permanently unfit for further service at the front, and in May of
that year was appointed Secretary of the Pensions Board of Canada. He
showed a very exceptional capacity for dealing with the problems which
came before the Board, and his military record gained him the confidence
of the many injured soldiers with whom his duties brought him in
contact. In 1918 he was appointed a Commissioner to fill the vacancy
created on the Board by the resignation of Major J. L. Todd, and the
choice was generally approved in military circles throughout Canada. He
is a Protestant and a member of St. Paul’s Lodge, A.F. & A.M. His
recreations are golf and tennis, and he is a member of the following
clubs: St. James and University, Montreal; Rideau, and Country, Ottawa.
In 1909 he married Nina, daughter of John McLean, Montreal, and has
three sons: Philip, born 1910; Edward, born 1912; and James, born 1918.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Watson, Senator Robert=, moved from Ontario to Portage la Prairie,
Manitoba, in 1876, where he built a mill, and later built another mill
at Stonewall. He prospered, became popular, and was well received and
appreciated by the entire community, irrespective of politics. Owing to
his enterprising activities, his generosity, and his sympathetic and
tangible conduct towards those less fortunate than he, he was soon
elected to the Municipal Council, and as a councillor was instrumental
in the adoption of municipal measures that aided in a marked degree the
progressive and harmonious state of affairs in that thriving town. The
Provincial Government and the Province’s representative in the House of
Commons had been Conservative from the time, July 15, 1870, the Province
entered Confederation, and with the return of the Conservatives to power
at Ottawa in 1878, and Hon. John Norquay as Prime Minister, President of
the Council, and Provincial Treasurer at Winnipeg, and four Conservative
spokesmen for the Province occupying seats in the House of Commons, the
young Province was but a helpless political toy in the hands of those
who were elected to, and should have, looked after its best interests.
Suffering for want of proper railway facilities, the situation became
unbearable. Led by Hon. John Norquay, Provincial railway charters were
being issued, only later to be disallowed by the Dominion Government,
all of which, while the public was being led to believe differently, was
fully understood and agreed upon beforehand by both Governments.
Something had to be done to save the Province, and to place it on a
higher plane. An agitation arose, several indignation meetings were held
and finally, in the town of Portage la Prairie, the Provincial Rights
Party was born, and Robert Watson, Portage la Prairie’s millwright,
became the ideal candidate of the party to carry the banner for
Marquette at the general Dominion election. In each of the five Manitoba
Dominion constituencies (a new constituency for the Province had been
created by the Dominion Government), a Provincial Rights Party candidate
was nominated, and three of the five were elected, Winnipeg and
Provencher, with Captain Thos. Scott and Joseph Royal, remained
Conservative, but Lisgar, Marquette and Selkirk, with A. W. Ross, Robert
Watson and Hugh Sutherland, became Provincial Rights constituencies. Out
of these three, however—Ross, Watson and Sutherland—from and including
1882 and 1887, Mr. Watson was practically the only Liberal member in the
House of Commons west of Lake Superior, and he is just as true and
reliable to-day as he was when he first entered political life in 1882.
Senator Robert Watson is the son of the late George Watson, of
Edinburgh, Scotland, who came to Canada in 1847, and his wife Elizabeth
McDonald, of Inverness-shire, Scotland. He was born at Elora, Ontario,
April 29, 1853. In 1876, he moved to Manitoba, and was elected to the
House of Commons for Marquette at the general elections in 1882, 1887
and 1891. He resigned to accept the portfolio of Minister of Public
Works in the Greenway Administration, 1892, and was elected at the
general elections of that year to the Legislature for Portage la
Prairie, and again at the general election of 1896. At the general
election of 1899 he was defeated. January 29, 1900, he was summoned to
the Senate. July, 1880, Senator Watson married Isabella, daughter of
Duncan Brown, of Lobo, Ontario. He is a Presbyterian, and his home
address is Portage la Prairie, Manitoba.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Sutherland, Fred C.=, Stock Broker, 12 King St. East, Toronto, was born
March 17, 1880, in West River, Nova Scotia, and received his education
at Pictou Academy. He entered his present business in 1909 and became
actively engaged in the development of Northern Ontario’s natural
resources, being instrumental in bringing in hundreds of thousands of
dollars for the advancement of mining interests in the districts of
Porcupine, Kirkland Lake, West Shining Tree and Fort Matachewan. The
firm of F. C. Sutherland & Co. is one of the largest of its kind in
Canada, besides its large and finely appointed head office, having
branch offices in Montreal, Boston, Springfield, Buffalo, Detroit and
New York. He has surrounded himself with a staff of the most capable
mining experts, and his sound judgment, based on first-hand information
has proven of great value to his large clientele of investors. Though
his time is constantly in demand by his clients and the investing public
as well as in directing both internal and external affairs of his
extensive interests he is invariably genial and unruffled, having the
happy faculty of being able to divert his attention rapidly from one
subject to another yet keeping closely in touch with each till disposed
of. He is a member of The Board of Trade, the Lambton Golf Club, a
Protestant, a Unionist in politics and the possessor of an unusually
pleasing personality.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Taylor, Lt.-Col. Hon. George= (Gananoque), the second son of the late
William Taylor and his wife Ann Graham, both of the north of Ireland.
Was born at Lansdowne, County Leeds, Ontario, March 31, 1840, and has
been for years one of the most popular figures in the public life of
this Dominion. Educated in the Public Schools of Lansdowne, the Hon. Mr.
Taylor began life in the mercantile business as a clerk in a country
general store at the age of eleven years, where he worked for £1 a
month, and continued with the same firm as partner over twenty-five
years. On retiring from the mercantile business above mentioned, the
Hon. Mr. Taylor re-organized the Ontario Wheel Company, to manufacture
carriage wheels, and has been President of the Company for thirty years.
He has been Reeve of Gananoque for seven years, and Warden of the United
Counties of Leeds and Grenville, of which he was County Auditor, 1881.
Was first elected to the House of Commons as a Conservative candidate
for the County of Leeds in the general elections of 1882, and was
re-elected at every general election held since up to 1911 when he
resigned his seat to create a vacancy for Sir Thomas White, who had been
appointed Minister of Finance in the Borden Cabinet. During his long
parliamentary career Hon. Mr. Taylor was chief Whip of the Conservative
party for twenty-five years under Sir John A. MacDonald, Sir John
Abbott, Sir John Thompson, Sir Mackenzie Bowell, Sir Charles Tupper and
Sir Robert Borden. Shortly after his retirement from the House of
Commons, on November 17, 1911, the subject of this sketch was summoned
to the Senate, and since his appointment to the Upper Chamber has taken
an active part in its deliberations. On retiring from the House of
Commons, he received a handsome testimonial of esteem from his
colleagues. Hon. Mr. Taylor, during his career in public life, has
always received the good will of all classes of citizens. He is the soul
of good humor, broadminded, generous and a liberal gentleman, and has
been called “The John Hampden” of this Dominion. He is the Honorary
Colonel of the 156th Battalion of Leeds and Grenville and President of
the Peace River Land Company and a member of the following societies:
Orange, Masonic, Oddfellows, United Workmen, Royal Arcanum and
Foresters. Senator Taylor was married on September 10, 1863, to Margaret
Ann Latimer, daughter of James and Ellen Latimer and ward of Major James
Kirker of Gananoque. They celebrated their golden wedding Sept. 10,
1913. Mrs. Taylor died Mar. 12, 1917. Mr. Taylor afterwards married
Lilian Coleman, daughter of the late Mr. Anson Clark Coleman and his
wife Hannah Witton, of Delta, both Canadians of English descent.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Richardson, John= (Toronto, Ont.), was born in Scarboro Township,
County of York, Ontario, in 1843, on the farm of his father, the late
Ezekiel Richardson. He received his education at the Public School,
Scarboro Village, at the Grammar School, Markham Village, and at
Victoria College, Cobourg. After completing his education he returned to
his old home and engaged in the business of farming until 1894. Early in
life he took an active interest in public affairs in his native
township. In 1875 he was induced to accept nomination and was a
successful candidate for a seat in the Township Council and was
re-elected for nineteen years consecutively, three years as Councilman,
two years as Deputy Reeve and fourteen years as Reeve. In 1885 he was
elected Warden of the County of York, the highest municipal position in
the County. The City of Toronto and the County of York are united for
judicial purposes. Mr. Richardson was for many years Chairman of the
Legislation Committee and as such had much to do with framing
legislation beneficial to the Metropolitan City and County. In December,
1894, he retired from the Reeveship of Scarboro, he having been elected
by the constituency of East York as their representative in the Ontario
Legislature, which position he held for ten years, being re-elected in
1892 and 1902. He was a Liberal in politics and was a supporter of the
administrations of Sir Oliver Mowat, Hon. A. S. Hardy and Sir George W.
Ross. In 1902 he lost his health, the strenuous life of a politician was
too severe for him. In 1904 he was compelled to forego his political
ambitions and withdraw from political life. In December of that year Sir
George W. Ross, then Premier of Ontario, appointed him to the position
of Clerk of the County Court of the County of York, which position he
held until his death. Mr. Richardson’s father emigrated from the North
of Ireland in 1824, and settled in Scarboro. In 1831 he married Miss
Mary Hunter, an English girl. Their descendants being five sons and four
daughters. James and Ezekiel, who were ordained Methodist Ministers, and
Joseph and Samuel, who graduated in medicine, now deceased. Three
sisters survive—Mrs. A. Barber, Bowmanville; Mrs. E. Draper and Mrs. H.
Aylard, of Toronto. He was a Director of the York Fire Insurance Co., a
member of the Acacia Lodge A.F. & A.M., and a Methodist in religion. He
was a philanthropist, in a quiet way, many owing their success in life
to his generosity. By his honest and straightforward actions in both his
political and private life, he won the confidence and respect of the
community at large. Mr. Richardson died at Toronto, in September, 1914,
after a very active career.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Doughty, Arthur George, M.A., C.M.G., Litt.D., LL.D., F.R.S.C.,
F.R.C.I.=, Archivist for the Dominion of Canada, is perhaps the greatest
living authority on Canadian history, and a scholar of international
repute. He was born at Maidenhead, England, on March 22, 1860, the son
of William John Doughty. He was educated at the public schools,
Maidenhead, Lord Eldon College, London, New Inn Hall, Oxford University,
and Dickenson College, Carlisle, when he was awarded the M.A. degree in
1890. Ten years later he became Docteur de Lettres of Laval University,
Montreal, and in 1912 received the Honorary Degree of LL.D. at Queen’s
University, Kingston, Ont. As a young man Dr. Doughty contemplated
entering the Church, and was engaged in religious work at All Hallows
Mission, Southwark, London, and in other institutions. Circumstances,
however, altered this intention and in the nineties he came to Canada
and was engaged for a time in commercial pursuits at Montreal, utilizing
his leisure for literary work. In 1897 he was appointed Private
Secretary to the Minister of Public Works at Quebec, and in 1899-1901
served in a similar capacity with the Provincial Treasurer of Quebec. In
the latter year he was appointed joint librarian of the Quebec
Legislature, and on May 16, 1904, became Dominion Archivist and Keeper
of the Records for Canada, with headquarters in the Archives Building,
Ottawa. His indefatigable labors in that office have raised it to very
large importance. In 1907 he was appointed a member of the Canadian
Historical Manuscripts Commission, and in 1908 a member of the literary
committee of the Quebec Battlefields Commission. In 1909 he became a
member of the Dominion Geographic Board. One of the greatest historical
services he has been able to render Canada was at the conclusion of the
great war in 1918 when he went to Great Britain and France and secured a
magnificent collection of war trophies as the permanent possession of
Canada, to be apportioned among various Canadian cities. Dr. Doughty
early acquired rare skill as an illuminator on vellum and decorated the
book presented to the present King and Queen on their visit to Quebec in
1901. He is also an expert in shorthand, and has published an edition of
Tennyson’s “In Memoriam” in that script. At the same time he has been
prolific in many forms of literary effort, as the following list of
publications shows: “The Life and Works of Lord Tennyson,” 1893; “Rose
Leaves,” 1894; “The Song Story of Francesco and Beatrice,” 1896; “Nugæ
Canoræ,” 1897; “The Site of the Battle of the Plains of Abraham,” 1918;
“The Siege of Quebec,” in six volumes, 1901-2 (written in collaboration
with George W. Parmalee); “The Struggle for Supremacy,” 1905; “Documents
relating to the Constitutional History of Canada” (with Prof. Adam
Shortt), 1907; “The Cradle of New France,” 1908; “Index and Dictionary
of Canadian History” (with L. J. Burpee), 1911; joint editor of “Canada
and Its Provinces,” in twenty-two volumes; joint editor of “Documents
Relating to the Constitutional History of Canada from 1791 to 1818,”
published 1914; Editor of General Knox’s “Journal of Campaigns in North
America,” published in three volumes by the Champlain Society, 1914;
“The Acadian Exiles,” 1915; “A Daughter of New France,” 1915. Dr.
Doughty has also contributed to the Encyclopedia Brittanica,
Encyclopedia Americana, the Catholic Encyclopedia, and to many magazines
and historical journals. His lighter efforts have included the libretto
of a comic opera “Bonnie Prince Charlie.” He is a member of the Canadian
Society of Authors, Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada, Fellow of the
Royal Colonial Institute, Fellow of the Royal Historical Society of
Great Britain, and a member of the Literary and Historical Society of
Quebec. In 1905 he was honored with the decoration of C.M.G. He married,
first, Bertha Van Kehrweider, in June, 1886, who died January, 1910;
secondly, Kathleen Rathbun Browne, daughter of George A. Browne,
Montreal, in June, 1911. In religion he is a Roman Catholic, and is a
member of the Rideau Club, and the Ottawa Golf Club. He resides at 490
Wilbrod St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=McFall, Robert James, B.A., A.M., Ph.D.=, of Ottawa, Ont., is one of
the best known economists and statisticians of Canada. He was born at
Somerset, Nova Scotia, on January 7, 1887, the son of Rev. Thomas
McFall, a Reformed Presbyterian clergyman, and his wife, Anna Lyons. His
education was remarkably complete. After studying at the public schools
of Nova Scotia he went to Geneva College, Beaver Falls, Penna.,
graduating with the degree of B.A. in 1912. This was followed by
post-graduate courses at Glasgow University, Scotland, and Columbia
University, New York City. He took a scholarship at the latter
institution in 1913, and in 1914 captured the Garth Fellowship in
Political Economy—a much-coveted honor. He received the degree of A.M.
in 1914 and Ph.D. in 1916. For two years, 1915-17, he had charge of the
work in Transportation and Commerce in the Department of Economics at
the University of Minnesota, and in 1917 returned to Canada to become
Chief of the Internal Trade Division, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, at
Ottawa. In August of that year he also became statistician of the Canada
Food Board, an office he held until February, 1919. He served also as
Cost of Living Commissioner from May, 1918, to August, 1919, when the
work of this office was merged in that of the Board of Commerce. During
his tenure of office as Cost of Living Commissioner Dr. McFall proved
most efficient and won high encomiums for his fearless performance of
his duties. Among his publications is a valuable treatise on the
transportation question “Railway Monopoly and Rate Regulation,”
published in 1916 by Longmans, Green & Company. In addition to various
official reports he has written numerous magazine and newspaper articles
on the subject of transportation and food supplies, for American and
Canadian publications. He is a member of the American Economic
Association and of the Canadian Club, Ottawa. In religion he is a
Presbyterian, and in politics, independent. On September 29, 1917, he
married Marjorie, daughter of Rev. E. S. Carr, D.D., Peoria, Ill., and
has one daughter, Alice, born November 6, 1918. His residence is at 353
Frank St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Amyot, Lieut.-Col. John A., C.M.G.=, Deputy Minister of the Federal
Department of Public Health, Ottawa, is an authority on the subject of
public sanitation and the prevention of disease. He was born at Toronto
on July 25, 1867, the son of John F. Amyot, a railroad man, and his
wife, Sophie Féré. He was educated at the separate schools, St. Thomas,
Ont., Assumption College, Sandwich, Ont. and at the University of
Toronto, from which he graduated with the degree of M.B. in 1891. He was
immediately appointed a house surgeon of Toronto General Hospital,
serving for one year; and from 1892 to 1900 was Demonstrator in
Pathology on the University of Toronto Medical Faculty. From 1894 to
1898 he was Assistant Surgeon at St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, and
from 1898 to 1900, Surgeon. Among other professional offices he filled
were those of Lecturer in Comparative Physiology at the Ontario
Veterinary College, 1898-1908; Director of the Laboratory of the
Provincial Board of Health, Ontario, 1900-1918; Associate Professor of
Pathology, University of Toronto, 1900-09, and Professor of Hygiene at
the same institution, 1909-1918. A year before the outbreak of the great
war he had become identified with the Canadian Army Medical Corps and
held the commission of D.A.D.M.S. (Sanitation) for the 2nd Canadian
Divisional Area, from 1913 to 1915. In that capacity he had much to do
with preserving the health of large bodies of troops who were placed in
training in that area after the outbreak of the war in 1914. In the
spring of 1915 he went to England on staff of No. 4 Can. Gen. Hospital,
was made officer in charge of Sanitation, 2nd Canadian Division whilst
in England, and in the latter part of that year was transferred to
France as O.C. of the Sanitary Section of the 1st Canadian Division. In
1916 he became Chief Adviser in Sanitation with the Canadian Army Corps
in France, and later in the same year was seconded to the Imperial
forces as D.A.D.M.S. (Sanitation) with the 2nd British Army in France.
From 1916 to 1918 he was also Consultant in Sanitation with the Canadian
Overseas Forces, England. The low percentage of deaths from communicable
disease in the British and Canadian armies during the war, was regarded
as miraculous when compared with the statistics of all past wars, and to
this desirable condition, which greatly aided in the victory,
Lieut.-Col. Amyot is considered as having largely contributed. He was
twice mentioned in despatches for service under fire while in France in
1916, and three times won similar recognition for his zeal in combatting
disease among the troops in England. In recognition of his abilities he
was personally decorated with the C.M.G. by His Majesty. In July, 1919,
he was appointed by the administration of Sir Robert Borden, Deputy
Minister of the newly created Department of Public Health, and entrusted
with the work of organizing it on modern lines. Col. Amyot’s writings
include various papers on questions of public health published in Canada
and the United States. He has also collaborated on Technical commissions
in connection with the United States and Canadian Public Health
Associations, and the Ontario and Canadian Medical Associations. He is
also a co-director of the International Waterways Commission, and in
that capacity has conducted investigations on the pollution of the
waters of the Great Lakes. He is a Roman Catholic in religion and a
member of the Toronto Board of Trade, the University and Canadian Clubs,
Toronto, and the Faculty Union of Toronto University. On May 21, 1895,
he married Mary J. Keller, daughter of Francis and Mary (Stuart) Keller,
Whitby, Ont., and has five sons and two daughters, John Francis, Gregory
Féré, William Keller, Joseph, Mary, Francis and Sophie. His residence is
at Slater St., Ottawa.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Owens, Edward W. J., K.C., M.P.P.= for South-East Toronto, has
represented that constituency for two parliaments, having been
re-elected by a handsome majority at the general elections in 1914. He
was born in Dublin, Ireland, and received his early education there, in
Manchester, England, and in the Forrest City. He became a student-at-law
in the office of Cronyn and Greenlees, of London, and shortly after
passing the bar removed to Toronto, where he joined the firm of Leys,
Reid and Owens, the head of the firm being the late John Leys, Q.C.,
M.P.P. He later practised for a number of years by himself, subsequently
forming the firm of Owens, Proudfoot, and Cooke, with offices at 32-34
Adelaide Street East. He is now head of the firm of Owens and Goodman at
the above address, and enjoys an extensive and constantly growing
practice. His manner is extremely affable, never ruffled, and constantly
active. Since coming to Toronto, he always took an active part in the
Conservative interest, and for years was President of the Central
Conservative Association before being elected member of the Legislature.
He can speak well and to the point when occasion demands, but has earned
the reputation of taking up less time on the floor of the house than any
other member of equal ability. He is unmarried, but has none of the
crotchety characteristics sometimes attributed to the bachelor of middle
age.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Hook, Thomas, M.P.P.= for South-East Toronto was born in England, and
when a very small boy came to Canada with his parents about the time of
Confederation. The family settled in London, Ont., where his father
engaged in business as a contractor. The firm of Hook and Toll built the
Military School in London as well as other buildings well known in that
city and vicinity. On leaving school, the subject of this sketch spent
three years in the office of E. Jones Parke, Q.C., and then joined the
staff of the Dominion Savings and Investment Society. He resigned his
position in this company some twenty years ago, and removed to Toronto,
where he became engaged in the real estate business, which he still
conducts at 79 Victoria Street. At an early age he took great interest
in politics, and on his arrival in Toronto soon became a well known and
active worker for the Conservative party in the city. For years he held
different offices in the local Conservative organizations, and in 1907
he was elected President of Ward 3 Conservative Association, holding
that position for the unprecedented period of seven years, till elected
to his present position in 1914 for seat “B” in South-East Toronto by a
large majority. During the war he was untiring in his recruiting
efforts. He is a fluent and forceful speaker, with marked executive
ability, a genial manner, and sociable disposition. Though a straight
party man, he is independent and outspoken, and may be expected to leave
the impress of his personality on the Legislature in the not distant
future. The family—including a son recently returned from service
overseas—reside at No. 1 Rathnally Ave.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Donovan, Albert Edward, M.P.P.=, representative of the riding of
Brockville in the Ontario Legislature, is one of the most widely known
publicists of that province, and is also known throughout the Dominion
as an insurance expert. He was born at Portland, Leeds County, Ont., on
February 5, 1859, the son of John and Margaret Donovan. His grandfather
was a native of Tipperary, Ireland, who adopted the profession of law,
and coming to Canada settled at Forfar, Leeds County, where he became
the first legal practitioner in that district. His father was a mechanic
and ship’s carpenter. The subject of this sketch was educated at the
public and high schools of Athens, Ont., and afterward taught school for
a number of years. Subsequently, he entered the life insurance business,
and became one of the most successful writers of policies in America. In
the early nineties, he represented the Sun Life Assurance Company of
Canada in Great Britain for two years, and subsequently returned to this
country to associate himself with the Mutual Life Insurance Company of
New York, the oldest Company of its kind in America. He was appointed
Superintendent of Agencies for the Maritime Provinces, with headquarters
at Halifax, and subsequently moved to Toronto as Superintendent for
Ontario. In 1905 he became manager for this province, a position he
still holds. He has become largely identified with the financial
interests of the province, and is one of the greatest authorities on
life insurance as an investment proposition in this or any other
country. The sum total of the policies he has written would run into
millions, and many of them have reached large sums like $100,000 or
$200,000. After moving to Toronto, he still maintained a home at Athens,
Ont., where he became largely interested in agriculture, and at one time
owned farm property in the Brockville district. It was because of his
loyal attachment to the county of his birth that in 1905 the
Conservatives of Brockville riding tendered him the nomination for the
Legislature in opposition to the sitting member, Hon. George P. Graham,
at that time a member of the Ross Government. Though his party was
successful at the polls, Mr. Donovan was unable to overcome the personal
following of Mr. Graham in the Brockville district. Subsequently, in
1907, when Mr. Graham retired from the Ontario Legislature to join the
Laurier cabinet at Ottawa, Mr. Donovan was again nominated and at a
by-election in October, 1907, was successful in redeeming the riding by
a large majority. His victory was the more signal, inasmuch as
Brockville had sent a Liberal member to the Legislature at every
election for many years, and was regarded as impregnable by that party.
Though on each occasion strongly opposed, Mr. Donovan was again elected
by large majorities at the general elections of 1908, 1911 and 1914.
From the occasion of his first speech in the Ontario Legislature, he has
been recognized as an important factor in the deliberations of that
body, his fine oratorical gifts being as marked as the sound
intellectual quality of his deliverances. On many occasions regret has
been expressed that Mr. Donovan’s business interests have precluded his
accepting cabinet preferment. During the late war he turned his
abilities as a speaker to patriotic uses, and is credited with having
recruited more men for the Canadian army than any other member of either
the House of Commons or the various legislatures of this country. His
efforts covered the entire province of Ontario, and in the year 1915 he
individually secured the enlistment of 1,260 soldiers. Personally, he is
popular with men of all shades of opinion, and is a member of the Albany
Club, Toronto, the Brockville Club, and the Canadian Club, Toronto, and
of the Executive of the Empire Club of Canada. In religion he is a
Methodist, and is a member of the A.F. and A.M. and the I.O.O.F. He
married Ella B., daughter of Duncan Fisher, and has two sons, Albert
Edward and John Alexander, and one daughter, Helen M. Donovan. His
residence is at 284 Huron Street, Toronto.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Crannell, Levi=, is one of the leading lumbermen of Ottawa, with
interests that embrace both Canada and the United States; and has also
played a prominent part in public affairs at the Canadian capital. He
was born in Albany, N.Y., on October 7, 1842, the son of Henry and Eliza
Crannell. His father was a prominent lumberman of the ante-bellum period
in New York State, and the subject of this sketch was educated in the
public schools of Albany, with a view to taking up the same line of
activity. At the time he attained manhood, Ottawa was, as now, a centre
of the lumbering industry. Coming to Canada many years ago, Mr. Crannell
became associated with the business now known as the Bronson Company,
Limited, ground wood pulp and lumber manufacturers, Ottawa, of which he
is still an active partner. This company is the offspring of an old
lumber firm established at Bytown (the early name of Ottawa) in 1852 by
J. J. Harris and Henry Franklin Bronson, both of whom came from the
United States to operate newly-acquired timber limits. Mr. Harris
retired in 1864, and for over forty years thereafter the business was
carried on under the name of the Bronson and Weston Lumber Company,
until the present title was adopted. Mr. Crannell threw himself heart
and soul into the aspirations of the young Canadian nation, and became a
naturalized citizen in 1875. His interests have expanded with the times,
and now include California as well as the Ottawa Valley. A good many
years ago, foreseeing the growth of the redwood industry on the Pacific
Coast, he acquired timber properties there, and twelve years ago the
Little River Redwood Company, of Budwinkie, California, commenced
manufacturing operations. Of this company Mr. Crannell is President, and
other members of the Bronson firm directors and shareholders. By this
industry Budwinkie has been turned into a happy and flourishing
industrial centre. Direct railroad connections with the mills have been
established, and handsome houses built by the company for all employees,
married or single. For the latter class, the company operates a
community dining room, at which from 350 to 400 meals are served daily.
It is evidence of the growing international importance of the redwood
industry that over one-third of the company’s manufactured product is
exported to other countries, and the demand both foreign and domestic is
constantly growing. It is a cedar of exquisite quality, and in its
finished condition makes a very handsome article. The American interests
of Mr. Crannell have not prevented his playing an important part in
public life. He served as alderman from 1889 to 1892, and sat on the
following municipal committees: Water Works, Board of Health, Printing,
Fire and Light, and Court of Revision. When nominated for mayor of that
city in 1896, his requisition paper was signed by over one thousand
ratepayers, representing all creeds and classes. His integrity, energy
and independence of thought are proverbial among those who know him, and
he is generous in his contributions to philanthropic objects. The
benefactions of the Bronson firm since its earliest days are well known,
and have brought cheer and happiness to hundreds of poor homes at
Christmas time and during hard winters. Mr. Crannell has been an
especially good friend to the Orphans’ Home, the Old Men’s Home, and,
indeed, all hospitals and charitable institutions in Ottawa owe much to
his generosity and initiative. He has twice been married: on the first
occasion on November 11, 1863, to Julia A. Woolcott, and secondly, on
January 26, 1876 to Gertrude E., daughter of the late Henry F. Bronson,
of Ottawa. He has three sons, Edward Wilber, Alfred Raymond, and Levi
Wilfrid, and two adopted daughters, Edith L. and Jennie G. Crannell. In
religion he is a Presbyterian, and in politics a Unionist.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Cudmore, Sedley Anthony, B.A.= (Oxon.) is Chief of Educational
Statistics in connection with the Dominion Bureau of Statistics at
Ottawa. He was born at Millstreet, County Cork, Ireland, the son of
Thomas Gardiner Cudmore and his wife, Caroline Ellen Sedley. His
maternal grandfather, Lt.-Col. Anthony Gardiner Sedley was Governor of
the Military Knights of Windsor, a Royal appointment of high
distinction. The subject of this sketch was educated at public schools
of Ireland, and later at the public and high schools of Brampton,
Ontario, the University of Toronto, where he graduated with the degree
of B.A. in 1905, and the University of Oxford, where he took a
post-graduate course and obtained the degree of B.A. in 1907. On his
return from Oxford, he was appointed Assistant Professor in Political
Economy at the University of Toronto, and in 1919 was selected for the
above-named office in connection with the Dominion Bureau of Statistics.
Mr. Cudmore has been active with his pen in connection with economic
subjects. He is the author of “Economics for Canadian Students,”
published by the Shaw Correspondence School of Toronto, and has been a
contributor to the “University of Toronto Review,” the “Review of
Historical Publications,” the “Canadian Magazine,” and other important
journals. In 1910, he married Phoebie Amelia Magee, B.A. (Tor.), a
daughter of John James Magee, well known as a High School teacher at
Port Hope and Uxbridge, and has one son, James Sedley Cudmore, born
1916. He is a member of the University of Toronto Faculty Union, and his
favourite recreations are cycling and tennis. In religion he is an
Anglican, and in politics a Conservative.

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Marshall, Lieut.-Col. Kenric Reid, C.M.G., D.S.O.=, is the eldest son
of Hon. Col. Noel Marshall, capitalist of Toronto, and his wife, H. T.
Hogg (deceased), born in Toronto, October 13, 1880. He was educated in
private schools and Upper Canada College. At the age of nineteen he
began his business career with the Standard Fuel Co., of which his
father was president, and continued active connection with that company
till the war broke out. He married, October 20, 1909, Marion J.,
daughter of Angus Kirkland, Esq., banker (deceased). He has one son,
Peter K. Marshall. On the outbreak of war Colonel Marshall, who was then
a junior Captain in the 48th Highlanders, proceeded overseas with the
15th Battalion, but was unable to accompany his unit to France owing to
an attack of pneumonia, contracted on Salisbury Plains, which rendered
him unfit for general service for the greater part of 1915, though he
was able to perform light duties in France and England for part of that
year. In May, 1916, he was passed fit for duty, shortly after being
appointed Staff Captain to Brigadier-General Lord Brooke’s Brigade in
the newly-formed 4th Canadian Division, and served under this officer
until Lord Brooke was wounded in September, 1916, and the 12th Canadian
Infantry Brigade came under the command of Brigadier-General J. H.
MacBrien, C.B., etc. Colonel Marshall served with General MacBrien
through the Battle of the Somme, and for his part in this operation
received the Distinguished Service Order. In the early part of 1917 he
was promoted to the rank of Major, and given an appointment under the
late Major-General Lipsett, who commanded the 3rd Canadian Division.
After some nine months’ service with this distinguished commander he was
recommended as qualified to fill the appointment of Adjutant and
Quartermaster-General of a division, and was subsequently promoted to
that post in the 4th Canadian Division under Major-General Sir David
Watson, K.C.B., and given the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel, being one of
the first officers who had not passed through the Staff College at
Camberley to become a first-grade Staff Officer in the field. Lt.-Col.
Marshall remained throughout the balance of the campaign in the above
capacity receiving the C.M.G. for his part in connection with the
battles of 1918. He was mentioned in despatches on three occasions.
Lt.-Col. Marshall is President of the Standard Fuel Co. of Toronto,
founded fifty years ago, at present doing a large retail business
throughout Ontario. He is fond of outdoor life, and is a member of
several prominent clubs, The Toronto Hunt, National, Rosedale Golf, etc.
He is an Anglican and Conservative. His favorite recreations are farming
and polo. His city residence is 97 Glen Road, and his country home and
farm at Dunbarton. Col. Marshall is an alert business man, with a very
pleasing personality.

[Illustration]

                 *        *        *        *        *

=Transcriber’s Notes:=

Punctuation and obvious type-setting errors have been corrected without
note. Other corrections are as noted below.

page vii, Cave, James G., 138 was added to the book index
page vii, Chrysler, Francis Henry, 81 ==> Chrysler, Francis Henry, 80
page viii, Elson, John Mebourne ==> Elson, John Melbourne
page viii, Gouin, Sir Jean Lomer, 26 ==> Gouin, Sir Jean Lomer, 22
page ix, Johnson, Ebeneazer Forsyth ==> Johnston, Ebenezer Forsyth
page ix, Jones, James William, 116 ==> Jones, James William, 161
page ix, Macauzay, Thomas Basset ==> Macaulay, Thomas Basset
  also relocated in index from after MacLean, Hon. John Duncan
page ix, Lieut.-Col. Kenrie Reid ==> Lieut.-Col. Kenric Reid
page 1, Honorary LL.D., St. Francois-Xavier ==> Honorary LL.D., St.
  Francis Xavier
page 10, The enconiums which ==>  The encomiums which
page 22, in rank, if ==> in rank with, if
page 39, Toronto Hunt, as also ==> Toronto Hunt, and also
page 69, he has two children ==> he has three children
page 75, member of N.V. Veterinary ==> member of N.Y. Veterinary
page 80, their mortgagees upon ==> their mortgages upon
page 86, Z. of Kichiekewana Chapter ==>  Z. of Kichikewana Chapter
page 93, Regina, Wascana County Club, ==> Regina, Wascana Country Club,
page 94, History, St. Johns, N.B. ==> History, St. John, N.B.
page 97, a student, Mr. Saint-Pierre ==> a student, Mr. Sainte-Pierre
page 97, Helene and Jean Saint-Pierre ==> Helene and Jean Sainte-Pierre
page 97, Saint-Pierre is a Liberal ==> Sainte-Pierre is a Liberal
page 97, occasion. Mr. Saint-Pierre is ==> occasion. Mr. Sainte-Pierre is
page 97, securities, Mr. Saint-Pierre ==> securities, Mr. Sainte-Pierre
page 97, these securities. Mr. Saint-Pierre ==> these securities. Mr.
  Sainte-Pierre
page 97, province. Mr. Saint-Pierre is ==> province. Mr. Sainte-Pierre is
page 97, skill of Mr. Saint-Pierre. ==> skill of Mr. Sainte-Pierre.
page 97, Johnston, Ebeneazer Forsyth ==> Johnston, Ebenezer Forsyth
page 118, Commerce, pursuaded him ==> Commerce, persuaded him
page 125, son of Francais Bellemare ==> son of François Bellemare
page 129, notably St. Johns, N.B. ==> notably St. John, N.B.
page 143, Alberta Pharmacal Association, ==> Alberta Pharmaceutical
  Association,
page 161, on September 31, 1869 ==> on September 21, 1869
page 180, is 329 Chaple Street, Ottawa ==> is 329 Chapel Street, Ottawa
page 191, and from St. Francois Xavier ==> and from St. Francis Xavier
page 250, B. Greening Wire Coy. ==> B. Greening Wire Co.
page 258, Messines, Vis-en-ertois ==> Messines, Vis-en-Artois
page 264, Scarborough Golf and County ==> Scarborough Golf and Country
page 264, Hamilton Golf and County ==> Hamilton Golf and Country
page 271, Beull, Orr, Hurdman & Coy., ==> Beull, Orr, Hurdman & Co.,
page 271, Quarries and Construction Coy. ==> Quarries and Construction Co.
page 288, Elson, John Mebourne ==> Elson, John Melbourne
page 295, James Coristine & Coy., Ltd., ==> James Coristine & Co., Ltd.,
page 298, “Nugae Canorae,” 1897 ==> “Nugæ Canoræ,”




