








                                HISTORY
                                 OF THE
                      Settlement of Upper Canada,
                               (ONTARIO,)
                       WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
                            THE BAY QUINTÉ.

                                   BY

                     WM. CANNIFF, M.D., M.R.C.S.E.,

    PROFESSOR OF SURGERY UNIVERSITY VICTORIA COLLEGE, AUTHOR OF THE
                        “PRINCIPLES OF SURGERY.”




                                TORONTO:
                DUDLEY & BURNS, PRINTERS, VICTORIA HALL.
                                 1869.




                                    TO

                              THE HONORABLE

           SIR JOHN ALEXANDER MACDONALD, K.C.B., D.C.L., M.P.,

                    PREMIER OF THE DOMINION OF CANADA,

           THIS VOLUME IS BY PERMISSION RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,

                                    AS

 A RECOGNITION OF HIS ABILITIES AS A CANADIAN STATESMAN, AND AS A TRIBUTE
  TO A LONG STANDING INHABITANT OF BAY QUINTÉ, WHO HAS GIVEN HIS TALENTS
   AND ENERGIES TO LAY A SURE FOUNDATION FOR “A GREAT NORTHERN NATION.”

                                      BY HIS RESPECTFUL ADMIRER,

                                                        WILLIAM CANNIFF.




                                PREFACE.


In the year 1861 a meeting was convened at the Education Office,
Toronto, with the view of establishing an Historical Society for Upper
Canada. The writer, as an Upper Canadian by birth, and deeply interested
in his country with respect to the past as well as the future, was
present. The result of that meeting was the appointment of a Committee
to frame a Constitution and By-Laws, and take the necessary steps to
organize the proposed Society, and to report three weeks thereafter.

The Committee consisted of the Hon. Mr. Merritt, Rev. Dr. Ryerson, Col.
Jarvis, Mr. DeGrassi, Mr. Merritt, J. J. Hodgins, Dr. Canniff and Mr.
Coventry. For reasons unknown to the writer, this Committee never even
met. The following year the writer received a printed circular
respecting an “Historical Society of Upper Canada” which had been
established at St. Catharines, of which Col. John Clarke, of Port
Dalhousie, was President; Hon. Wm. H. Merritt, Vice-President, and
George Coventry, of Cobourg, Secretary.


                          “HONORARY MEMBERS.”

           “Chief Justice Sir John Beverley Robinson, Bart.,
           Colonel Jarvis, _Toronto_,
           Doctor Canniff, _Toronto_,
           Henry Eccles, Esq., Q.C.,
           William H. Kittson, Esq., _Hamilton_,
           Henry Ruttan, Esq., _Cobourg_,
           The Venerable Lord Bishop of Toronto,
           Alfio DeGrassi, Esq., _Toronto_,
           J. P. Merritt, _St. Catharines_,
           Thomas C. Keefer, Esq., _Yorkville_,
           Hon. George S. Boulton, _Cobourg_,
           David, Burn, Esq., _Cobourg_.”

At the request of this Society the writer undertook to prepare a Paper
upon the Settlement of the Bay Quinté. Having been induced to take up
his abode for a time at Belleville, near which he was born, the writer
availed himself of every opportunity he could create while engaged in
his professional duties, during a period of five years, to collect facts
pertaining to the subject. After some months of labor, he was advised by
friends, in whose judgment he had confidence, to write a History of the
Bay Quinté, for publication.

Acting upon this advice, he continued, with increased energy, to collect
and elaborate material. In carrying out this object, he not only visited
different sections of the country and many individuals, but consulted
the libraries at Toronto and Ottawa, as well as availed himself of the
private libraries of kind friends, especially Canniff Haight, Esq., of
Picton. As the writer proceeded in his work, he found the subject
assuming more extended proportions than he had anticipated. He found
that, to write an account of the Settlement of the Bay Quinté, was to
pen a history of the settlement of the Province. Finally, he has been
induced to designate the work “A History of the Settlement of Upper
Canada.”

The labor, time and thought which has been given to the subject need not
to be dwelt upon. Every effort has been made, consistent with
professional duties, upon which the writer’s family is dependent, to
sift a mass of promiscuous material which has come under investigation,
so that grains of truth alone might fill the measure which this volume
represents.

Various sources of information have been duly indicated in the text; but
there are a large number of individuals, from whom information has been
obtained, whose names could not be recalled.

This work has been one of love as well as labor; yet time and again the
writer would have relinquished it had it not been for the words of
encouragement, volunteered by his friends.

The writer has explained the cause of his writing this volume. He now
presents it to the reader—to Canadians—to the world. He loves his
country so well, that he regrets an abler pen had not undertaken the
task, that justice might be more fully done to the worthy.

Fault may be found because of repeated and earnest protests against the
attitude assumed by the United States: the comments made in respect to
their history: the contrast drawn upon the subject of LIBERTY and
FREEDOM. The writer offers no excuse. He has endeavored to adhere to
truth. It is true these pages have been written during a period of great
irritation to Canadians, from the hostile and aggressive spirit which
the United States have displayed towards us; but a record has been made
which, it is trusted, will stand the test of the closest examination.

As to the work, apart from its historical character, no remark is
offered, except that the writer is perfectly conscious of errors and
imperfections. Time has not been allowed to polish; and while the pages
have been going through the press, other necessary duties have prevented
that close and undivided attention which the work demanded. But
subscribers to the volume were urgent in their requests to have the work
without further delays. The reader is referred to a page of _Errata_.

A concluding chapter it has been found necessary to omit, in consequence
of the size already attained. In this it was intended to discuss the
future prospects of the Dominion. The writer has unbounded faith in the
Confederation scheme. Before this scheme was initiated, the writer, in a
lecture delivered to a Toronto audience, uttered these words. Pointing
out the elements which constitute the fabric of a great nation, he
remarked that he “loved to contemplate the future, when all the British
American Provinces would be consolidated into a grand whole; when, from
the summit of the Rocky Mountains, would be seen—to the East along the
magnificent lakes and river to the Atlantic, and down the western slopes
to the Pacific—the ceaseless industry of the Canadian beaver, and the
evergreen Maple Leaf overshadowing the peaceful homes of Canada.” The
prospects now are far brighter than when those words were spoken; and
notwithstanding the obstacles—an unpatriotic company of Englishmen, the
unscrupulous designs of covetous Americans, and the apathy of the
British Government—the belief is broad and strong that the dream of the
future will be realized. There is life in the tree whose seed was
planted eighty years ago, and as it has in the past continued to grow,
so it will in the future.

In concluding these prefatory remarks, we desire to tender our thanks to
all who have assisted us directly or indirectly, by supplying
information, and by encouraging words. Particularly we thank those
gentlemen who gave their names as subscribers, some of them voluntarily,
years ago, before the work was fairly commenced; also the Hon. Lewis
Wallbridge, for procuring for us, when Speaker, copies of manuscript in
the Parliamentary Library, at Ottawa.

Finally, we express our obligations to the Publishers and Printers.

 Toronto, 27th March, 1869.

                                                 [_Copy Right secured._]




                               CONTENTS.


                  A SKETCH OF FRANCO-CANADIAN HISTORY.


                               CHAPTER I.
                                                                    PAGE

 Antiquarianism—Records of the Early Nations—Tradition—The Press—
   The Eastern World—The Western World—Importance of History—
   Columbus—Colonization—Canada—America—Cartier—French Canadian
   writers—Cartier’s first visit—Huguenots—Cartier’s second visit—
   Jean Francois—Sir George E. Cartier—Establishment of the Fur
   Trade—Champlain—Discovery of Lake Ontario—Bay of Quinté—Quebec
   founded—First fighting with Indians—First taking of Quebec by
   the British—Returned to France—The Recollets and Jesuits—Death
   of Champlain—Foundation of Montreal—Emigration from France—The
   Carignan Regiment—DeCourcelle—Proposal to found a Fort at Lake
   Ontario—Frontenac—Fort at Cataraqui—La Salle—Fort at Niagara—
   First vessel upon the Lakes—Its fate—Death of La Salle, the
   first settler of Upper Canada—Founder of Louisiana—Discoverer of
   the mouth of the Mississippi                                        1


                               CHAPTER II.

 Cataraqui Fort strengthened—Kente Indians seized and carried
   captive to France—Massacre of Lachine—Commencing struggle
   between New England and New France—Siege of Quebec by Sir Wm.
   Phipps—Destruction of Fort Cataraqui—Its re-erection—Treaty of
   Ryswick—Death of Frontenac—Iroquois in England—Another attempt
   to capture Quebec—Decline of French power—Population of Canada
   and of New England—Continuation of the contest for the fur
   trade—Taking of Fort Louisburg—Col. Washington, dishonorable
   conduct—Inconsistency of Dr. Franklin—Commencement of seven
   years’ war—Close of first year—Montcalm—His presentiment—Taking
   of Fort Oswego—Of Fort William Henry—Fearful massacre—The state
   of Canada—Wolfe appears—Taking of Frontenac—Duquesne—Apathy of
   France—The Spring of 1759—Reduced state of Canada—Overthrow of
   French power in America—The result—Union of elements—The capture
   of Quebec—Wolfe—Death of Montcalm—Fort Niagara—Johnson—Effort to
   retake Quebec—Wreck of the French army—Capitulation at Montreal—
   Population—The first British Governor of Canada—The Canadians as
   British subjects—The result of French enterprise—Rebellion         15


                               DIVISION I.

              THE REBELLION OF 1776—THE THIRTEEN COLONIES.


                              CHAPTER III.

 First American rebellion—Independence—Traitors made heroes—
   Loyalists driven away to found another colony—The responsibility
   of rebelling—Treatment of the Loyalists—The several colonies—The
   first Englishman in America—Receives £10—English colonization—
   Virginia—Convicts—Extent of Virginia—First Governor—Virginians
   not willing to rebel—Quota supplied to the rebel army—New York—
   Hudson—The Dutch—New Netherlands—Price of New Amsterdam (New
   York)—First Legislative Assembly—Not quick to rebel—Quota of
   rebel troops—Gave many settlers to Upper Canada—New Jersey—Its
   settlement—A battle ground—Gave rebel troops; also loyal troops—
   Furnished settlers to Upper Canada—Massachusetts—Captain Smith—
   New England Puritans—The “Mayflower”—First Governor—Cruel
   treatment of Indians—Massachusetts takes the lead in rebelling—
   Troops—Loyalists—New Hampshire—Troops—Delaware—Settlement—Quota
   of rebel troops—Connecticut—Education—Troops—Roman Catholics—
   Toleration—Rhode Island—Providence—Inconsistency of the
   Puritans—Roger Williams—North Carolina—Inhabitants—South
   Carolina—Many Loyalists—Pennsylvania—William Penn—Conduct toward
   Indians—The people opposed to rebellion—Georgia—Oglethorpe—
   Policy of New England—New England                                  32


                               CHAPTER IV.

 American writers—Sabine—Loyalists had no time to waste—
   Independence not sought at first—Adams—Franklin—Jay—Jefferson—
   Washington—Madison—The British Government—Ingratitude of the
   Colonists—Taxation—Smugglers—Crown officers—Persistence—
   Superciliousness Contest between Old England and New England       41


                               CHAPTER V.

 The signers of the Declaration of Independence—Their nativity—
   Injustice of American writers for 80 years—Cast back
   mis-statements—The Whigs had been U. E. Loyalists—Hancock—
   Office-seekers—Malcontents stir up strife—What the fathers of
   the Republic fought for—Rebel committees—Black mail—Otis, John
   Adams, Warren, Washington, Henry, Franklin—What caused them to
   rebel—What the American revolutionary heroes actually were—
   Cruelty, during and after the war—No Freedom—The political
   mistake of the rebels in alienating the loyalists—The
   Consequence—Motives of the loyalists—False charges—Conscientious
   Conservatives—Rebellion not warranted—Attachment to the old
   flag—Loyalists driven away—_Suppressio veri_—Want of noble
   spirit towards the South—Effects—Comparison between loyalists
   and rebels—Education—Religion—The neutral—The professions          46


                               CHAPTER VI.

 Republicanism—The lesson of the first rebellion—The late civil
   war—The Loyalists; their losses and hardships—Ignored by
   Americans—Unrecorded—The world kept in ignorance—American glory—
   Englishmen—Question of Colonial treatment—The reason why Great
   Britain failed to subdue the rebellion—Character of the rebel
   bravery—The great result—Liberty in England and United States
   contrasted—Slavery—The result to U. E. Loyalists—Burgoyne—
   Mobocracy—Treatment from “Sons of Liberty”—Old men, women and
   children—Instances of cruelty—Brutality—Rapacity—Torture—The
   lower classes—“Swamp Law”—Fiendish cruelty—Worse than Butler’s
   Rangers—Seward and the Fenians—Infamous falsification—Close of
   the war—Recognition of independence by Great Britain—Crushed
   hopes of the Loyalists—In New York—Their conduct—Evacuation day—
   The position of the Loyalists—Confiscation—“Attainting”—Seizing
   Estates—Paine—Commissioners at Paris—British Ministry—Loyalists’
   petition—King’s speech—Division of claimants—Six classes—The
   number—Tardy justice—Noble conduct of South Carolina—Impostors—
   Loyalists in Lower Canada—Proclamation—The soldiers’ families—
   Journeyings—Meeting of families                                    52


                              CHAPTER VII.

 A spirit of strife—The French war—British American troops—Former
   comrades opposed—Number of U. E. Loyalists in the field—General
   Burgoyne—Defeat—First reverse of British arms—The campaign—
   Colonel St. Leger—Fort Stanwix—Colonel Baume—Battle of
   Bennington—General Herkimer—Gates—Schuyler—Braemar Heights—
   Saratoga—Surrender—The result upon the people—Sir John Johnson—
   Sir William—Sketch—Indian Chief—Laced coat—Indian’s dream—It
   comes to pass—Sir William dreams—It also comes to pass—Too hard
   a dream—Sir John—Attempt to arrest—Escape—Starving—Royal greens—
   Johnson’s losses—Living in Canada—Death—Principal Corps of
   Royalists—King’s Rangers—Queen’s Rangers—Major Rogers—Simcoe—The
   Rangers in Upper Canada—Disbanded—The Hessians                     63


                              CHAPTER VIII.

 Indian names—The Five Tribes—The Sixth—Confederation—Government—
   Subdivisions—Origin—Hendrick—Death—Brant—Birth—Education—
   Married—Teaching—Christianity—Brant elected Chief—Commissioned a
   British Captain—Visits England—Returns—Leads his warriors to
   battle—Efforts of Rebels to seduce Brant to their cause—
   Attempted treachery of the Rebel Herkimer—Border warfare—
   Wyoming—Attempt to blacken the character of Brant—His noble
   conduct—Untruthful American History—The inhabitants of Wyoming—
   The Rebels first to blame—Cherry Valley—Van Schaick—Bloody
   orders—Terrible conduct of the Rebels, Helpless Indian families—
   Further deeds of blood and rapine by the rebel Sullivan—A month
   of horrible work—Attributes of cruelty more conspicuous in the
   Rebels than in the Indians—The New Englander—Conduct toward the
   Indians—Inconsistent—The “down trodden”—The Mohawks—Indian
   agriculture—Broken faith with the Indians—Noble conduct of
   Brant—After the war—His family—Death—Miss Molly—Indian usage—The
   character of the Mohawk—The six Indians as Canadians—Fidelity to
   the British—Receiving land—Bay Quinté—Grand River—Settling—
   Captain Isaac, Captain John—At present—Mohawk Counsel              71


                               CHAPTER IX.

 Individuals—Anderson—Bethune—Burwell—Butler—Canliff—Claus—Coffin—
   Doune—Jarvis—Jones—McDonald—McGill—McGilles—Merrit—Munday—
   Peters—Robinson—Singleton—Ross—McNab—Allen—Allison—Ashley—Bell—
   Burritt—Casey—Carscallion—Church—Clark—Crawford—Dame—Daly—
   Diamond                                                            85


                               CHAPTER X.

 Ferguson—Frazer—Gerollamy—Goldsmith—Harrison—Hudgins—Hicks—Howell—
   Hover—Hogle—Ham—Herkimer—Holt—Jones—Johnson—Ketcheson—Loyst—
   Myers—McArthur—Miller—Mordens—McDonald—McDonnell—McDonell—
   Ostrom—Peterson                                                   100


                               CHAPTER XI.

 Rogers’ family—Ryerson—Redner—Sherwood—Taylor—Van Dusen—
   Williamsburgh—Wright—Wilkins—Young—Officers who settled in
   Niagara District                                                  117


                              DIVISION II.

                TRAVELING IN EARLY TIMES—ORIGINAL ROUTES.


                              CHAPTER XII.

 Indian paths—Portages—Original French routes—Mer de Canada—
   Original names of St. Lawrence—Ontario—Huron—Route by Bay
   Quinté—Old French maps—Original English routes—Four ways from
   Atlantic to the Lakes—Mississippi—Potomac—Hudson—Indian name of
   Erie—From New York to Ontario—The Hudson River—Mohawk—Wood
   creek—Oneida Lake—Oswego River—The carrying places—West Canada
   Creek—Black River—Oswegotchie—The navigation—Military highway—
   Lower Canada—An historic route—The paths followed by the
   Loyalists—Indian paths north of Lake Ontario—Crossing the Lake—
   From Cape Vincent to the Bay Quinté—From Oswego by Duck Islands—
   East Lake—Picton Bay—Coasting Ontario—Two ways to Huron—By Bay
   Quinté and Trent; by Don River—Lake Simcoe—Point Traverse—
   Loyalists—Travelling by the St. Lawrence—First road—Long
   remembered event                                                  129


                              CHAPTER XIII.

 Indians traveled by foot or by canoe—Secreting canoes—Primeval
   scenes—Hunting expeditions—War path—In 1812—Brock—A night at
   Myers’ Creek—Important arrival—The North West Company—Their
   canoes—Route—Grand Portage—The Voyageurs—The Batteaux—Size—
   Ascending the rapids—Lachine—A dry dock—Loyalists by batteaux—
   Durham boats—Difficulties—In 1788, time from Lachine to
   Fredericksburgh—Waiting for batteaux—Extracts from a journal,
   traveling in 1811—From Kingston to Montreal—The expenses—The
   Schenectady boats—Trade between Albany and Cataraqui—The Durham
   boat—Duncan—Description of flat-bottomed boat by “Murray”—
   Statement of Finkle—Trading—Batteaux in 1812—Rate of traveling—
   The change in fifty years—Time from Albany to Bay Quinté—
   Instances—Loyalists traveling in winter—Route—Willsbury
   wilderness—Tarrying at Cornwall—The “French Train”—Traveling
   along north shore of Ontario—Indian path—Horseback—Individual
   owners of batteaux—Around Bay Quinté—The Last regular batteaux—
   In 1819—“Lines” from magazine                                     135


                              CHAPTER XIV.

 The first Vessel—The French—La Salle—The Griffon—Vessels in 1770—
   During the Rebellion—Building at Carleton Island—Captain
   Andrews—The Ontario—Col. Burton—Loss of the Ontario—The
   Sheehans—Hills—Givins’—Murney’s Point—Schooner ‘Speedy’—Mohawk—
   Mississauga—Duke of Kent—Capt. Bouchette—Paxton—McKenzie—
   Richardson—Earle Steele—Fortiche—The Governor Simcoe—Sloop
   ‘Elizabeth’—First vessel built at York—Collins’ Report upon
   Navigating the Lakes—Navy in Upper Canada, 1795—Rochfoucault—
   Capt. Bouchette—Officers’ Pay—York, the centre of the Naval
   Force—Gun Boats—The Loss of the “Speedy”—Reckoner—Dr. Strachan—
   Solicitor-Gen. Gray—Canada took the lead in building Vessels—
   First Canadian Merchant Vessel—The York—A Schooner on runners
   round the Falls—Sending Coals to Newcastle—Upon Bay Quinté—The
   Outskirts of Civilization—“The Prince Edward” built of Red
   Cedar—In 1812—Schooner “Mary Ann”—1817—Capt. Matthews             147


                              DIVISION III.

             THE LOYALISTS AS PIONEERS—THE ORIGINAL SURVEY.


                               CHAPTER XV.

 Major Gen. Holland—Surveying on Atlantic Coast—An adherent of the
   Crown—Removal to Montreal—Death—Major Holland—Information from
   “Maple Leaves”—Holland Farm—Taché—First Canadian Poem—Head
   Quarters of Gen. Montgomery—Hospitality—Duke of Kent—Spencer
   Grange—Holland Tree—Graves—Epitaphs—Surveyor Washington—County
   Surveyor—Surveyors after the War—First Survey in Upper Canada—
   Commenced in 1781—The Mode pursued—Information in Crown Lands
   Department—The Nine Townships upon the St. Lawrence—At the close
   of the War—Non-Professional Surveyors—Thomas Sherwood—Assisting
   to Settle—Surveying around the Bay Quinté—Bongard—
   Deputy-Surveyor Collins—First Survey at Frontenac—Town Reserve—
   Size of Township—Mistakes—Kotte—Tuffy—Capt. Grass—Capt. Murney—
   Surveying in Winter—Planting Posts—Result—Litigation—Losing
   Land—A Newspaper Letter—Magistrates—Landholders—Their Sons’
   Lawyers—Alleged Filching—Speculators at Seat of Government—Grave
   Charges—Width of Lots—Mode of Surveying—Number of Concessions—
   Cross Roads—Surveyors Orders—Numbering the Lots—Surveying around
   the Bay—The ten Townships—Their Lands—The Surveying Party—A
   Singer—Statement of Gourlay                                       154


                              CHAPTER XVI.

 The term Concession—First Concession of Land in Canada—The
   Carignan Regiment—Seigniories—Disproportion of the sexes—Females
   sent from France—Their appearance—Settling them—Marriage
   allowance—The last seigniory—New Longeuil—Seigniory at
   Frontenac—Grants to refugees—Officers and men—Scale of granting—
   Free of expense—Squatting—Disbanded soldiers—Remote regions—A
   wise and beneficent policy—Impostors—Very young officers—
   Wholesale granting of land—Republicans coming over—Covetous—
   False pretensions—Government had to discriminate—Rules and
   regulations—Family lands—Bounty—Certificates—Selling claims—Rear
   concessions—Transfer of location ticket—Land board—Tardiness in
   obtaining titles to real estate—Transfer by bond—Jobbing—Sir Wm.
   Pullency—Washington—Giving lands to favorites—Reserves—Evil
   results—The Family Compact—Extract from Playter—Extract from
   Lord Durham—From Gourlay—Recompense to Loyalists—Rations—Mode of
   drawing land—Land agent—Broken front—Traitor Arnold—Tyendinaga    164


                              CHAPTER XVII.

 Lines—Western Settlement, 1783—Population—Settlement upon St.
   Lawrence and Bay—Number, 1784—Proclamation to Loyalists—Society
   disturbed—Two kinds of Loyalists—St. Lawrence and Bay favorable
   for settlement—Government provisions—State of the Loyalists—
   Serving out rations—Clothes—Utensils for clearing and fencing—
   The axe—Furniture—Attacking a last enemy—Tents—Waiting for their
   lots—“Bees”—Size of dwellings—Mode of building—Exchanging work—
   Bedsteads—Clearing—Fireing trees—Ignorance of pioneer life—
   Disposing of the wood—No beast of burden—Logging—Determination—
   All settlers on a common ground—Additional refugees—Advance—
   Simcoe’s proclamation, 1792—Conditions of grants—The response—
   Later settlers—Questionable Loyalists—Yankees longing for
   Canada—Loyalty in 1812                                            181


                              DIVISION IV.

                    THE FIRST YEARS OF UPPER CANADA.


                             CHAPTER XVIII.

 Father Picquet—Provision of Forts in Upper Canada just before
   conquest—Frontenac—Milk—Brandy—Toronto—The several forts—
   Detroit—British garrisons—Grasping rebels—Efforts to starve out
   Loyalists in Canada—Worse treated than the Acadians—Efforts to
   secure Fur Trade—The frontier forts—Americans’ conduct to
   Indians—Result—Conduct of British Government—Rations for three
   years—Grinding by hand—“Hominy blocks”—“Plumping mill”—The
   women—Soldier farmers—The Hessians—Suffering—The “Scarce Year”—
   Charge against the Commissariat officers—Famine—Cry for bread—
   Instances of suffering—Starving children—No salt—Fish—Game—
   Eating young grain—Begging bran—A common sorrow—Providential
   escapes—Eating buds and leaves—Deaths—Primitive fishing—Catching
   salmon—Going 125 miles to mill—Disconsolate families—1789—
   Partial relief—First beef slaughtered in Upper Canada—First log
   barn—A “Bee,” what they ate and drank—Tea introduced—Statements
   of Sheriff Sherwood—Roger Bates—John Parrott—Col. Clark—Squirrel
   swimming Niagara—Maple sugar—How it was made—Women assisting—
   Made dishes of food—Pumpkin loaf—Extract from Rochefoucault—
   1795—Quality of grain raised—Quinté Bay—Cultivation—Corn
   exported—The grain dealers—Price of flour—Pork—Profits of the
   merchants                                                         191


                              CHAPTER XIX.

 Kingston Mills—Action of Government—The Millwright—Situation of
   the first Mill—Why Selected—The Machinery—Put up by Loyalists—No
   Toll—Only Mill for three years—Going to Mill, 1784—The Napanee
   Mill—Commenced 1785—Robert Clarke—An old Book—“Appenea” Falls—
   Price of certain articles—What Rum cost, and was used for—The
   Mill opened 1787—Sergt.-Major Clarke in charge—Indian Corn—Small
   Toll—Surveyor Collins in charge—Becomes the property of R.
   Cartwright, 1792—Rebuilt—Origin of Napanee—Price of Butter,
   1788—Mills at Four Mile Creek, Niagara Falls, Fort Erie, and
   Grand River—Mills on the St. Lawrence—The Stone Mills—Van
   Alstine—Lake of the Mountain—1796—Natural Beauty, _versus_
   Utility—The Mill—Van Alstine’s Death—Wind Mill—Myer’s Mill—Mill
   at Consecon                                                       206


                               CHAPTER XX.

 Clothing—Domestic and Farming Implements—Style of Dress eighty
   years ago—Clothing of the Refuges—Disbanded Soldiers—No Fresh
   Supply—Indian Garments of Skin—Deerskin Pants—Petticoats—Bed
   Coverings—Cultivating Flax—Sheep—Home-made Clothes—Rude
   Implements—Fulling—French Mode—Lindsay Woolsey—The
   Spinning-wheel—Young men Selecting Wives—Bees—Marriage Portion—
   Every Farmer his own Tanner and Shoemaker—Fashions—How odd hours
   were spent—Home-made Shoes—What Blankets were made of—Primitive
   Bedstead—Nakedness—Bridal Apparel—No Saddles—Kingston and
   Newark—Little Money—Bartering—Merchants from Albany—Unable to
   buy—Credit with Merchants—The Results—Itinerant Mechanics—
   Americans—Become Canadians—An old Stone-mason—Wooden Dishes—
   Making Spoons—Other Hardships—Indians Friendly—Effects of
   Alcohol upon the Mississaugas—Groundless Panic—Drunken Indians—
   Women, defending Themselves—An erroneous Statement about Indian
   Massacre in “Dominion Monthly Magazine”—Statement of an Old
   Settler, Sherwood—Wild Beasts—Few Fire-arms—Narrow Escapes—
   Depredations at Night—Destroying Stock—An Act of Parliament—“A
   traveller’s statement”—The Day of Small Things—Settlers
   Contented—The Extent of their Ambition—Reward of Industry—
   Population in 1808—Importations—Money—The Youth                   211


                              CHAPTER XXI.

 Sweat of the brow—No beast of burden—No stock—Except by a few—
   Horses and oxen—From Lower Canada—York State—Late comers,
   brought some—No fodder—First stock in Adolphustown—Incidents—
   Cock and hens—“Tipler”—Cattle driving—First cow in Thurlow—First
   house in Marysburgh—The first oxen—No market for butter and
   cheese—Sheep—Rev. Mr. Stuart, as an Agriculturist—Horses at
   Napanee—An offer for a yoke of steers                             220


                              CHAPTER XXII.

 Old channels of trade, and travel—Art and science—New channels—The
   wilderness—Loyalists Travelling on foot, from Kingston to York—
   Formation of roads—Act of parliament—1793—Its provisions—Crooked
   roads—Foot-path—Bridle-path—King’s highway from Lower Canada—
   When surveyed—Road from Kingston westward—Its course—Simcoe’s
   military road—Dundas street—Asa Danforth—Contract with
   government—Road from Kingston to Ancaster—Danforth road—1799—
   Misunderstandings—Danforth’s pamphlets—Slow improvement—Cause—
   Extract from Gourlay—Thomas Markland’s report—Ferries—1796—Acts
   of parliament—Statute labor—Money grants—Commissioners—Midland
   district—Distribution—The Cataraqui Bridge Company—The
   petitioners—An act—The provisions—The plan of building—The
   bridge—Toll—Completing the bridge—Improvements of roads—McAdam—
   Declines a knighthood                                             224


                             CHAPTER XXIII.

 Ode to Canada—Early events—First English child in America, 1587—In
   New England—First French child, 1621—First in Upper Canada,
   1783—In Prince Edward—Adolphustown—Ameliasburgh—North of the
   Rideau—Indian marriage ceremony—Difficulty among first settlers
   to get clergymen—First marriage in America, 1608—First in New
   England, 1621—First in Canada, 1621—Marriageable folks—No one to
   tie the matrimonial knot—Only one clergyman—Officers marrying—
   Magistrates empowered—Legislation, 1793—Its provision—Making
   valid certain marriages—Further Legislation, 1798—In 1818—1821—
   1831—Clergymen of all denominations permitted to marry—Methodist
   ministers—Marriage license, 1814—Five persons appointed to
   issue—A noticeable matter—Statements of Bates—Mode of courting
   in the woods—Newcastle wedding expeditions—Weapons of defence—
   Ladies’ dresses—The lover’s “rig”—A wedding ring—Paying the
   magistrate—A good corn basket—Going to weddings—“Bitters”—Old
   folks stay at home—The dance, several nights—Marriage outfit—
   Frontier life—Morals in Upper Canada—Absence of irregularities—
   Exceptional instances—Unable to get married, Peter and Polly—A
   singular witness—Rev. Mr. Stuart—Langhorn—McDowell—How to adorn
   the bride—What she wore—A wedding in 1808—On horseback—The
   guests—The wedding—The banquet—The game of forfeits—The night—
   Second day wedding—The young folks on horseback—Terpischorean—An
   elopement by canoe—The Squire—The chase—The lovers successful—
   The Squires who married                                           232


                              CHAPTER XXIV.

 Burying places—How selected—Family burying place—For the
   neighborhood—The Dutch—Upon the Hudson—Bay Quinté—A sacred spot
   to the Loyalists—Ashes to ashes—Primitive mode of burial—The
   coffin—At the grave—The father’s remarks—Return to labor—French
   Burying-place at Frontenac—Its site—U. E. Loyalists’ burying
   place at Kingston—The “U. E. burying-ground,” Adolphustown—
   Worthy sires of Canada’s sons—Decay—Neglect of illustrious dead—
   Repair wanted—Oldest burying-ground in Prince Edward—Ross Place—
   At East Lake—Upon the Rose farm—“The Dutch burying-ground”—
   Second growth trees—In Sophiasburgh—Cronk farm—In Sidney—Rude
   tomb stones—Burial-place of Captain Myers—Reflections—Dust to
   dust—In Thurlow—“Taylor burying-ground”—The first person buried—
   Lieut. Ferguson—An aged female—Her work done—Wheels stand still   243


                               DIVISION V.

                    THE EARLY CLERGYMEN AND CHURCHES.


                              CHAPTER XXV.

 French missionaries—First in 1615—Recollets—With Champlain—
   Jesuits, in 1625—Valuable records—Bishopric of Quebec, 1674—
   First Bishop of Canada, Laval—Rivalry—Power of Jesuits—Number of
   missionaries—Their “relations”—First mission field; Bay Quinté
   region—“Antient mission”—How founded—First missionaries—Kleus,
   Abbe D’Urfé—La Salle to build a church—The ornaments and sacred
   vessels—The site of the “Chappel” uncertain—Bald Bluff, Carrying
   Place—Silver crosses—Mission at Georgian Bay—The “Christian
   Islands”—Chapel at Michilmicinac, 1679—The natives attracted—
   Subjects of the French King—Francois Picquet—La Presentation—
   _Soegasti_—The most important mission—The object—Six Nations—The
   missionary’s living—“Disagreeable expostulations”—Putting
   stomach in order—Trout—Picquet’s mode of teaching Indians—The
   same afterwards adopted by Rev. W. Case—Picquet’s success—
   Picquet on a voyage—At Fort Toronto—Mississaugas’ request—
   Picquet’s reply—A slander—At Niagara, Oswego—At Frontenac—Grand
   reception—Return to La Presentation—Picquet in the last French
   war—Returns to France—By Mississippi—“Apostles of Peace”—
   Unseemly strife—Last of the Jesuits in Canada                     249


                              CHAPTER XXVI.

 First church in New York, 1633—First Dominie, Rev. Everardus
   Bogardus—The Dutch, Huguenots, Pilgrims—Transporting ministers
   and churches—First Rector of New York, Wm. Vesey—Henry Barclay,
   1746—First Catholic Bishop in America, 1789—Episcopalian Bishop,
   1796—Moral state of Pioneers in Canada—Religion—No ministers—No
   striking immorality—Feared God and honored their King—The
   Fathers of Upper Canada—Religious views—A hundred years ago—
   “Carousing and Dancing”—Rev. Dr. John Ogilvie—First Protestant
   clergyman in Canada—Chaplain, 1759, at Niagara—A Missionary
   Successor of Dr. Barclay, New York—Death, 1774—Rev. John
   Doughty—A Graduate ordained—At Peekskill—Schenectady—A Loyalist—
   A Prisoner—To Canada—Chaplain—To England—Returns—Missionary
   Resigns—Rev Dr. John Stuart—First clergyman to settle—His
   memoir—The “Father of the U. C. Church”—Mission work—The five
   nations—The Dutch—Rev. Mr. Freeman—Translator—Rev. Mr. Andrews—
   Rev. Mr. Spencer Woodbridge, Howley—New England missionaries—
   Rev. Dr. Whelock—The Indian converts—The London society—Rev. Mr.
   Inglis—John Stuart selected missionary—A native of Pennsylvania—
   Irish descent—A graduate, Phil. Coll.—Joins Church of England—To
   England—Ordination—Holy Orders, 1770—Enters upon his work         255


                             CHAPTER XXVII.

 At Fort Hunter—Mr. Stuart’s first sermon, Christmas—Officiates in
   Indian tongue—Translates—The rebellion—Prayers for the King—The
   Johnsons—Rebels attack his house—Plunder—Indignity—Church
   desecrated—Used as a stable—A barrel of rum—Arrested—Ordered to
   come before rebel commissioners—On Parole—Limits—Idle two years—
   To Albany—Phil—Determines to remove to Canada—Not secure—
   Exchanging—Security—Real estate forfeited—Route—Negroes—The
   journey, three weeks—At St. John’s—Charge of Public School—
   Chaplain—At the close of the war—Three Protestant Parishes—
   Determines to settle at Cataraqui—Chaplain to Garrison—
   Missionary—Bishop of Virginia, Dr. Griffith—Visits Mr. Stuart—
   Invitation to Virginia declined—“Rivetted prejudices,”
   satisfied—“The only refuge clergymen”—Path of duty—Visits the
   settlements, 1784—Mohawks, Grand river—Reception of their old
   pastor—First church—Mohawks, Bay of Quinté—Remains in Montreal a
   year—Assistant—Removes to Cataraqui, 1785—His land—Number of
   houses in Kingston—A short cut to Lake Huron—Fortunate in land—
   5000 settlers—Poor and happy—Industrious—Around his Parish,
   1788—Two hundred miles long—By batteau—Brant—New Oswego—Mohawk
   village church, steeple, and bell—First in Upper Canada—Plate—
   Organ—Furniture—Returns—At Niagara—Old parishioners—Tempted to
   move—Comfortable, not rich—Declines a judgeship—New
   Mecklenburgh—Appointed Chaplain to first House of Assembly—
   Mohawk Mission—At Marysburgh—Degree of D.D.—Prosperity—Happy—
   Decline of life—His duties—Illness, Death, 1811—His appearance—
   “The little gentleman”—His manners—Honorable title—His children—
   Rev. O’Kill Stuart                                                260


                             CHAPTER XXVIII.

 A Missionary—Chaplain at Niagara—Pastors to the settlers—Chaplain
   to Legislature—Visits Grand river—Officiates—A land speculator—
   Receives a pension, £50—1823—Rev. Mr. Pollard—At Amherstburgh—
   Mr. Langhorn—A missionary—Little education—Useful—Odd—On Bay
   Quinté in Ernesttown—Builds a church—At Adolphustown—Preaches at
   Hagerman’s—Another church—A diligent pastor—Pioneer preacher
   around the bay—Christening—Marrying—Particular—His appointments—
   Clerk’s Fees—Generosity—Present to bride—Faithful to sick calls—
   Frozen feet—No stockings—Shoe buckles—Dress—Books—Peculiarities—
   Fond of the water—Charitable—War of 1812—Determined to leave
   Canada—Thinks it doomed—Singular notice—Returns to Europe—His
   library—Present to Kingston—Twenty years in Canada—Extract from
   Gazette—No one immediately to take his place—Rev. John Bethune—
   Died 1815—Native of Scotland—U. E. Loyalists—Lost Property—
   Chaplain to 84th Regiment—A Presbyterian—Second Legal Clergymen
   in Upper Canada—Settled at Cornwall—Children—The Baptists—Wyner—
   Turner—Holts Wiem—Baptists upon river Moira—First Chapel—How
   built—Places of preaching—Hayden’s Corners—At East Lake—The
   Lutherans—Rev. Schwerdfeger—Lutheran settlers—County Dundas—
   First church east of Kingston—Rev. Mr. Myers lived in
   Marysburgh—Marriage—His log church—Removes to St. Lawrence—
   Resigns—To Philadelphia—Mr. Weant—Lives in Ernesttown—Removes to
   Matilda—Not supported—Secretly joins the English church—
   Re-ordained—His society ignorant—Suspicious—Preaching in shirt
   sleeves—Mr. Myers’ return, by sleigh—Locking church door—The
   thirty-nine articles—Compromise—Mr. Myers continues three years
   a Lutheran—He secedes—The end of both Seceders—Rev. I. L.
   Senderling—Rev. Herman Hayunga—Rev. Mr. Shorts—Last Lutheran
   minister at Ernesttown, McCarty—Married                           267


                              CHAPTER XXIX.

 Bishop Strachan—A teacher—A preacher—A student—Holy Orders—A
   Presbyterian—Becomes an Episcopalian—A supporter of the “Family
   compact”—Sincere—His opinion of the people—Ignorant—Unprepared
   for self-government—Strachan’s religious chart—He was deceived—
   The Methodists—Anomalous connection—A fillibustering people—
   Republicanism egotistical—Loyalty of the Methodists—American
   ministers—Dr. Strachan’s position—His birth place—His education—
   A.M., 1793—Studying Theology—Comes to Canada—A student of Dr.
   Stuart’s—Ordained Deacon—A missionary at Cornwall—Rector at
   York—Archdeacon—Bishop of Toronto—Coadjutor—Death—A public
   burial—Rev. Mr. McDowell—First Presbyterian at Bay Quinté—
   Invited by Van Alstine—On his way—At Brockville—Settles in a
   second town—His circuit—A worthy minister—Fulfilling his
   mission—Traveling on foot—To York—Marrying the people—His death—
   His descendants—Places of preaching—A Calvinist—Invites
   controversy—Mr. Coate accepts the challenge—The disputation—
   Excitement—The result—Rev. Mr. Smart—Called by Mr. McDowell—
   Pres. clergyman at Brockville—Fifty years—An earnest Christian—A
   desire to write—“Observer”—A pioneer—A cause of regret—Not
   extreme—Mr. Smart’s views on politics—The masses uneducated—The
   “Family Compact”—Rise of responsible government—The Bidwells—
   Credit to Dr. Strachan—Brock’s funeral sermon—Foundation of
   Kingston gaol—Maitland—Demonstration—Sherwood’s statement         273


                              CHAPTER XXX.

 The Quakers—Among the Settlers—From Penn—Duchess County—First
   Meeting-house—David Sand—Elijah Hick—Visiting Canada—James
   Noxen—A first settler—Their mode of worship—In Sophiasburg—The
   meeting-house—Joseph Leavens—Hicksites—Traveling—Death, aged 92—
   Extract, Picton Sun—The first preaching places—First English
   church—In private houses—At Sandwich—The Indian church at the
   bay—Ernesttown—First Methodist church—Preaching at Niagara—First
   church in Kingston—At Waterloo—At Niagara—Churches at Kingston,
   1817—In Hallowell—Thurlow—Methodist meeting-houses, 1816—At
   Montreal—Building chapels in olden times—Occupying the frame—The
   old Methodist chapels—In Hallowell township—In the fifth town—
   St. Lawrence—First English Church, Belleville—Mr. Campbell—First
   time in the pulpit—How he got out—The old church superseded—
   Church, front of Sidney—Rev. John Cochrane—Rev. Mr. Grier—First
   Presbyterian Church in Belleville—Rev. Mr. Ketcham—First
   Methodist Church in Belleville—Healey, Puffer—The site of the
   church—A second one                                               279


                              CHAPTER XXXI.

 The first Methodist Preachers—The army—Capt. Webb—Tuffey—George
   Neal—Lyons—School-teacher—Exhorter—McCarty—Persecution—Bigotry—
   Vagabonds—McCarty arrested—Trial—At Kingston—Banished—“A
   martyr”—Doubtful—Losee, first Methodist missionary, 1790—A
   minister—A loyalist—Where he first preached—“A curiosity”—
   Earnest pioneer Methodist—Class-meetings—Suitable for all
   classes—Losee’s class-meetings—Determines to build a
   meeting-house—Built in Adolphustown—Its size—The subscribers—
   Members, amount—Embury—Those who subscribed for first church in
   New York—Same names—The centenary of Methodism—New York
   Methodists driven away—American Methodist forgetful—Embury and
   Heck refugees—Ashgrove—No credit given to British officers—
   Embury’s brother—The rigging loft, N. Y.—Barbara Heck—Settling
   in Augusta—First Methodist Church in America—Subscribers—“Lost
   Chapters”—The Author’s silence—What is acknowledged—“Severe
   threats”—Mr. Mann—To Nova Scotia—Mr. Wakely “admires piety”—Not
   “loyalty”—Second chapel, N. Y.—Adolphustown subscribers—Conrad
   VanDusen—Eliz. Roblin—Huff—Ruttan—The second Methodist chapel—
   The subscribers—Commenced May, 1795—Carpenter’s wages—Members
   Cataraqui Circuit—Going to Conference—Returns—Darias Dunham—
   Physician—First quarterly meeting—Anecdotes—Bringing a “dish
   cloth”—“Clean up”—The new made squire—Asses—Unclean spirits—
   Losee discontinues preaching—Cause—Disappointment—Return to New
   York—Dunham useful—Settles—Preachers travelling—Saddle-bags—
   Methodism among loyalists—Camp-meetings—Where first held in
   Canada—Worshipping in the woods—Breaking up—Killing the Devil—
   First Canadian preacher—Journey from New York                     285


                             CHAPTER XXXIa.

 Henry Ryan—Ryanites—He comes to Canada—His associate, Case—At
   Kingston—A singer—Preaching in the market-place—Their treatment—
   In office—His circuit—1000 miles—What he received—Elder—
   Superseded—Probable cause—A British subject—During the war of
   1812—President of Conference—“High-minded”—Useful—Acceptable to
   the people—Desired independence by the Canadians—How he was
   treated—His labors—Brave—Witty—“Fatherless children”—“Impudent
   scoundrel”—Muscular—“Methodists’ bull”—“Magistrate’s goat”—Ryan
   seeks separation—Breckenridge—Conduct of the American
   Conference—Ryan’s agitation—Effect upon the Bishops—First Canada
   Conference—At Hallowell—Desire for independence—Reasons, cogent—
   Fruit of Ryan’s doings—The way the Conference treated Ryan—
   Withdraws—No faith in the United States Conference—Ryan sincere—
   “Canadian Wesleyans”—The motives of the United States Conference
   questionable—The wrong done Ryan—Second Canada Conference—Case,
   first Superintendent—Visit of Bishop Asbury—Account by Henry
   Bœhm—Asbury an Englishman—During the rebellion—A Bishop—His
   journey to Canada—Crossing the St. Lawrence—Traveling in Canada—
   An upset—“A decent people”—His opinion of the country—The Bishop
   ill—At Kingston—Bœhm at Embury’s—A field meeting—Riding all
   night—Crossing to Sackett’s harbor—Nearly wrecked                 295


                             CHAPTER XXXII.

 McDonnell—First R. Catholic Bishop—A “Memorandum”—Birth-place—in
   Spain—A priest—In Scotland—Glengary Fencibles—Ireland, 1798—To
   Canada—Bishop—Death in Scotland—Body removed to Canada—Funeral
   obsequies—Buried at Kingston—Had influence—Member of Canadian
   Legislative Council—Pastoral visitations, 1806—A loyal man—A
   pioneer in his church—The Bishop’s Address, 1836—Refuting
   Mal-charges—Number of the R. C. clergy in 1804—From Lake
   Superior to Lower Canada—Traveling horseback—Sometimes on foot—
   Hardships—Not a politician—Expending private means—Faithful
   services—Acknowledged—Roman Catholic U. E. Loyalists—First
   church in Ernesttown—McDonnell at Belleville—Rev. M. Brennan—
   First church in Belleville—What we have aimed at—The advantages
   to the English Church—The Reserves—In Lower Canada—Dr. Mountain—
   Number of English clergymen, 1793—A Bishop—Monopoly initiated—
   Intolerance and exclusion swept away—An early habit at Divine
   Service                                                           303


                             CHAPTER XXXIII.

 First Sabbath teaching—Hannah Bell, 1769—School established, 1781—
   Raikes—Wesley—First in United States—First in Canada—Cattrick—
   Moon—Common in 1824—First in Belleville—Turnbull—Cooper—
   Marshall—Prizes, who won them—Mr. Turnbull’s death—Intemperance—
   First temperance societies—Change of custom—Rum—Increasing
   intemperance—The tastes of the pioneers—Temperance, not
   teetotalism—First society in Canada—Drinks at raisings and bees—
   Society at Hallowell                                              308


                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

 The Six Nations—Faithful English Allies—Society for Propagation of
   Gospel—First missionary to Iroquois—John Thomas, first convert—
   Visit of Chiefs to England—Their names—Their portraits—Attention
   to them—Asking for instructor—Queen Anne—Communion Service—
   During the Rebellion—Burying the plate—Recovered—Division of the
   articles—Sacrilege of the Rebels—Re-printing Prayer Book—Mr.
   Stuart, missionary—The women and children—At Lachine—Attachment
   to Mr. Stuart—Touching instance—Mr. Stuart’s Indian sister—
   Church at Tyendinaga—School teacher to the Mohawk—John Bininger—
   First teacher—The Bininger family—The Moravian Society—Count
   Zinzendorf—Moravian church at New York—First minister, Abraham
   Bininger—Friend of Embury—An old account book—John Bininger
   journeying to Canada—Living at Bay Quinté—Removes to Mohawk
   village—Missionary spirit—Abraham Bininger’s letters—The
   directions—Children pleasing parents—“Galloping thoughts”—
   Christianity—Canadian Moravian missionaries—Moravian loyalists—
   What was sent from New York—“Best Treasure”—The “Dear Flock”—
   David Zieshager at the Thames—J. Bininger acceptable to Mohawk—
   Abraham Bininger desires to visit Canada—Death of Mrs. Bininger—
   “Tender mother”—Bininger and Wesley—“Garitson”—“Losee”—“Dunon”—
   Reconciled to Methodists—Pitying Losee—Losee leaving Canada—
   Ceases to be teacher—Appointing a successor—William Bell—The
   salary—The Mohawks don’t attend school—An improvement—The cattle
   may not go in School-house—The school discontinued                312


                              CHAPTER XXXV.

 The first Church at Tyendinaga grows old—A Council—Ask for
   assistance—Gov. Bagot—Laying first stone of new Church—The
   Inscription—The Ceremony—The new Church—Their Singing—The
   surrounding Scenery—John Hall’s Tomb—Pagan Indians—Red Jacket—
   His Speech—Reflection upon Christians—Indians had nothing to do
   with murdering the Saviour                                        319


                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

 Mississauga Indians—Father Picquet’s opinion—Remnant of a large
   tribe—Their land—Sold to Government—Rev. Wm. Case—John Sunday—A
   drunkard—Peter Jones—Baptising Indians—At a camp-meeting—Their
   department—Extract from Playter—William Beaver—Conversions—Jacob
   Peter—Severe upon white Christians—Their worship—The Father of
   Canadian missions—Scheme to teach Indians—Grape Island—Leasing
   Islands—The parties—“Dated at Belleville”—Constructing a
   village—The lumber—How obtained—Encamping on Grape Island—The
   method of instruction—The number—Agriculture—Their singing—
   School house—The teacher—Instructions of women—Miss Barnes—
   Property of Indians—Cost of improvements—A visit to Government—
   Asking for land—“Big Island”—Other favors—Peter Jacobs at New
   York—Extracts from Playter—Number of Indian converts, 1829—River
   Credit Indians—Indians removed to Alnwick                         323


                              DIVISION VI.

                    EARLY EDUCATION IN UPPER CANADA.


                             CHAPTER XXXVII.

 Education among the Loyalists—Effect of the war—No opportunity for
   Education—A few Educated—At Bath—A common belief—What was
   requisite for farming—Learning at home—The school teachers—Their
   qualifications—Rev. Mr. Stuart as a teacher—Academy at Kingston—
   First Canadian D.D.—Mr. Clark, Teacher, 1786—Donevan—Garrison
   Schools—Cockerell—Myers—Blaney—Michael—Atkins—Kingston, 1795—
   Lyons—Mrs. Cranahan—In Adolphustown—Morden—Faulkiner—The school
   books—Evening schools—McDougall—O’Reiley—McCormick—Flogging—
   Salisbury—James—Potter—Wright—Watkins—Gibson—Smith—Whelan—
   Articles of Agreement—Recollections—Boarding round—American
   teachers—School books—The letter Z                                329


                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

 Mr. Stuart’s school—Simcoe—State Church and College—Grammar
   schools—Hon. R. Hamilton—Chalmers—Strachan—Comes to Canada—
   Educational history—Arrival at Kingston—The pupils—Fees—Removes
   to Cornwall—Pupils follow—Strachan, a Canadian—Marries—Interview
   with Bishop Strachan—His disappointment—A stranger—What he
   forsook—300 pupils—Their success—Stay at Cornwall—Appointments
   at York—A lecturer—At Kingston—Member of Legislative Council—
   Politician—Clergy Reserves—Founds King’s College—The thirty-nine
   articles—Monopoly swept away—Voluntaryism—Founds Trinity
   College—Bishop Strachan in 1866—What he had accomplished—Those
   he tutored—Setting up a high standard—“Reckoner”—Sincerity—
   Legislation, 1797—Address to the King—Grammar Schools—Grant,
   1798—Board of Education—Endowment of King’s College—Its
   constitution—Changes—Upper Canada College—Endowment—“A spirit of
   improvement”—Gourlay—The second academy—At Ernesttown—The
   trustees—Bidwell—Charges—Contradicted—Rival school—Bidwell’s
   son—Conspicuous character—Bidwell’s death—Son removes to
   Toronto—Academy building, a barrack—Literary spirit of Bath—
   Never revived—York                                                334


                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

 Extract from Cooper—Educational institutions—Kingston—Queen’s
   College—Own’s Real Estate—Regiopolis College—Roman Catholic—
   Grammar School—Attendance—School houses—Library—Separate School—
   Private Schools—The Quaker School—William Penn—Upon the Hudson—
   Near Bloomfield—Origin of school—Gurnay—His offer—Management of
   school—The teaching—Mrs. Crombie’s school—Picton ladies’
   Academy—McMullen, proprietor—Teachers—Gentlemen’s department—
   Popular—The art of printing—In America—Book publishing—First in
   America—Books among the loyalists—Few—Passed around—Ferguson’s
   books—The Bible—Libraries at Kingston and Bath—Legislation—In
   Lower Canada—Reading room at Hallowell—Reserves for education—
   Upper Canada in respect to education—Praiseworthy—Common School
   system bill introduced 1841—Amended, 1846—Dr. Ryerson’s system—
   Unsurpassed                                                       341


                               CHAPTER XL.

 First Newspapers, 1457—Year, 66—English Newspapers—In America—In
   Canada—‘Gazette’—Founder—Papers in 1753—Quebec ‘Herald’—Montreal
   ‘Gazette’—‘Le Temps’—Quebec ‘Mercury’—Canadian ‘Courant’—‘Royal
   Gazette’—First in Newfoundland—‘U. C. Gazette’—First paper—
   Subscribers—Upper Canada ‘Guardian’—Wilcox—Mr. Thorpe—
   Opposition—Libel—Elected to Parliament—York Jail—Leader—In 1812—
   Deserted—York ‘Gazette’—Kingston ‘Gazette’—Only Paper—News sixty
   years ago—In Midland District—Rev. Mr. Miles—Pioneer of
   Journalism—His Birthplace—Learns the printing business—Mower—
   Montreal ‘Gazette’—Kendall—Partnership—To Kingston in 1810—The
   printing office—Kingston ‘Gazette’—Mr. Miles sells out—The
   concern purchased—Mr. Miles asked to be Editor—Their kindness—
   Gratitude—Second Volume—Extract from ‘Gazette’—The Price—
   Kingston ‘Chronicle’—Upper Canada ‘Herald’—‘Canadian Watchman’—
   Mr. Miles at Prescott—Returns to Kingston—Enters the Ministry—
   Loyal Subject—In 1812—On Duty—Archdeacon Stuart—Col. Cartwright—
   Contributors to ‘Gazette’—Our Thanks—A Watch—Faithfulness—“A
   Good Chance”—Subscribers at York—Kingston ‘Spectator’—‘Patriot’—
   ‘Argus’—‘Commercial Advertizer’—‘British Whig’—‘Chronicle’ and
   ‘News’—First Daily in Upper Canada—Paper Boxes—Brockville
   ‘Recorder’—A Reform paper—McLeod—Grenville ‘Gazette’—Prescott
   ‘Telegraph’—‘Christian Guardian’—Reform Journals                  350


                              CHAPTER XLI.

 First paper between Kingston and York—Hallowell “Free Press”—The
   Editor—“Recluse”—Fruitless efforts—Proprietor—Wooden press—Of
   iron—“Free Press,” independent—The “Traveller”—Press removed to
   Cobourg—“Prince Edward Gazette”—“Picton Gazette”—“Picton Sun”—
   “Picton Times”—“New Nation”—“Cobourg Star”—“Anglo-Canadian” at
   Belleville—The Editor—Price—The “Phœnix”—Slicer—“Canadian
   Wesleyan”—“Hastings Times”—The “Reformer”—The “Intelligencer”—
   George Benjamin—The “Victoria Chronicle”—“Hastings Chronicle”—
   Extract from Playter—“Colonial Advocate”—“Upper Canada Herald”—
   “Barker’s Magazine”—“Victoria Magazine”—Joseph Wilson—Mrs.
   Moodie—Sheriff Moodie—Pioneer in Canadian literature—Extract
   from Morgan—“Literary Garland”—“Roughing it in the Bush”—
   “Eclectic Magazine”—“Wilson’s Experiment”—“Wilson’s Canada
   Casket”—The “Bee” at Napanee—“Emporium”—The “Standard”—The
   “Reformer”—“North American”—“Ledger”—“Weekly Express”—“Christian
   Casket”—“Trenton Advocate”—“British Ensign”—The “Canadian Gem”—
   “Maple Leaf”—Papers in 1853—Canadian papers superior to
   American—Death at Boston—Berczy—Canadian idioms—Accent—Good
   English—Superstition—Home education—Fireside stories—Traditions   358


                              DIVISION VII.

              THE TERRITORY OF UPPER CANADA—THE BAY QUINTÉ.


                              CHAPTER XLII.

 The Indians—Their origin—Pre-historic Canada—Indian relics—
   Original inhabitants—Les Iroquois du nord—Original names—
   Peninsula of Upper Canada—Champlain exploring—Ascends the
   Ottawa—His route to Lake Nippissing—To Lake Huron—French river—
   The country—Georgian Bay—Lake Simcoe—Down the Trent—A grand
   trip—Bay Quinté and Lake Ontario discovered—War demonstration—
   Wintering at the Bay—A contrast—Roundabout way—Erroneous
   impressions                                                       366


                             CHAPTER XLIII.

 Name—Letter, “Daily News”—“Omega” Lines—The writer—Conjectures—
   Five Bays—Indian origin—Kentes—Villages—_Les Couis_—Modes of
   spelling—Canty—The occupants, 1783—Mississaugas—Origin—With the
   Iroquois—The _Souter_—Mississaugas, dark—At Kingston—Bay Quinté—
   Land bought—Reserves—Claim upon the islands—Wappoose Island—
   Indian agent—Indians hunting—Up the Sagonaska—Making sugar—
   Peaceable—To Kingston for presents                                374


                              CHAPTER XLIV.

 Appearance—Mouth of Bay—Length—The Peninsula of Prince Edward—
   Width of Bay—Long Reach—Course of Bay—The High Shore—Division of
   bay—Eastern, central, western—Taking a trip—Through the Reach—A
   picture—A quiet spot—Lake on the mountain—A description—Montreal
   Gazette—Beautiful view—Rhine, Hudson—Contrast—Classic ground—A
   sketch—Birth place of celebrated Canadians—Hagerman—A leading
   spirit—Sir J. A. McDonald—Reflections—A log house—Relics of the
   past—Lesson of life—In the lower bay—Reminiscences—The front—
   Cradle of the province—Shore of Marysburgh—In the Western Bay—
   Cuthbertson—Up the bay—A battle ground—Devil’s Hill—In the
   depths—Prosperity—Geological supposition—Head of bay—The past     383


                              CHAPTER XLV.

 The “Big Bay”—Musketoe Bay—Mohawk Bay—Hay Bay—“Eastern Bay”—Site
   of Ancient Kentes—The name—Old Families—An Accident, 1819—
   Eighteen Drowned—Extract from Playter—Searching for the Bodies—
   Burying the dead—Picton Bay—Appearance—The “Grand Bay”—Upper
   Gap—Lower Gap—Kingston Bay—A Picture—Recollections—A Contract—
   Ship Yards—Extract from Cooper—Inland Lakes                       395


                              CHAPTER XLVa.

 Islands—Possessed by Indians—The “Thousand Islands”—Carleton
   Island—History of Island—During the rebellion—Wolfe Island—The
   name—Howe Island—Old name—County of Ontario—Garden Island—
   Horseshoe Island—Sir Jeffry Amherst—The size—Indian name—
   “Tontine”—Johnson’s Island—The Island won—Present owner—First
   settler—The three brothers—Small Islands—Hare Island—Nut Island—
   Wappoose Island—Indian rendezvous—Captain John’s Island—
   Bartering—Hunger Island—Big Island—First settlers—Huff’s Island—
   Paul Huff—Grape Island—Hog Island—Smaller Islands—Mississauga
   Island—A tradition—The carrying place—Its course—Original
   survey—History—American prisoners—Col. Wilkins                    402


                             DIVISION VIII.

            THE FIRST TEN TOWNSHIPS IN THE MIDLAND DISTRICT.


                              CHAPTER XLVI.

 The French—Their policy—Trading posts—Cahiaque—Variations—Name of
   river—Foundation of Fort Frontenac—A change—Site of old fort—La
   Salle’s petition—A Seigniory—Governors visiting—War Expedition—
   Fort destroyed—Rebuilt—Colonial wars—Taking of Fort Oswego—
   Frontenac taken—End of French domination                          410


                             CHAPTER XLVII.

 Cooper’s Essay—Loyalists naming places—King’s Town—Queen’s Town—
   Niagara—Spanish names—Cataraqui from 1759 to 1783—Desolation—The
   rebellion—Station, Carleton Island—Settling—Refugees at New
   York—Michael Grass—Prisoner at Cataraqui—From New York to
   Canada—Captain Grass takes possession of first township—First
   landholders—A letter by Captain Grass—Changes—Surveying forts
   and harbors—Report to Lord Dorchester—Kingston, _versus_
   Carleton Island—The defenses—Troops—King’s township—First
   settlers—“Plan of township No. 1”—First owners of town lots—
   Names—Settlers upon the front—First inhabitants of Kingston—A
   naval and military station—The Commodore—Living of old—Kingston
   in _last century_—New fortifications                              419


                             CHAPTER XLVIII.

 The situation of Kingston—Under military influence—Monopolist—
   Early history of legislation—In 1810—Gourlay’s statement—Police—
   Modern Kingston—Lord Sydenham—Seat of government—Perambulating—
   Surrounding country—Provisions—An appeal for Kingston as
   capital—Barriefield—Pittsburgh—Building of small crafts—Famous—
   Roads—Waterloo—Cemetery—Portsmouth—Kingston Mill—Little
   Cataraqui—Collinsby—Quantity of land—Early and influential
   inhabitants—Post masters—“Honorable men”—Deacon, Macaulay,
   Cartwright, Markland, Cummings, Smiths, Kerby—Allen McLean,
   first lawyer—A gardener—Sheriff McLean—“Chrys” Hagerman—Customs—
   Sampson, shooting a smuggler—Hagerman, M.P.P.—Removes to Toronto  430


                              CHAPTER XLIX.

 The second town—Ernest’s town—King George—His children—Settlers of
   Ernesttown—Disbanded soldiers—Johnson’s regiment—Major Rogers’
   corps—The “Roll”—Number—By whom enlisted—An old book—Township
   surveyed—Settling—Traveling—Living in tents—A change—Officers—
   Names—Occupants of lots—Mill Creek—The descendants—Quality of
   land—Village—The settlers in 1811—The main road—Incorporation of
   Bath—Trading—Fairfield—The library—Bath by Gourlay—Bath of the
   present—Bath _versus_ Napanee—In 1812—American Fleet—Wonderful
   achievement—Safe distance from shore—Third township—
   Fredericksburgh—After Duke of Sussex—Surveyed by Kotte—A promise
   to the disbanded soldiers—Johnson—Fredericksburgh additional—A
   dispute—Quantity of land—Extract from Mrs. Moodie—Reserve for
   village—Second surveys                                            439


                               CHAPTER L.

 The fourth township—Adolphustown—After Duke of Cambridge—Quantity
   of Land—Survey—Major VanAlstine—Refugees—From New York—Time—
   Voyage—Their Fare—Names—Arrived—Hagerman’s Point—In Tents—First
   Settler—Town Plot—Death—The Burial—A Relic—Commissary—Dispute of
   Surveyors—The Settlers—All things in common—An aged man—Golden
   rule—Old map—Names—Islands—The township—Price of land—First
   “town meeting”—Minutes—The Officers Record—Inhabitants, 1794—Up
   to 1824—First Magistrates—Centre of Canada—Court Held in Barn—In
   Methodist Chapel—“A Den of Thieves”—Court House erected—
   Adolphustown Canadians—Members of Parliament—The Courts—Where
   first held—Hagerman—Travelers tarrying at Adolphustown            448


                               CHAPTER LI.

 Marysburgh—Origin—Once part of a Seigniory—Survey—Hessians—Old
   map—The lots—Officers of the 84th Regt.—Original landowners—
   Indian Point—McDonnell’s Cove—Grog Bay—“Accommodating Bay”—
   “Gammon Point”—Black River—“Long Point”—Reserves—Course pursued
   by the Surveyor—Number of Hessians—Their sufferings—Dark tales—
   Discontented—Returning to Hesse—A suitable location—Not U. E.
   Loyalists—Received land gratis—Family land—Their habits—Capt.
   McDonnell—Squire Wright—Sergt. Harrison—The Smith’s—Grant to
   Major VanAlstine—Beautiful Scenery—Smith’s bay—“The Rock”—Over a
   precipice                                                         458


                              CHAPTER LII.

 Sixth township—Name—Survey—Convenient for settlement—First
   settlers—A remote township—What was paid for lots—“Late
   Loyalists”—Going to Mill—Geological formation—Along the fronts—
   High shore—Grassy Point—Its history—Marsh front—Central place—
   Stickney’s Hill—Foster’s Hill—Northport—Trade—James Cotter—
   Gores—Demerestville—The name—“Sodom”—First records—Township
   meetings—The Laws of the township—Divided into parishes—Town
   clerk—Officers—The poor—The committee—Inhabitants, 1824—Fish
   Lake—Seventh Township—The name—Survey by Kotte—At the Carrying
   Place—Surveyor’s assistant—No early records—First settlers        465


                              CHAPTER LIII.

 Prince Edward—The name—Rich land—Size of peninsula—Shape—Small
   Lakes—Sand hills—The Ducks—Gibson’s rock—The past—First settler—
   Col. Young—Prospecting—Discovery of East Lake—West Lake—Moving
   in—Settlers in 1800—East Lake—Capt. Richardson—“Prince Edward
   Division Bill”—Office seekers—Township of Hallowell—The name—
   Formation of Township—First records 1798—The officers—The laws—
   Magistrates—Picton—Its origin—Hallowell village—Dr. Austin—Gen.
   Picton—His monument—Naming the villages—A contest—The Court
   house—An offer—Enterprise—Proposed steamboat—Churches—Rev. Mr.
   Macaulay—Rev. Mr. Fraser—Rev. Mr. Lalor                           476


                              CHAPTER LIV.

 Eighth Township—Sidney—Name—Survey—Settlement, 1787—Letter from
   Ferguson—Trading—Barter—Potatoes—Building—Cows—No salt to spare—
   First settlers—Myers—Re-surveying—James Farley—Town Clerk at
   first meeting—William Ketcheson—Gilbert’s Cove—Coming to the
   front—River Trent—Old names—Ferry—Bridge—Trenton—Its settlement—
   Squire Bleeker                                                    485


                               CHAPTER LV.

 Ninth town—Thurlow—Name—When surveyed—Front—Indian burying ground—
   Owner of first lots—Chisholm—Singleton—Myers—Ferguson—Indian
   traders—To Kingston in batteau—Singleton’s death—Ferguson’s
   death—Distress of the families—Settled, 1789—Ascending the
   Moira—Taking possession of land—Fifth concession—John Taylor—
   Founder of Belleville—Myers buying land—Settlers upon the front—
   Municipal record—Town officers—1798—Succeeding years—Canifton,
   its founder—Settling—The diet—Building mill—Road—River Moira—
   Origin of name—Earl Moira—Indian name—Indian offering—
   “Cabojunk”—Myers’ saw-mill—Place not attractive—First bridge—The
   flouring-mill—Belleville—Indian village—Myers’ Creek—Formation
   of village—First Inn—Permanent bridge—Bridge Street—In 1800—
   Growth—A second mill—McNabb’s—Sad death—Captain McIntosh—Petrie—
   Inhabitants, 1809—Dr. Spareham—Naming of Belleville—Bella Gore—
   By Gore in council—Petition—Extract from Kingston Gazette—
   Surveying reserve—Wilmot—Mistakes—Granting of lots—Conditions—
   Board of Police—Extent of Belleville—Muddy streets—Inhabitants
   in 1824—Court-house—First Court, Quarter Sessions—Belleville in
   1836                                                              489


                              CHAPTER LVI.

 Tenth township—Richmond—Origin—Quantity of land—Shores of Mohawk
   Bay—Village on south shore—Original land holders—Names—Napanee—
   The falls—The mill—Salmon River—Indian name—Source of Napanee
   River—Its course—Colebrook—Simcoe Falls—Name—Clarke’s Mills—
   Newburgh—Academy—The settlers—“Clarkville”—No records             503


                              DIVISION IX.

                  THE EARLY GOVERNMENT OF UPPER CANADA.


                              CHAPTER LVII.

 Military rule—Imperial Act, 1774—French Canada—Refugees—Military
   Government in Upper Canada—New Districts—Lunenburgh—
   Mecklenburgh—Nassau—Hesse—The Judges—Duncan—Cartwright—Hamilton—
   Robertson—Court in Mecklenburgh—Civil Law—Judge Duncan—Judge
   Cartwright—Punishment inflicted—First execution—New Constitution
   of Quebec—1791, Quebec Bill passed—Inhabitants of Upper Canada    505


                             CHAPTER LVIII.

 Simcoe—His arrival in Canada—Up the St. Lawrence—An old house—“Old
   Breeches’ River”—Simcoe’s attendants—The old veterans—“Good old
   cause”—“Content”—Toasting—Old officers—Executive Council of
   Upper Canada—First entry—Simcoe inducted to office—Religious
   ceremony—“The proceedings”—Those present—Oath of office—
   Organization of Legislative Council—Assembly—Issuing writs for
   elections—Members of Council—Simcoe’s difficulty—At Kingston—
   Division of Province—The Governor’s officers—Rochfoucault upon
   Simcoe—Simcoe’s surroundings—His wife—Opening Parliament in
   1795—Those present—Retinue—Dress—The nineteen counties—Simcoe’s
   designs—Visit of the Queen’s father—At Kingston—Niagara—A war
   dance                                                             509


                              CHAPTER LIX.

 General Hunter—Peter Russell—Francis Gore, 1806—Alex. Grant—Brock—
   1812—United States declare war—Prompt action—Parliament—
   Proclamation—The issue—Second proclamation—General Hull—His
   proclamation—Bombast and impertinence—The Indians—Proclamation
   answered—Hull a prisoner—Michigan conquered—To Niagara—At
   Queenston heights—“Push on York Volunteers”—Death of Brock—
   McDonnell—War of 1812, the Americans—Extract from Merritt—What
   Canadians did—Brock’s monument—General Sheaffe—General Drummond—
   Invading the States—What Canada will do—Lord Sydenham—A tribute
   by Dr. Ryerson—Union of the Provinces                             517


                               CHAPTER LX.

 Kingston—First capital—First act of government—Niagara—Selecting
   the capital—Niagara in 1788—Carrying place—Landing place—Newark—
   In 1795—Mr. Hamilton—The inhabitants—Little York—The Don—The
   Harbor—Survey—De la Trenche—London—Inhabitants of the Don—Yonge
   street, a military road—Governor at York—Castle Frank—York in
   1798—The Baldwins—In 1806—Buffalo—York, 1813—Taken by the
   Americans—The Combatants—Toronto—“Muddy York”—A monument
   required                                                          526


                              CHAPTER LXI.

 Parliament—Simcoe’s Proclamation—Nineteen counties formed—Names
   and boundaries—First elections—Names of members—Officers of the
   House—A Quaker member—Chaplain—Meeting of Parliament—The Throne,
   a camp stool—Address—To both houses—Closing address—Acts passed—
   Simcoe’s confidential letters—A contrast—A blending—2nd Session—
   The Acts—Quarter Sessions—3rd, 4th, 5th Sessions—New division of
   Province—1798—Modes of punishment—Burning the hand—Whipping—
   Salaries of officers—Revenue first year—The members of
   Parliament—Education—Offering for Parliament—A “Junius”—Early
   administration of justice—“Heaven-born lawyers”—First
   magistrates                                                       533


                               DIVISION X.

                   THE EARLY MILITIA OF UPPER CANADA.


                              CHAPTER LXII.

 Militia Act, 1792—Simcoe—No faith in the Americans—His views—
   Military Roads—Division of Districts—Military purposes—The
   officers—Legislation—The expenses—Repeated Legislation—
   Aggressive spirit—The Enrolment—Hastings Battalion—“Something
   brewing”—List of Officers—Col. Ferguson—Col. Bell—Leeds Militia—
   Officers’ clothing—The Midland District—Prince Edward—Training
   Places                                                            544


                             CHAPTER LXIII.

 In 1812, around Bay Quinté—The declaration of war—The news at
   Kingston—The call to arms—Hastings—Events at Kingston—In 1813—
   Attack upon Sacket’s Harbor—Oswego—American fleet before
   Kingston—Royal George—Kingston prepared—Chrysler’s farm—A
   “Postscript”—Along the St. Lawrence—Ribaldry—The Commissary—
   Capt. Wilkins—Quakers—Rate of pay—American prisoners—The
   Wounded—Surgeons, Dougal, Meacham—Jonathan Phillips—Militiamen’s
   reward—Militia orders—Parliamentary grants                        551


                              CHAPTER LXIV.

 The Six Nations in 1812—American animus—“Manifest Destiny”—Mohawk
   Indians—A right to defend their homes—Inconsistency—American
   savages—Extract from Playter—Brock’s proclamation—Indian
   character, conduct, eloquence—Deserters in 1812—Few of them—
   Court-martials—The attempts at conquest by the Americans—The
   numbers—Result of war—Canadians saved the country—And can do so—
   Fraternal kindness                                                564


                              DIVISION XI.

                        ADVANCE OF CIVILIZATION.


                              CHAPTER LXV.

 Canada’s first step in civilization—Slavery in America—By whom
   introduced—False charge—Slavery in Canada—History—Imperial Acts—
   Legislation in Canada—The several clauses—In Lower Canada—
   Justice Osgood—Slavery at the Rebellion—Among the U. E.
   Loyalists—Those who held slaves—Descendants of the slaves—“A
   British slave”—“For sale”—“Indian slave”—Upper Canada’s Record—
   Compared with the States—Liberty—Why the United States abolished
   slavery—Honor to whom honor is due                                569


                              CHAPTER LXVI.

 Returns to the Pioneer—Bay Region—Garden of Canada—Clogs—False
   views of settlers—Result—New blood—Good example—Anecdote—The
   “Family Compact”—Partiality—Origin of the _Compact_—Their
   conduct—The evil they did—A proposed Canadian Aristocracy—What
   it would have led to—What may come—“Peter Funks”                  580


                             CHAPTER LXVII.

 Agriculture—Natural Products—Rice—Ginseng—Orchards—Plows—Reaping—
   Flax—Legislation—Agricultural Society organized by Simcoe—A
   Snuff Box—Fogies—Silver—Want of help—Midland District taking the
   lead—Societies—Legislative help—Prince Edward—Pearl Ashes—
   Factories—Tanneries—Breweries, Carding Machines—Paper—Lumber—
   First vehicles—Sleighs—Waggons—Home-made—Roads—First Public
   Conveyances—Stages—Fare—Building Greater—Sawing Mills introduced
   by the Dutch—First Brick Building—Myers’ House—Its past history—
   Furniture from Albany—Currency—Paper Money—Banks—First
   Merchants—Barter—Pedlars—On the Bay                               587


                             CHAPTER LXVIII.

 Steam vessels—Crossing the Atlantic in 1791—First Steam Vessel—
   Hudson—The second on the St. Lawrence—First across the Atlantic—
   In Upper Canada—_Frontenac_—Built in Ernesttown—The Builders—
   Finkle’s Point—Cost of Vessel—Dimensions—Launched—First Trip—
   Captain McKenzie—‘_Walk-in-the-Water_’—_Queen Charlotte_—How
   Built—Upon Bay Quinté—Capt. Dennis—First year—Death of Dennis—
   Henry Gilderslieve—What he did—Other Steamboats—Canals—First in
   Upper Canada—Welland Canal—Desjardin—Rideau—Its object—Col. By—A
   proposed Canal—Railroads—The first in the world—Proposed Railway
   from Kingston to Toronto, 1846—In Prince Edward District—
   Increase of Population—Extract from Dr. Lillie—Comparison with
   the United States—Favorable to Canada—False Cries—The French—
   Midland District, 1818                                            599


                              DIVISION XII.

        THE UNITED EMPIRE LOYALISTS—THE FATHERS OF UPPER CANADA.


                              CHAPTER LXIX.

 Definition—A division—Their principles—Our position—Ancestry—
   Dutch—Puritans—Huguenots—New Rochelle—English writers—Talbot—
   Falsehoods—Canadian and English ancestry—Howison—Maligner—
   Gourlay’s reply—Palatines—Old names                               616


                              CHAPTER LXX.

 Character—Hospitality—At home—Fireside—Visitors—Bees—Raisings—
   Easter Eggs—Dancing—Hovington House—Caste—Drinks—Horse-racing—
   Boxing—Amusements—La Crosse—Duels—Patriotism—Annexation—Freedom—
   Egotism—The Loyalists—Instances—Longevity—Climate of Canada—A
   quotation—Long lived—The children—The present race—A
   nationality—Comparison—“U. E. Loyalist”—Their Privileges—Order
   of Council—Dissatisfaction                                        624


                              CHAPTER LXXI.

 Notice of a Few—Booth—Brock—Burritt—Cotter—Cartwright—Conger—Cole—
   Dempsey—Detlor—Fraser—Finkle—Fisher—Fairfield—Grass—Gamble—
   Hagerman—Johnson’s—“Bill” Johnson—Macaulay—The Captive,
   Christian Moore—Parliament—Morden—Roblins—Simon—Van Alstine—
   Wallbridge—Chrysler—White—Wilkins—Stewart—Wilson—Metcalf—Jayne—
   McIntosh—Bird—Gerow—Vankleek—Perry—Sir William Johnson’s
   children                                                          642


                                APPENDIX.

 Roll of the 2nd Battalion King’s Royal Regiment                     667

 The Governors of Canada                                             670

 Indian Goods                                                        671




                                ERRATA.


  Page 29, 12th line from top, instead of “1859,” read “1759.”

  Page 80, 4th line from bottom, instead of “are equally,” read “were
    equally.”

  Page 102, 16th line from bottom, instead of “removed to the town,”
    read “to the fifth town.”

  Page 104, instead of “Hodgins,” read “Hudgins.”

  Page 104, 16th line from top, instead of “1859,” read “1809.”

  Page 130, 4th line, 2nd paragraph, instead of “South,” read “North.”

  Page 138, heading of page should be “Voyaging.”

  Page 192, bottom line, instead of “dispersed,” read “dispossessed.”

  Page 257, 19th line, “gloomy,” read “glowing.”

  Page 288, 19th line, “glowing a picture,” should have “of”
    following.

  Page 293, instead of “Wesleyanism,” read “Wesleyans.”

  Page 371, 14th line, instead of “1815,” read “1615.”

  Page 437, 10th line from bottom, instead of “Lawer,” read “Lawyer.”

  Page 585, 15th line, after “Governor,” read _they were generally_.

  Page 596, 3rd line, after “often,” read _inferior_.




                                HISTORY

                                   OF

                    THE SETTLEMENT OF UPPER CANADA,

              WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE BAY OF QUINTÉ.




                             INTRODUCTION.




                               CHAPTER I.
                  A SKETCH OF FRANCO-CANADIAN HISTORY.

  CONTENTS—Antiquarianism—Records of the Early Nations—Tradition—The
    Press—The Eastern World—The Western World—Importance of History—
    Columbus—Colonization—Canada—America—Cartier—French Canadian
    writers—Cartier’s first visit—Huguenots—Cartier’s second visit—
    Jean Francois—Sir George E. Cartier—Establishment of the Fur
    Trade—Champlain—Discovery of Lake Ontario—Bay of Quinté—Quebec
    founded—First fighting with Indians—First taking of Quebec by the
    British—Returned to France—The Recollets and Jesuits—Death of
    Champlain—Foundation of Montreal—Emigration from France—The
    Carignan Regiment—DeCourcelle—Proposal to found a Fort at Lake
    Ontario—Frontenac—Fort at Cataraqui—La Salle—Fort at Niagara—First
    vessel upon the Lakes—Its fate—Death of La Salle, the first
    settler of Upper Canada—Founder of Louisiana—Discoverer of the
    mouth of the Mississippi.


There exists, as one characteristic of the nineteenth century, an
earnest desire on the part of many to recall, and, in mind, to live over
the days and years that are past; and many there are who occupy more or
less of their time in collecting the scattered relics of bygone days—in
searching among the faded records of departed years, to eagerly catch
the golden sands of facts which cling to legendary tales, and to
interpret the hieroglyphics which the footsteps of time have well-nigh
worn away. To this fact many a museum can bear ample testimony. The
antiquarian enjoys intense satisfaction in his labors of research, and
when he is rewarded by the discovery of something new, he is but
stimulated to renewed exertion. In the old world rich fields have been,
and are now being explored; and in the new laborers are not wanting.

Since the days when man first trod the virgin soil of this globe, he has
ever been accustomed to preserve the more important events of his life,
and, by tradition, to hand them down to his children’s children; and
likewise has it been with communities and nations. Every people who are
known to have occupied a place upon the earth, have left some indication
of their origin, and the part they played in the world’s great drama. In
recent days, facts pertaining to nations and particular individuals are
preserved in all their amplitude, through the agency of the Press. But
in former centuries, only a few symbols, perhaps rudely cut in solid
stone, commemorated events of the most important kind. The historians of
Eastern nations have had to look far back into the misty past, to learn
the facts of their birth and infant days; while the dark days of
barbarism hang as a thick veil to obstruct the view. The middle ages,
like a destructive flood, swept away, to a great extent, the records
previously in existence. But out of the _debris_ has been exhumed many a
precious relic; and the stone and the marble thus obtained, have
supplied valuable material on which to base trustworthy history.

In recording the events which belong to the Western world—this broad
American continent—the historian has far less of toil and research to
undergo. It is true the native Indian, who once proudly ruled the vast
extent of the new world, has a history yet undeveloped. An impenetrable
cloud obscures the facts appertaining to his advent upon this continent.
The nature of his origin is buried in the ocean of pre-historic time.
But in reference to the occupation of America by Europeans, the
subjugation and gradual extermination of the Indian, the life of the
pioneer, the struggles for political independence, the rapid growth and
development of nations; all these results, embraced within the space of
a few centuries, are freely accessible to the American historian.

The importance of history cannot be questioned; the light it affords is
always valuable, and, if studied aright, will supply the student with
material by which he may qualify himself for any position in public
life. In the following chapters it is intended to draw attention more
particularly to the new world, and to examine a few pages in the history
of North America.

In the absence of any data upon which to base statements relating to the
aborigines, we may say the history of the new world begins with the
memorable and enterprising adventures of Christopher Columbus, in 1492;
although there is evidence that America had been previously visited by
the people of Northern Europe, about the year 1000. The steady flow of
emigrants which commenced a century later, from the old world to the
new, of bold, energetic people, is a spectacle of grand import.

Almost every nation of Europe has contributed to the colonization of
America. All, however, were not at first actuated by the same motives in
braving the perils of the deep—then far greater than at the present day—
and the dangers of the wilderness. The Spaniards were searching for the
precious gold. The English desired to acquire territory; the Dutch
sought to extend their commerce; and the French, it is said, were, at
first, intent only on converting the pagan Indians to Christianity.—
(Garneau.) Space will not permit to trace the course of events in
connection with the first settlements in America; the history of the
several colonies, the bloody Indian wars, the contentions between the
different colonizing people, the rebellions of the colonies and their
achievement of independence. We shall mainly confine ourselves to those
events which led to, and accompanied the settlement of Upper Canada.

Canada, the coast of which was first discovered by John Cabot, in 1497,
is an honorable name, far more so than America. It has been a cause of
complaint with some that the United States should appropriate to their
exclusive use the name of America. But it is quite right they should
enjoy it. It is after a superficial impostor, Amerigo Vespucci, who
availed himself of the discoveries of Columbus, to vaunt himself into
renown.

The word Canada is most probably derived from an Iroquois word,
signifying Cabin. It has been stated on the authority of a Castilian
tradition, that the word was of Spanish origin. The Spaniards, looking
after gold, ascended the St. Lawrence, but failing to find the precious
metal, exclaimed “Aca nada,” (Here is nothing.) The natives hearing the
land thus called, when Europeans again visited them, upon being asked
the name of their country, replied “Canada,” in imitation of the
Spaniards. Again, Father Hennepin asserts that the Spaniards, upon
leaving the land, gave it the appellation “El Cape di nada,” (Cape
nothing,) which in time became changed into Canada. But Charlevoix, in
his “Histoire de la Nouvelle France,” says that Canada is derived from
the Iroquois word “Kannata,” pronounced Canada, which signifies “love of
cabins.” Duponcion, in the “Transactions of the Philosophical Society of
Philadelphia,” founds his belief of the Indian origin of the name
Canada, on the fact that, in the translation of the Gospel by St.
Matthew into the Mohawk tongue, by Brant, the word Canada is always made
to signify a village. Taking the whole matter into consideration, there
appears the best of reasons to conclude that Canada, a name now properly
bestowed upon the Dominion, is of Indian origin, and signifies the
country of a people who are accustomed to live in villages or permanent
cabins, instead of in tents and constantly changing from one place to
another.

The history of French Canada is one of unusual interest—from the time
Jacques Cartier, in 1534, with two vessels of less than 60 tons burden
each, and 122 men in all, entered for the first time the Gulf of St.
Lawrence—up to the present day. It was not until the first decade of the
17th century, nearly a hundred years after Cartier first landed, that
successful colonization by the French was accomplished. Nevertheless,
Canada has as early a place among the colonies of America as New
Netherlands or Virginia, which are the oldest States of the neighboring
Union. Virginia was planted in 1608; New Netherlands (now New York,) was
not settled until 1614. Prior to that, in 1609, Hudson had ascended the
river now bearing his name, as far as the present site of Albany; but at
the same time the intrepid Champlain was traversing the wilds of the
more northern part of the territory to the south of Lake Ontario.

Although the history of New France is one of great interest, yet, in
this local history, space can only be allowed to glance at the course of
events in connection therewith. But French Canada is not in danger of
suffering for want of historians to pen the events of her life. Already
enthusiastic countrymen have done justice to the patriotism, valor and
ability of the Franco-Canadian race. And, at the present time, earnest
workers are in the field, searching among the records of the past,
stowed away in Paris, with the view of making known all that can be
learned of their sires. We find no fault with the intense love they bear
to their language, their laws, their religion, their institutions
generally. Such is characteristic of a high-spirited race; and, as
common Canadians we rejoice to have so devoted a people to lay with us
the foundation of our northern Dominion.

It has already been said that Jacques Cartier first landed in Canada in
1534. At this time the pent up millions of Europe, lying in a state of
semi-bondage, were prepared to strike off the chains which had hitherto
bound them, both in mind and body, to the select ones, who claimed that
prerogative, as of Divine origin, and to avail themselves of the vast
territory which Columbus had recovered from oblivion. Then was the
future pregnant with events of the most startling nature—events fraught
with interests of the most colossal magnitude. While America was to open
up a new field for active labor, wherein all might pluck wealth, the art
of printing, so soon to be in active operation, was to emancipate the
mind, and cast broadly the seeds of universal liberty. Already was being
broken the fallow ground, in the rich soil of which was to germinate the
great truths of science.

In May, 1535, Cartier set out on his second voyage to the New World, in
“La Grande Hermion,” a vessel of 110 tons, accompanied by two other
vessels of smaller size, with 110 men altogether. Reaching Labrador in
July, he on St. Laurence Day entered St. John’s River; and thus arose
the name of St. Lawrence, afterward applied to the mighty river now
bearing that name. Guided by two natives, Cartier ascended the St.
Lawrence as far as the Isle d’Orleans, where he was received by the
Indians in a friendly spirit. Cartier having determined to stay the
winter, moored his vessels in the St. Charles River, with the Indian
village of Stadaconé upon the heights above him. The same autumn he
ascended with a small party to visit Hochelaga, now Montreal. Here he
found a considerable village of fifty wooden dwellings, each fifty paces
long, and twelve and fifteen broad. This village was fortified. An aged
and withered chief accorded Cartier a distinguished reception; after
which Cartier ascended to the top of the mountain, to which he gave the
name Mont Real, or Royal Mount, a name subsequently given to the village
which has become the commercial capital of the Dominion, and which is
destined to rival even New York.

Cartier’s stay in Canada during the winter was attended with much
distress, and the loss by death of twenty-six of his men; while most of
the rest were almost dying, being, it is related, saved by the medical
skill of the natives. In the Spring he returned to France, carrying with
him several Indians. It was five years later before another visit was
made to Canada, owing to the civil and religious wars existing in
France. It was the cruel laws enacted and put in force at this time in
France that expatriated so many noble Huguenots who were dispersed
throughout Great Britain, Ireland, and afterward America, the blood of
whom yet flows in the veins of many of the descendants of the loyal
refugees from the rebelling States of America. In the Summer of 1541
Cartier again set sail for the St. Lawrence. He was to have been
accompanied by one Jean Francois de la Roque, a brave and faithful
servant of the king, to whom had been conceded the privilege of raising
a body of volunteers to form a permanent settlement upon the St.
Lawrence. But unforeseen difficulties prevented his sailing until the
following year. In the meantime Cartier, to whom had been given command,
with five ships, had, after a tedious passage, reached Canada, and
ascended to Quebec. The intending colonizers immediately went ashore and
commenced the work of clearing the land for cultivation. The winter was
passed in safety, but in the spring, tired of waiting for the Governor,
who ought to have followed him the year before, and discovering signs of
hostility on the part of the savages, he determined to return to France.
So he embarked all the men and set sail. Before he had reached the
Atlantic, however, he met la Roque, with some two hundred more
colonists, who desired Cartier to return, but he continued his course to
France. Jean Francois landed safely at Quebec. In the autumn he sent
home two vessels for provisions for the following year, while he
prepared to undergo the severity of the coming winter, a season that
brought severe trials, with the death of fifty of his men. The following
year he set out with seventy men to seek fresh discoveries up the river,
but he was unsuccessful. France, again immersed in war, paid no
attention to the request for succor in the New World, but ordered
Cartier to bring back the Governor, whose presence as a soldier was
desired. With him returned all the colonists. Thus the attempt to
establish a settlement upon the St. Lawrence failed, not, however,
through any want of courage, or ability on the part of Cartier, the
founder of Canada. The name thus immortalized and which disappeared from
the history of Canada for many years, again occupies a place. And, Sir
George Etienne Cartier, of to-day, although not a lineal descendant of
the first Cartier, holds a position of distinction; and, as one who has
assisted in effecting the Confederation of the provinces, his name will
ever stand identified, as his great predecessor and namesake, with the
history of our Canada.

In 1549, Jean Francois a second time, set out for Canada with his
brother, and others, but they all perished on the way. This disaster
prevented any further immediate attempt at settlement in Canada.

The commencement of the seventeenth century found France again in a
state suitable to encourage colonial enterprize, and she, in common with
other European nations was directing her attention to the yet unexplored
New World. At this time one Pont-Gravé, a merchant of St. Malo,
conceived the idea of establishing a fur trade between Canada and
France; and to this end he connected himself with one Chauvin, a person
of some influence at court, who succeeded in obtaining the appointment
of governor to Canada, with a monopoly of the peltry traffic. These two
adventurers, with a few men, set out for Canada, but arrived in a state
of destitution. Chauvin died, while the others were preserved alive by
the kindness of the natives. Chauvin was succeeded by De Chastes,
Governor of Dieppe; and Captain Samuel Champlain, who had distinguished
himself as a naval officer, was appointed to command an expedition about
to proceed to the New World.

The name of Champlain is indelibly fixed upon the pages of Canadian
history. It was he who traversed trackless forests, ascended the most
rapid rivers, discovered the Lake of Ontario, by way of Bay Quinté, and
gave his name to another lake. It was in 1603 that Champlain set out
upon his voyage. He had but three small vessels, it is said, of no more
than twelve or fifteen tons burden. He ascended as far as Sault St.
Louis, and made careful observations. He prepared a chart, with which he
returned to France. The king was well pleased with his report, and De
Chaste having died, Governor de Monts succeeded him, to whom was
granted, exclusively, the fur trade in Canada. But their operations were
confined, at first, to Acadia, now Nova Scotia. In 1607 De Monts
abandoned Acadia and directed his attention to Canada. Obtaining from
the king a renewal of his privileges, he appointed Champlain his
lieutenant, whom he despatched with two vessels. The party arrived at
Stadaconé, on the 3rd of July. The party commenced clearing land where
the lower town of Quebec now stands, and erected cabins in which to
live. Having determined to make this the head-quarters of his
establishment, he proceeded to build a fort. Thus was founded the
ancient capital of Canada upon the Gibraltar of America. The powers
granted to Champlain were ample, whereby he was enabled to maintain
order and enforce law. During the well nigh one hundred years that had
passed away since Cartier attempted to colonize, great changes, it would
seem, had taken place among the Indians. Altogether different tribes
occupied the Laurentian valley; and the former Indian villages of
Stadoconé, and Hochelaga had been entirely destroyed, Champlain found
the Indians of this place, the Algonquins, at enmity with other tribes
to the west, the Iroquois. The Algonquins were glad to form an alliance
with him against their long standing enemy. It suited the purpose of
Champlain to thus ally himself; but the policy may well be questioned;
at all events it inaugurated a long course of warfare between the French
and the Iroquois, which only terminated when Canada became a British
dependency. He, no doubt, was ignorant of the great power and
superiority of the confederated five nations which formed the Iroquois
people. The first encounter between Champlain and the Indians took place
the 29th of July, 1609, by the lake which now bears his name, which had
been known by the Indians as Lake Corlar. The Iroquois, who had never
before seen the use of fire-arms, were naturally overwhelmed with
surprise at this new mode of warfare, by which three of their chiefs
were suddenly stricken to the earth; and they beat a hasty retreat,
leaving their camp to the pillage of the enemy. The following year
Champlain again set out with his Indian allies, and a second time drove
them from the well contested field by the use of fire-arms. It was on
this occasion he first met the Hurons, which were to become such fast
allies, until almost exterminated. But the time came when the Iroquois,
supplied with arms and trained to their use, by the Dutch, became better
able to cope with the French. In 1612 Count de Soissons succeeded De
Monts. Champlain, who was again engaged in war, was at the same time
endeavoring to advance the peltry traffic, a trade that had many
vicissitudes, owing to the changing opinions at home, and the uncertain
support of merchants. He commenced the erection of a fort at Montreal,
and formed an alliance with the Huron Indians.

In the year 1615, the Iroquois were collected near the foot of Lake
Ontario, a body of water as yet unseen by Europeans. At the request of
the Indians, it has been said Champlain set out to attack them, after
having ascended the Ottawa. The course taken by him, and the disastrous
result are given in connection with the discovery of the Bay Quinté. The
year 1628 saw Canada, as well as the colony of Florida, pass under the
power of the “Company of the Hundred Partners.” The same year saw Quebec
in a state of great distress, the inhabitants almost starving, and a
fleet of British war vessels at the entrance of the St. Lawrence
demanding the surrender of the fort. War was then existing between
England and France, arising out of the intestine war of France, between
the Huguenots and the Catholics, which had resulted in the subjugation
of the former, many of whom had sought refuge in England and entered her
service. Two of the vessels now threatening French Canada were commanded
by Huguenots, one Captain Michel; the other David Kertk. The latter
demanded the surrender of Quebec, but Champlain concealed the great
straits to which he was reduced and bravely withstood the famine and
cold through the long winter, in the hopes of relief in the spring,
which was destined never to reach him. Instead of relief, the spring
brought three vessels of war, commanded by Kertk’s two brothers, Louis
and Thomas. The demand to surrender could no longer be refused, and upon
the 29th July, 1618, the English took possession of Quebec. Louis Kertk
became Governor, while Champlain accompanied Thomas Kertk to Europe.
Quebec remained in British possession until the treaty of
St-German-en-Laye, signed 29th March 1632, by which England renounced
all claims upon New France.

Quebec was governed by Louis Kertk during the three years it was in
possession of England, and he returned it to the French, it was alleged,
a heap of ruins. On the ensuing year, the “Hundred Partners” resumed
their sway, and Champlain was re-appointed Governor, who came with much
pomp and took possession of Fort St. Louis with the beating of drums.
Hereafter emigration from France was accelerated. Even some of the
higher classes sought in Canada, repose from the troubles incident to
religious and domestic war, although Catholics. The Jesuits were now
superseding the order of Recollets, and were earnestly seeking to
convert the Hurons; and at the same to secure their trusty allegiance.
For two years prosperity continued to smile upon the province, and in
1635 the Jesuits laid the foundation stone of the College of Quebec. But
the same year took from New France its chief and its greatest friend.
Champlain died on Christmas day in Quebec, after “thirty years of
untiring efforts to establish and extend the French possessions in
America.” This great discoverer, and founder of Quebec left no children,
his wife remained in Canada four years, when she returned to France.

Following the death of Champlain was the terrible onslaught by the
Iroquois upon the Hurons, whom they entirely destroyed as a nation,
leaving but a remnant under the protection of the French. In 1642 M. de
Maisonneuve laid the foundation of Montreal, the village consisting of a
few buildings with wooden palisades, was then called “Ville-Marie.”
Maisonneuve gathered here the converted Indians to teach them the art of
civilization.

The successor to Champlain was M. de Chateaufort: but we cannot continue
to even sketch the history of the several Governors, and the successive
steps in Canadian development only so far as they bear upon our subject.

In 1663 the population along the St. Lawrence numbered to between 2,000
and 2,500. In 1665 the number was increased by emigration, and by the
arrival of the Carignan regiment, a veteran body of men who became
permanent settlers, and who aided much in controlling the Indians and
maintaining the power of the French. The same year live stock was
introduced, and horses for the first time were seen in Canada. About
this time commenced, in earnest, the struggle between England and France
for the supremacy of the fur trade. The viceroy, M. de Tracy, began to
erect regular forts upon the Richeleu. In 1671 there was a rendezvous of
Indian Chiefs at Sault St. Marie, and through the influence of Father
Allouez, the several tribes consented to become subjects of France. In
the same year M. de Courcelles, now Governor, in pursuance of the
attempt to govern the fur trade, conceived the idea of planting a fort
at the foot of Lake Ontario. But he left before the work had commenced,
and was succeeded by Louis de Buade, _Conte de_ Frontenac, after whom
the fort, subsequently erected, was called.

As the founder of the first settlement in Upper Canada, whose name is
now so familiar, as belonging to a County, we may make space to say of
Frontenac, that he was a gentleman of good birth, and had gained great
distinction, having attained to the rank of Brigadier-General. He was
somewhat proud and haughty, but condescending to his inferiors. His
instructions from his master, the King, on coming to the Canada, were to
secure the aggrandizement of France. Emigration in large numbers from
France having been forbidden, he was to seek the increase of numbers in
New France by stimulating early marriages. And to this day, the rate of
increase by birth, among the French, is considerably greater than with
the Anglo-Saxon.

He was to foster agriculture, the raising of stock, to increase the
fishing operations, and the trade abroad; and he was instructed to take
measures to construct a highway between Canada and Acadia, a plan which
is only now about to be accomplished in the Intercolonial Railroad.
Frontenac, likewise received very explicit instructions as to his
procedure towards the Jesuits and Recollects; and he was charged “to
administer justice with the strictest impartiality.” The Colony being at
peace, Frontenac’s principal difficulty was in dealing with the Church,
and he found it necessary to take high-handed steps to bring the Clergy
into subjection to the State. There had been for years a struggle with
respect to the liquor traffic among the Indians; the Bishops being
opposed to it, while the Governor favored it for the purpose of
furthering the trade in furs. The dissentions between parties became so
great, and representations to the home authorities became so frequent
and vexatious that Frontenac and the Intendant were both recalled in
1682. But during the incumbency of Frontenac, explorations had continued
in the west, and the fort at Cataraqui had been fully established; and
the Mississippi had been discovered by Pére Marquette and M. Joliet, in
1673. That same year Frontenac set out 29th of June, from Montreal, with
an expedition for Cataraqui, arriving there 12th July. There was at this
time one Robert Cavalier de la Salle, a native of Rouen, who had come to
Canada when a young man, full of a project for securing a road by a
northwestern passage to China. He was a man of ability and energy, but
without means. But he managed to obtain the favorable notice of Governor
Frontenac, who regarded him as a man after his own heart.

In the time of de Courcelles he opened a trading post near Montreal, now
Lachine, so called from La Salle’s belief that a pathway to China would
be found thence across the Continent by the waters of the Ottawa or
Upper Lakes. The discovery of the Mississippi caused no little sensation
in Canada; and La Salle lost no time in asking permission and assistance
to continue the western explorations, declaring his belief that the
upper waters of the Mississippi would, if followed to their source, lead
to the Pacific Ocean. He consequently submitted a petition for a certain
grant of land at Cataraqui to the king, Louis X. (See under history of
Kingston.)

Thus it seems that La Salle, a name greatly distinguished in connection
with the discovery of the mouth of the Mississippi, stands connected
very intimately with the foundation of Kingston. For him a Seigniory was
here erected, and from this point he went forth on his eventful voyage.
He was a man of much energy and lost no time in setting out. His boats
laden with goods, and likewise with material for constructing a
brigantine, and a fort, set sail for the Niagara River. The first steps
La Salle prepared to take was to erect a second fort at Niagara, and
then to build his vessel upon the waters of Lake Erie.

The construction of the defensive work of the fort, however, suited not
the views of the Indians, so he satisfied himself with a palisaded
storehouse. In the winter the vessel was commenced, six miles above the
Falls. By the middle of summer it was ready to be launched, which was
done with a salute of cannon, and the chanting of a Te deum, amid great
rejoicing. There was also great demonstration among the Indians, who
designated the French “Otkou,” or “men of a contriving mind.” The vessel
was named _Griffon_, and on the 7th August, 1679, with seven guns, and
small arms, and loaded with goods she entered Lake Erie. A few day’s
sail and Detroit, or the strait was reached; and on the 23rd August, she
was cutting the waters of Lake Huron. In five days Michilmicinac was
gained; then the voyageur proceeded to the western shore of Michigan,
where he cast anchor. The wonder of the Aborigines, as they witnessed
this mounted craft, and heard the thunder tones of the cannon, may be
conceived. But this first vessel upon the western lakes, which had at
first so prosperous a voyage, was doomed to early destruction. Men of
enterprise and success invariably have to encounter enemies born of
incapacity and jealousy, who in the absence of the victim, may sow the
seeds of evil. La Salle had not a few of such enemies, it would seem, to
encounter. After his departure his creditors had seized his possessions,
and he, as soon as he heard of it, loaded the _Griffon_ with peltries
and despatched her for Niagara. But the _Griffon_ never reached Detroit,
the waters of Lake Huron swallowed her up, and all on board. La Salle
proceeded with thirty men to the lower end of Lake Michigan, and laid
the foundation of another fort. He then continued westward to the
Illinois River, and formed still another fort. But this chain of forts
thus established by La Salle, was not destined to accomplish the great
end aimed at. Among the opponents of La Salle, were not only those
jealous of his success, but likewise rival merchants, who were ill
pleased to see the fur trade monopolized by one; and then, there was the
growing trade by the English. These many obstacles and the loss of his
vessel with its cargo, and of a second one, in the Gulph of St.
Lawrence, about this time, valued at £22,000, had the effect of
seriously crippling him; yet his was a nature not easily overcome.
Leaving Father Hennepin to explore the Illinois River and the Upper
Mississippi, he set out March 2nd, 1680, for Montreal, accompanied by
four whites and an Indian guide.

Two years later and the indomitable La Salle, nothing daunted, who had
compounded with his creditors, and suffered repeated disappointments, is
found traversing the forest, for the Mississippi, to descend that stream
to its mouth. He reached the Mississippi, 6th February, 1682. Descending
the stream he stopped at the mouth of the Ohio to erect a fort. He then
continued his easy course down the Father of rivers, and reached its
mouth on the 5th April, and took formal possession of the territory in
the name of the king, calling the place after him, Louisiana. The glory
thus won by La Salle, was not to be crowned with the success,
financially, that ought to have followed. At this juncture Governor
Frontenac, seemingly the only friend La Salle had, was called home to be
followed by M. de la Barre. A continuation of the persecutions and
misrepresentations of his conduct, led to the sequestration of Fort
Frontenac, as well as Fort St. Louis, and in the following year he was
called upon to defend himself at court, which he was able to do. The
result was an order to reinstate the founder of Louisiana on his return,
in Fort Frontenac, and to repair all damages which his property had
sustained in that locality.

La Salle was graciously received by the king on account of his discovery
of the mouth of the Mississippi, and was commissioned to begin a
colonization of Louisiana. The same unfortunate luck continued to attend
him. He sailed July 24th, 1684, from La Rochelle with two ships of war
and two other vessels, having some 500 persons in all. The fleet was
commanded by M. de Beaujeu. Between the commander and La Salle, a
misunderstanding arose which ended in decided aversion. One of the ships
was captured by the Spaniards, and the others overpassed the mouth of
the Mississippi by many leagues. The commander instead of assisting to
carry out La Salle’s object, did all he could to thwart him. One of the
vessels was run upon the reefs and lost. Finally Beaujeu left La Salle
with his people upon a desert shore without provision, and put out to
sea. Although 120 leagues distant from the Mississippi, in Texas, La
Salle set some of his people to cultivate the land, and began to
construct a fort. But the craftsmen were deficient. The seed sown did
not grow, the savages became troublesome, and one evil after another
rapidly succeeded until his men were mostly all dead. As a last resort
La Salle determined to set out for Canada to proceed to France. It was
early spring and the indomitable discoverer found but slow progress; at
last some of those accompanying him, mutinied together and resorted to
force, during which La Salle was mortally wounded. Thus perished the
discoverer of the mouth of the Mississippi, the founder of Louisiana, as
well as the first land owner of Upper Canada. It is worthy of note here
how great was the territory of France in America at this time. It was a
vast region, embracing within its limits the Hudson’s Bay territory,
Acadia, Canada, a great part of Maine, portions of the States of Vermont
and New York, with the whole of the valley of the Mississippi. And a
great portion of this ought, to-day, to form part of Canada, some of
which would, were it not for the indifference, or stupidity of English
commissioners, and the contemptible trickery of Americans, such as the
act of concealing the fact of the existence of a certain map by Daniel
Webster, which would prove adverse to his pretentions.

It has been deemed appropriate to follow La Salle in his steps, not
alone because he was the first settler in Upper Canada, who held land
property; but because we learn of the way in which the French,
originally struggling to gain a footing in the Lower St. Lawrence,
gradually extended westward, carrying in one hand the Cross, and with
the other, planting forts for the purpose of trade, and erecting such
defences as the uncertain character of the natives rendered necessary.
We learn how it came, that fort after fort, whose ruins may yet be
traced across the continent, were planted along a route which commenced
at the mouth of the mighty St. Lawrence, extended along the western
lakes, and then turning southward terminated at the mouth of the
majestic Mississippi.




                             INTRODUCTION.

                              (CONTINUED.)




                              CHAPTER II.

  CONTENTS—Cataraqui fort strengthened—Kente Indians seized and
    carried captive to France—Massacre of Lachine—Commencing struggle
    between New England and New France—Siege of Quebec by Sir Wm.
    Phipps—Destruction of Fort Cataraqui—Its re-erection—Treaty of
    Ryswick—Death of Frontenac—Iroquois in England—Another attempt to
    capture Quebec—Decline of French power—Population of Canada and of
    New England—Continuation of the contest for the fur trade—Taking
    of Fort Louisburg—Col. Washington, dishonorable conduct—
    Inconsistency of Dr. Franklin—Commencement of seven years’ war—
    Close of first year—Montcalm—His presentiment—Taking of Fort
    Oswego—Of Fort William Henry—Fearful massacre—The state of Canada—
    Wolfe appears—Taking of Frontenac—Duquesne—Apathy of France—The
    spring of 1759—Reduced state of Canada—The overthrow of French
    power in America—The result—Union of elements—The capture of
    Quebec—Wolfe—Death of Montcalm—Fort Niagara—Johnson—Effort to
    retake Quebec—Wreck of the French army—Capitulation at Montreal—
    Population—The first British Governor of Canada—The Canadians as
    British subjects—The result of French enterprise—Rebellion.


In 1685 Marquis DeNonville became Governor, and brought with him to
Canada 600 regular troops. The Iroquois had become allies of the
English, with whom they preferred to trade. DeNonville ascended to
Cataraqui with two thousand men. Arrived at Cataraqui, he tried, by
gentle means at first, to obtain certain terms from them, but the
Iroquois were insolent, being supported by the English traders.
DeNonville wrote to Paris for more troops, and, in the mean time,
proceeded to accumulate stores at Cataraqui, and to strengthen the fort
at Niagara. The King sent to Canada, in 1687, 800 soldiers, to assist in
subduing the Iroquois. DeNonville becoming bold, and in his increased
strength, pursued a course of trickery which has been branded by all
writers as anti-Christian, and more savage than anything pertaining to
the savages (so-called) of America. Pére Lamberville, a missionary among
the Iroquois, caused a certain number of chiefs to congregate at Fort
Frontenac, to confer with the governor, and when they were within the
precincts of the fort they were seized and carried captive in chains,
even to France, and there sent to the galleys. Draper says that these
were Indians of the tribes called Ganneyouses and Kentes, and that about
40 or 50 men, and 80 women and children were seized, who were forwarded
to France. The attitude of the Indians under such trying circumstances,
towards the missionary among them, stands out in prominent contrast to
the vile conduct of the French governor. The missionary, summoned by the
chief, was thus addressed: “We have every right to treat thee as our
foe, but we have not the inclination to do so. We know thy nature too
well; thine heart has had no share in causing the wrong that has been
done to us. We are not so unjust as to punish thee for a crime that thou
abhorrest as much as we.” Then the aged chief informed him that the
young men of the tribe might not feel so lenient, and that he must
leave, at the same time causing him to be conducted by a safe path from
their midst.

For a time DeNonville somewhat curbed the Iroquois; but in the end he
failed completely to hold the ground which had previously been acquired.
For four years he continued to govern; matters continually growing
worse, until, in the spring of 1689, 1,400 Iroquois made an onslaught on
the island of Montreal. The inhabitants, in the depth of sleep, knew
nothing of their danger, until the fearful whoop and the bloody tomahawk
and scalping knife were already at work. The butchery was most fearful;
the cruelties to women and children most revolting. Besides those
instantly killed, 200 were burnt alive, and others died under prolonged
torture. This was called the massacre of Lachine. The governor was
paralyzed, and no step was taken to redress the great evil.

It was under such circumstances that he was recalled, and superseded by
De Frontenac, who had again been requested to become governor. Frontenac
landed at Quebec on the 18th October, 1689, and was received with every
demonstration of joy.

Frontenac entered upon his duties shortly before the renewal of
hostilities between England and France. All of Protestant Europe,
indeed, were enlisted in the war which had, to a great extent, arisen
from the cruel course pursued by France towards the Huguenots.
Frontenac, whose master foresaw the war, which was declared in the
following year, brought with him full instructions to prepare for a
vigorous warfare all along the frontier of New France, even to the
Hudson Bay territory. By this time the English settlements upon the
Atlantic coast had attained to no inconsiderable strength, and were
already engaging in trade by water, as well as with the Indians in
peltries; and already it had become a question of conquest by New
England or by New France. The present juncture seemed one favorable for
bold measures on the part of the Anglo-Americans. They had rapidly
advanced in material strength, while the French had rather declined,
owing to the want of immigration and to the frequent destructive
incursions of the Iroquois. The declaration of war between England and
France, in June, 1689, saw the colonists prepared to contest the ground
for supremacy, and monopoly of the fur trade. The French,
notwithstanding their limited numerical strength, hesitated not to enter
the field, and made up their want of numbers by superior and determined
bravery. Before De Frontenac had arrived, everything was going on badly
with the Canadians. M. DeNonville had, before his departure, instructed
Senor de Valreuve, commandant at Cataraqui, to blow up the fort, which
had been accordingly done; and the country abandoned to the Indians, who
now ranged the country, to the very entrance of Montreal. But Frontenac
determined to take bold and active measures to carry the war into the
enemies’ country, notwithstanding the odds against the French. Organized
plans of attack, at different points, were arranged, one of which, in
its carrying out, was quite as cruel and barbarous as the Lachine
massacre, which it was intended, as afterwards stated, it should
revenge. A party of French and Indians were led in the direction of
Albany. On their way, one night, about eleven o’clock, they attacked the
sleeping town of Schenectady, and put the defenceless inhabitants to the
sword. Those acts cannot be justified in Europeans, and show the fearful
spirit of barbarity which reigned in those early days of America. The
effect produced by the bands of raiders that swept over the British
colonies along the frontier, and here and there, into the very interior,
was salutary to the French interests, and the spring saw the French flag
much more respected by the Indians than it had lately been: yet the
Iroquois earnestly and boldly strove to carry death to the door of every
Canadian hamlet. The energetic measures adopted by Frontenac frustrated
all their attempts; yet it was unsafe for the husbandman to go to the
field, so that famine began to appear. The spring of 1691 saw, however,
instead of a repeated invasion of New England, extensive preparations in
the latter country to invade Canada. Sir William Phipps was preparing to
sail from Boston, with a squadron, to capture Quebec, and General
Winthrop, with forces from Connecticut and New York, was mustering his
militia, to invade by land. The latter marched to, and encamped upon,
the banks of Lake George, where he waited for the appearance of Phipps,
by the St. Lawrence; but, in the meantime, disease attacked his troops,
and he was obliged to retrace his steps to Albany. Scarcely had Winthrop
departed when the fleet under Phipps entered the waters of the St.
Lawrence, and ascended, to invest the City of Quebec, appearing in sight
on the 16th of October. Phipps demanded a surrender; but Frontenac,
although with an inferior garrison and but few troops, gave a spirited
refusal; and ultimately, before the close of the month, Phipps found it
expedient to retire. Thus terminated the first siege of Quebec.

The ensuing four years presented one continuous scene of border warfare.
While hostilities in Europe were exhausting the resources of France,
Canada, under Frontenac, was more than holding its own. The British
Americans vainly tried again to besiege Quebec, making an attack by
land; but each attempt was attended with disaster. Frontenac,
recognizing the importance of Cataraqui as a place of defence, sent 700
men to re-erect the fort. In this he was opposed by the Intendant, M. de
Champigny, and even by the home government; but he had the work
completed in 1695, before orders came to abstain from erecting it.
Frontenac had submitted a report giving the reasons why the fort should
exist, namely: in time of peace for trade, and to repair hatchets and
arms; and in time of war to afford a place of retreat, and to give
succor and provisions; also a place to organize expeditions against the
Iroquois, and to receive the sick and wounded on returning from
expeditions. On the other hand, De Champigny reported that the trade
would not be much in time of peace, as the Iroquois would prefer to deal
with the English, who would give more; that the Indian should carry the
beaver skin to the French, not the French go for it; that the fort was
out of the direct course of trade, some thirty or forty leagues; that
the force necessary to carry provisions would at any time be capable of
proceeding against the enemy. It would be better to take a more
southerly course from Montreal into the enemy’s country, while Cataraqui
is situated upon the opposite side of the lake; that it was an unfit
place for sick and wounded, being “very unhealthy, eighty-seven having
died there in one year, out of the hundred who composed the garrison.”
“The swamp poisons the garrison,” which is so situated that it affords
no protection except to the men within it, who might as well be in a
prison. He counselled that the fort should be abandoned, as it was
useless and expensive. Frontenac, however, having erected the fort,
garrisoned it with 48 soldiers. The expense of re-establishing the fort
and supplying the necessary provisions cost some £700. At this juncture
the French had entertained the idea of calling in the outposts along the
western lakes and upon the Mississippi, but it was represented that to
do so was to open the way for the exclusive trade of the Indians with
the English. But Frontenac advised no such measures. He, by his
determined bravery, succeeded in bringing the Iroquois to respect the
French name, and he often carried fire and death into their very
country. When the war terminated, the old boundaries of the Provinces
had been fully re-established, and honors were conferred upon the
governor by his royal master. In 1697 the war terminated by the treaty
of Ryswick, signed September 11, by which the French were to restore all
places taken from the British in America; and it was stipulated that a
commission should be appointed to determine the respective boundaries of
the Provinces.

In the year 1698, on the 28th November, Count de Frontenac died, aged
77, much beloved by the Canadians, after having raised New France from a
low condition to a high state of material advancement. But against him
was too truly said that he encouraged the dreadful traffic of liquor
among the Indians, in order that advantageous trading, in which the
governor allowed himself to meddle, might be carried on.

On 26th May, 1703, M. de Calliére, who had been the successor of
Frontenac, died, and the governor of Montreal, who was the Marquis de
Vaudreuil, was nominated as successor.

This appointment, made at the instance of the colonists, was conferred
with hesitancy, the reason being that his Countess was a native-born
Canadian! Not only in that day but in later days, and under other
circumstances, we have seen the belief obtaining that natives of Canada
must, from the nature of their birth-place, lack those qualifications
for distinguished positions with which those from home are supposed to
be so eminently endowed.

The British Colonists by this time began to entertain desires to conquer
Canada, and steps were taken to accomplish the taking of Quebec. Among
those who took an active part, by raising provincial troops, and in
visiting England to obtain assistance, was General Nicholson, whose
descendants to this day live in the vicinity of the Bay Quinté, and in
the Lower Provinces. In 1710 he visited England, in company with five
Iroquois chiefs, who were presented to Queen Anne, and who received
distinguished attention, being conveyed to the palace in royal coaches.
It was following this that the Queen presented those interesting pieces
of Communion plate to the five nations, part of which may be seen at
Tyendinagua, and part at the Grand River. A futile attempt was made by
Nicholson, with a fleet under Admiral Walker, in 1711, to take Quebec.
The whole enterprise not only failed but was attended with great
disaster. General Nicholson, with his army at Lake Champlain, had to
give up his desire to capture Montreal and Quebec.

On March 30, 1713, was signed the treaty of Utrecht. In this treaty
abridgement of French territory in America was effected. Acadia,
Hudson’s Bay territory and Newfoundland were ceded to Britain. French
power was on the decline both in America, and Europe. Vainly the French
tried to regain what they had lost in Newfoundland and Acadia, by
founding an establishment at Cape Breton, and in the foundation of the
historic fort of Louisburg.

In 1714 Governor Vaudreuil went to France, where he remained until
September, 1716. He then returned to Canada, and set about improving the
state of affairs generally. Quebec, at the present day such an
impregnable fortress, was not, in any respect, regularly fortified
before the beginning of this century. To the natural strength of the
place was first added artificial aid, in 1702. To this again were added,
in 1712, other defences, and in 1720, by the approval of the home
government, the fortification was systematically proceeded with. At this
time the colony was divided into three distinct governments, those of
Quebec, Three Rivers, and Montreal; and the whole was subdivided into
eighty-two parishes. The whole population was estimated at 25,000;
whilst at the same time the British colonies had 60,000 males able to
bear arms. The governor, aware of this, already began to fear a
successful invasion of Canada.

M. de Vaudreuil died October 10, 1725, having been governor twenty-one
years. He was succeeded by the Marquis de Beauharnois, who arrived at
Quebec in 1726. The contest for the supremacy of the fur trade
continued. The British seeing the advantage of the line of forts held by
the French determined to erect a fort also, and selected the mouth of
the Oswego for its site. As an offset to this aggression on the part of
the British, against which the French vainly protested, the French fort
at the mouth of the Niagara was erected, with defences; and orders were
given that a stone fort should replace the one originally constructed of
wood, at Cataraqui. In 1731, Fort Frederick was also erected, at Crown
Point, on Lake Champlain. This year, Varrennes, Sieur de la Vérendrye,
urged by the governor, set about to discover a route to the Pacific
ocean; but he only reached the foot of the Rocky Mountains, being the
first white man to discover them. About this time the fort at Toronto
(Lake) is, for the first time, referred to. For more than a decade the
strife for the peltry traffic continued to be waged, yet without any
actual warfare. It was seen by all that peace could not continue, and
New England and New France were all the time anticipating the conflict.
In 1745 war broke out in Europe, and immediately extended to America. It
will be remembered that the French were dispossessed of Acadia, but had
subsequently erected a fort upon Cape Breton, Louisburg. From this naval
stronghold they were able to send privateers and men-of-war. The
English, in the meantime, seeing this evil, and that this was a
protection to the only entrance to French territory, determined to
possess it promptly, if it were possible. To carry out this project,
which originated with Governor Shirley, of Massachusetts, 4,000 militia,
levied in Mass., New Hampshire, Maine, and Connecticut, under Colonel
Pepperel, sailed from Boston in March. The attack upon this strong fort
was so well planned and carried out, that full success was the result.
Admiral Warren arrived with ships to give assistance, and captured a
French ship of 64 guns, with 560 soldiers and supplies. Already the
Anglo-Americans were beginning to display the energy (derived from an
energetic race) which was to overturn British domination in the Atlantic
States. But in the first place it was necessary that England should
extinguish French power. The brilliant nature of the attack and taking
of Fort Louisburg was recognized by the granting of baronetcies to
Governor Shirley and Colonel Pepperel. This success hastened the
determination to conquer Canada—a desire already existing in the hearts
of the Anglo-Americans; and Governor Shirley applied to the British
government for regulars and a fleet for that purpose. Meanwhile, a
fleet, with several thousand troops, sailed from France, with a view of
re-taking Cape Breton and Acadia; but tempest and disease destroyed the
force, until it was no longer able to invade.

From the year 1745 border warfare continually blazed along the frontier.
The French, with their savage allies, carried the scalping-knife and the
torch into the British settlements, captured Fort Massachusetts and Fort
Bridgman, and gained other victories, and the luckless settlers had to
seek safety in the more largely-settled parts of the country.

Again came temporary peace to the colonists. In 1748, upon the 7th of
October, the treaty was signed at Aix-la-Chapelles, by the terms of
which Cape Breton reverted to the French. This treaty was, however, but
a lull in the struggle in America, which was destined to end in
conquest.

The French continued to strengthen their outposts. Detroit was
garrisoned, and forts of stone were built at Green Bay, Toronto, and La
Présentation. In 1756, Fort Duquesne, at Pittsburgh, was established. It
was in this year that Washington first came before the public as an
actor. He led a considerable force to the west, with the view of
destroying Fort Duquesne, and encountered a small body of French. The
man who subsequently became a hero by concurring events, as well as by
his own energy, did not, on this occasion—if we may credit history—act a
very honorable part. Informed of the camping ground of the enemy, he
marched all night, to attack them in the morning. Junonville, the
commander, when aware of the proximity of Washington, made known to him
by a trumpeter that he had a letter to deliver, and when Junonville had
begun to read his letter firing was suddenly re-commenced. The painters
of Washington’s character have tried to cover this stain; but unbiassed
recorders think he was by no means blameless. But Washington’s
humiliation rapidly followed this unmanly procedure. The main force of
the French, hearing of the massacre by Washington, advanced to revenge
it; and, attacking him in his own chosen position, succeeded, after ten
hours’ fighting with muskets alone, against cannon, in driving
Washington from his position, and compelled him to make an inglorious
retreat.

At the beginning of 1755, England sent out additional soldiers and means
of war, and appointed General Braddock, who had distinguished himself as
a soldier, to act as military chief.

At this time, “Dr. Franklin estimated the whole English provincials at a
total of 1,200,000; whilst the whole number of people in Canada, Cape
Breton, Louisiana, &c., was under 80,000 souls.”—(_Garneau._) At the
same time France was weak, by the presence of an indolent King, who
allowed himself and kingdom to be governed by a courtesan, Madame de
Pompadour. Religious dissensions and stagnation of trade, all
contributed to place France in but a poor position to engage in war.
Great Britain, on the contrary, was in all respects prosperous. At such
a favorable time it was that the Anglo-Americans urged the mother
country to carry on, with the utmost rigor, a war for the subjugation of
Canada. Franklin, as astute a politician as clever in science, was their
principal mouthpiece. He who, twenty-five years thereafter, repaired to
Paris, to arouse the public feeling of France and entire Europe against
Britain; the same who came to Canada to revolutionize it in 1776, was,
in 1754, the greatest promoter of the coming invasion of the French
possessions in North America. “There need never be permanent repose
expected for our thirteen colonies,” urged he, “so long as the French
are masters of Canada.” Thus was inaugurated what is known as the seven
years’ war.

The respective combatants marshalled their forces for the conflict. The
French, nothing daunted, took energetic measures to repel the foe, and
strike blows here and there, as opportunity afforded. A force was sent
to take Fort Oswego from the English, while Johnson, a name to be
mentioned hereafter, was despatched to attack Fort Frederick. The first
great battle was fought in the Ohio valley, by General Braddock. Here
the French gained a signal victory, with but a few men, and utterly put
to rout their enemy. At Fort Edward, the French, under General Dieskau,
were less successful in an encounter with Johnson, the French commander
being taken prisoner.

The close of the first year saw Forts Frederick, Niagara and Duquesne,
still in the hands of the French, while bands of savages and Canadians
traversed the British settlements, massacring and burning all before
them.

The ensuing year witnessed more elaborate arrangements to continue the
war. France sent to Canada soldiers, provisions, war material and money;
and, also, the Marquis de Montcalm was selected to take charge of the
army. Montcalm had seen service, and with him came other officers
likewise experienced.

Proceeding to Montreal, he conferred with the Governor, and it was
determined to form two principal camps, one at Ticonderoga, the other at
Frontenac, and a battalion was despatched to Niagara.

The British, at the same time, made extensive preparations, both in the
colonies and at home, and the Earl of London was appointed
generalissimo.

It is a remarkable fact that Montcalm had from the first a fatal
presentiment as to the issue of the war; yet he, all the same, took
every step that prudence and energy directed, to secure the success of
his army. There was also a coolness between him and the Governor, who
manifested a determination and energy worthy of him. It was determined
that fresh attempts should be made to possess Fort Oswego, and General
Montcalm arrived at Frontenac for that purpose on the 29th of July. Upon
the 11th August they reached Oswego and invested the Fort, which was
obliged to surrender on the 14th, the commander, Colonel Mercer, having
been killed. The Fort was razed to the ground. The Canadians then
withdrew to their homes carrying the prisoners of war, and the guns of
the Fort, and provisions with them. This was the principal event of this
year. The winter saw the Canadians suffer from famine and small-pox.
During the winter 1757–8, there was continued hostility, and in the
following year Montcalm succeeded in taking Fort William Henry, after a
siege of four days. Colonel Munroe commanded the Fort, and he trusted
for support to General Webb, who failed to afford it, but instead sent a
message to Munroe to retire, which note fell into the hands of Montcalm.
Munroe on the morning of the 9th, displayed his flag of truce. The
events of this capitulation have ever been held in remembrance, because
of the fearful massacre which the Indians made of the English, who had
surrendered, and who marched out without their arms, in full confidence
in the integrity of the victorious besiegers. Stern history has cast no
little blame upon Montcalm, for at least remissness of duty; and the pen
of historic fiction has found it a fruitful theme with which to weave a
story, and record thrilling events.

The ensuing winter was one of great privation to the Canadians, the
harvest had failed; and everything began to look dark indeed for the
devoted French; yet four years of war had given all the advantage to
their arms. The continued ill-success of the British, caused them to
raise increased numbers of men, so that by numerical force they might
overwhelm the French. In the spring of 1758, 80,000 British combatants
were ready to march. While such was the condition and war-like spirit
which obtained upon the British side, a far different state of affairs
existed with the French. Success had so far attended the gallant feats
undertaken by them. All along the lengthened border the foe had been
defeated, or had gained but scant victory. Again, the Iroquois nation,
impressed with the success thus obtained by the French, and gratified to
have the Fort of Oswego, always unpleasant to them, destroyed, seemed
inclined to take sides with them, certainly did not favor the English.
But, when so much has been said the extent of French power in America
has been stated. Canada was no longer receiving support from France. The
colonists had been weakened by continual warfare and repeated
crop-failures.

But undeterred by the dark clouds that continued to thicken, the
Canadians buckled on their armor to fight till the very last. Says
Montcalm to the Minister at home, “We shall fight and we shall bury
ourselves, if need be, under the ruins of the colony.” Again the tide of
war ebbed and flowed with fearful power. Carillon was made red with
British blood, as vain endeavors were made to capture that French strong
hold. Against Louisburg, Cape Breton, Carillon, Lake Champlain, and
Duquesne in the Ohio Valley, the English arrayed their fleets and
armies. In the attack now made upon Louisburg, for the first time
appears the name of Wolfe, who distinguished himself by scaling a rock,
with a hundred men, which had hitherto been regarded unaccessible. After
a spirited defence, the French surrendered the Fort, a perfect wreck,
July 26. About this time Cape Breton passed into British hands, and thus
was opened to the English, the Fort of Quebec.

In the mean time the attack upon Fort Carillon by General Abercromby,
with a strong army, had proved a complete failure. The French, although
few, desperately met the repeated assaults made during half a day, and
Abercromby, cut up and ashamed, was forced to relinquish the matter.
This battle was fought July 8th, in which 3,600 men struggled
successfully for six hours against 15,000 picked soldiers. (_Garneau._)
De Lévis, who had been in command at Fort Frontenac, was called by
Montcalm to take part in the defence of Carillon. This left Fort
Frontenac comparatively weak, and Abercromby, having learned the fact,
despatched Colonel Bradstreet, who had taken an active part in the
battle, to capture the Fort. Bradstreet set out with 3,000 men, 11 guns
and mortars. The invading force reached its destination August 25. The
Fort had been left with 70 men under the command of M. de Noyan,
notwithstanding, the Fort was bravely defended for a time. “The victors
captured many cannons, quantities of small arms, boats of provisions and
nine newly armed barques,—part of the trophies brought from Oswego when
captured. After loading his barges to the waters-edge, Bradstreet
released his prisoners on parole, burnt the Fort, also seven of the
barks, and returned to his country.” (_Garneau._) This was a severe blow
to the struggling Canadians. The Governor had ordered the farmers from
the field, and all the savages he could command, to march to the
assistance of Fort Frontenac; but when the party reached Fort
Présentation, (Ogdensburg), it was learned that Frontenac was already
destroyed. To add to the misfortune of the French, the same autumn,
General Forbes, notwithstanding a part of his force had been previously
defeated, secured the destruction of Fort Duquesne on the Ohio. This
closed the engagements for the year 1748, and everything looked for the
French, most discouraging. The winter was spent by the English in
preparing for a still more determined continuation of the war; while the
French wasted their energies in domestic dissention. The Governor M. de
Vaudreuil and Montcalm ceased not to quarrel, and to charge each other
with incompetency, and even crimes. At the same time the means of the
country was absorbed by unpatriotic merchants, who availed themselves of
the circumstances of the country to amass fortunes by illegal traffic in
furs with the Indians.

The Government at home, although informed by Montcalm that Canada would
be conquered if help were not sent, took no step to assist the devoted
Colonists, who, although disheartened were not disposed to surrender
allegiance to their native country, even when all but forsaken. The
spring of 1759 beheld them standing to their arms with calm
determination, awaiting the onset of the foe. The British as in previous
years prepared to invade Canada simultaneously at three different
points. There was no fortress in the Lower St. Lawrence to obstruct
their advance by water, so Quebec was the point at which, to the east,
the attack would be made. A corps of 10,000 men commanded by General
Wolfe, who we have seen, distinguished himself at the taking of
Louisburg, prepared to ascend the St. Lawrence to invest the capital.
Another force 12,000 strong under General Amherst, a name we shall have
to speak of hereafter, was to pass by Lake Champlain to descend the
Richeleu and to join Wolfe at Quebec. And a third force, under General
Prideaux, with savages under Sir William Johnson, were to possess Fort
Niagara, and then descend to the capture of Montreal. Opposed to the
numerous and well appointed armies of invasion, there was, according to
Garneau, all in all of Frenchmen, between the ages of 16 and 60, capable
of bearing arms, but a little over 15,000. In the early spring, one M.
de Corbiere, ascended with the view of rebuilding Fort Frontenac. 300
men were also sent to repair and defend Niagara. But it soon was deemed
expedient to recall them and to concentrate their forces. Every man from
even the more remote parts, presented himself to the nearest place of
rendezvous. In the latter part of May, word came that the enemies’ ships
were coming.

The events connected with the overthrow of French supremacy in Canada
cannot fail to impress the student of Canadian history.

The capture of Quebec, and, as an inevitable result, the conquest of
Canada are events of great interest; but the space cannot be allowed
here to more than refer to the thrilling scenes of valor displayed by
the victors and the vanquished. As Canadians of British origin we
recognize the event as one not to be deplored, however Franco-Canadians
may regard the question. The conquest of Canada, was to add a new
element to that of the British American which was destined to grow, and
to act no mean part in respect to British interests in America, and we
believe, ultimately to completely amalgamate with a portion of the older
elements, and thus to beget a race, under Confederation, none the less
noble, none the less stable, and none the less glorious, than that race
(a prototype of this)—the Original Anglo-Saxon derived from the Norman,
who came to England with William the Conqueror, as well as the Saxon
elements.

More than a hundred years have passed away since the fall of Quebec. The
centenary anniversary of the event has been celebrated with an amount of
enthusiasm which probably Quebec never witnessed before. Since the
American Revolution, when the French Canadians fought by the side of the
American Loyalist to defend Quebec, the former have ceased to be a
conquered people—Sequestrated from France, they have escaped all the
horrors which have since swept over that people, while they have
retained their language, religion, and laws. A hundred years has
eradicated or rather changed all the feelings which burned so fervently
in the French Canadian heart, except their love of Canada; and they have
joined heartily with the Anglo-Saxon to erect a joint monument which
commemorates at once the heroism of Wolfe, and the gallantry of
Montcalm.

Although the forces invading under Wolfe, exceeded in number those who
defended the citadel, yet, the greatest heroism was displayed in its
taking. The British fleet of “20 ships of the line with frigates and
smaller war vessels,” and transports, reached the Isle of Orleans, June
25, where the land force disembarked and proceeded deliberately to
invest the stronghold, finding a more difficult task than had been
expected. Repeated attempts and assaults were made with the result of
showing Wolfe how strong was the position his youthful ardor would fain
secure. Not alone was he baffled thus, but a severe illness prostrated
him to death’s door, whose portals were so soon to be opened to him, by
another means. In his moments of discouragement he had written home in a
spirit not calculated to afford hope. The plan which resulted in
success, it is said was suggested by his three faithful Generals,
Monkton, Townshend and Murray.

The night before the 13th of September, 1759, the day upon which Wolfe
was to win imperishable laurels, and to lay down his life, he felt a
presentiment that his end was near, and carefully arranged all his
worldly affairs. On the evening of the 12th he invited Captain John
Davis (afterwards Admiral, Earl St. Vincent), of the _Porcupine_ sloop
of war, to spend an hour or two on board the _Sutherland_. “Wolfe, in
the course of their conversation, said that he knew he should not
survive the morrow; and when they were about to separate, he took from
his bosom the picture of Louther and delivered it into the hands of his
friend, whom he requested, should his foreboding be fulfilled, to
restore the pledge to the lady on his arrival in England.”

Having previously made disposition of his forces to prepare the way for
the final attack, and, as well in some instances, to deceive the enemy
as to his intentions, Wolfe finally, at one o’clock, upon the morning of
the 13th September, set out in flat bottomed boats to make his landing
at Fuller’s Cove, thereafter to be called after himself. The night was
dark, and other circumstances being favorable the landing was safely
effected, the heights ascended, and at the break of day Montcalm learned
with the utmost astonishment that the enemy was upon the heights of
Abraham in battle array. Montcalm hastened to drive away the venturesome
foe, but this was not to be accomplished; a few hours brought a
realization of his early presentiment. After a spirited struggle the
French were to be seen running, the announcement of which made Wolfe die
happy; and, Montcalm was wounded unto death. He died on the 14th. The
defeat of Montcalm secured the capture of Quebec, yet it was not until
the 18th September that the city surrendered, and French writers would
make it appear that even then it were not necessary.

The command of the French army after the death of Montcalm devolved upon
Gen. de Lévis, who had been absent up the St. Lawrence. He returned to
Montreal only in time to hear of Montcalm’s defeat. He hastened to the
rescue of the beleaguered city, but he reached the vicinity, not until
Quebec had passed into the hands of the British.

During the time these exciting scenes had been transpiring at Quebec,
Gen. Amherst had been confronting Boulamaque, upon the shores of Lake
Champlain; whom he had compelled to return, and to destroy Fort
Frederick and to retire to Isle Aux Nois. In the west, at Niagara Gen.
Prideaux and Sir Wm. Johnson had been successful in taking the Fort from
Pouchot. By this, Lake Ontario with its northern shore, as well as the
region of the Bay of Quinté came into the possession of the British.

The expedition to capture Fort Niagara, taken at the urgent request of
the Governor of New York, was under the command of General Prideaux. The
attacking party landed at Four Mile Creek almost four miles east of the
Fort, on the 6th July, 1759. Fort Niagara was garrisoned by 486 men
according to Pouchot, the French commander, but according to English
statements 600. General Prideaux forces numbered, according to Capt. de
Lancy, 1,200, and 1,000 Indians, as said by Sir William Johnson. Pouchot
discovered their approach the following day. He despatched couriers to
Presque Isle, to Fort Machault, at the mouth of French Creek, Pa., and
to the commander of the Fort at the “Carrying Place” for assistance.
Reinforcements were sent, numbering about 600 French, and 100 Indians.
They resembled when passing down the rapids, “a floating island, so
black was the river with batteaux and canoes.” They landed a few miles
above the falls and proceeded to Lewiston and thence to relieve Pouchot.
In the mean time the siege had been pressed with vigor. Prideaux, the
English General, had been killed and the command had devolved on Sir W.
Johnson. The English learned of the approach of the reinforcements, and
Captain James de Lancy was despatched to a position in ambuscade above
the present site of Youngstown. The French discovering the English in
ambush, made an impetuous attack upon them, but the English withstood
the assault, and eventually turned the tide against the enemy, who were
put to flight, 200 being killed, and 100 taken prisoners. Pouchot
learned of the disaster about two o’clock; and, two hours after Sir W.
Johnson demanded a surrender. That same evening, or on the following
morning he complied; but he has stated that he would not have done so
had it not been for the mutiny of the Germans who formed a part of the
garrison. On the 26th the garrison left the fort to be transported to
New York. Thus was the power of the French broken in the west, and the
English became masters of the key to the Northwest.

The following spring Gen. de Lévis determined to make an effort to
retake Quebec, and upon the 28th of April, the plains of Abraham were
again red with blood, and the British, under Gen. Murray, were compelled
to seek safety within the walls of the city, where they were besieged
until the 9th, when a British frigate arrived and gave succor.

On the 14th July Gen. Murray, with a large sailing force, commenced the
ascent of the St. Lawrence. At the same time Gen. Amherst, with a
considerable force was commencing a descent from Oswego. The two were
thus advancing toward Montreal, each subduing on the way such forts and
garrisons as were deemed of sufficient importance. By the first of
September, the city of the Royal Mountain, containing the wreck of the
French army was encompassed on either hand. The Governor, upon the night
of the 6th, held a council of war, at which it was determined to
capitulate. The celebrated act was signed on the 8th September, 1760,
and the same day the English took possession of the city. Thus Canada
passed into the possession of the British. The terms of capitulation
were more favorable to the French than they had any reason to expect,
and those terms have ever been fulfilled.

The Governor, Gen. de Lévis, the officers, and a large number of men,
women and children returned to France. At the time of the taking of
Montreal, there remained at Detroit some three or four hundred families.
This Fort and others around the lakes yet held by the French were
surrendered to Major Rogers, a person again to be spoken of. The
population according to the Governor, left of French origin, was 70,000.

The Canadians who did not return to France repaired to their homes and
renewed their peaceful avocations.

The first British Governor, Sir Jeffry Amherst, entered upon his
functions 1763.

We have now very cursorily indeed, noticed the history of the French
Canadians up to the time they became British subjects. We have seen they
did not willingly become such; yet scarcely fifteen years were to pass
away before their loyalty to the British flag was to be tested; not
indeed to decide whether they should again become a part of France,
rather than remain British, but whether their condition as British
subjects was so intolerable that they should seek other protection of a
foreign origin.

We shall see that although promises were held out of great political
advantage they preferred to remain as they were. There remained in the
hearts of the Canadian French, not so much a dislike to England as a
detestation to the New Englander. Hence it was that when the rebel
banner was unfurled in 1776, with the declaration of American
Independence upon it, no Canadian rallied around it. Although
commissioners from the rebel congress visited them with honied words and
fair promises, they received no friendly welcome. The Canadians regarded
their old enemies as enemies still, and they turned their backs upon the
revolting provinces and their faces toward old England for protection.
The commissioners to the Canadians, composed of Dr. Benj. Franklin,
Samuel Chase and Charles Carrol, with his brother, a Jesuit Priest were
appointed to this mission, on the 15th February, 1776. The same Franklin
who now offered the French “freedom,” had urged upon the British in 1753
the expediency of reducing Canada!!

For a century and a half France endeavored in vain to erect a power in
America; but shall we say that it was all in vain?

The monument although broken, so far as France is concerned yet stands a
lasting memorial of French energy, of religious fervor, stern
determination, and indomitable valor. And, when the wave of revolution
passed over the thirteen British Colonies, the column was conspicuous
enough to be seen by refugees; the protection Canada offered was
sufficient for the homeless families of U. E. Loyalists. Canada was a
sacred spot, although French. It constituted a nucleus, around which
collected those who preferred order to rebellion. Those who had fought
as opponents at Duquesne, at Niagara, at Frontenac, at Tyconderoga, and
upon the Plains of Abraham, were joined together. The heel, which had
assisted to crush the Canadian French, now sought and found a resting
place among those who had been overcome. Thus was to be laid the
foundation of the Dominion of Canada, whose future is to be great.
Stretching from seaboard to seaboard, it is destined to become, ere it
has reached the present age of the United States, the Russia of America,
with the purest principles of government the world has ever known.

We now approach the period of time when another element of discord was
to appear among the races which inhabited America. Bloody Indian wars
had in the past swept back and forth across the woody land. Rival
colonizers had resorted to strife, to extend territorial power. European
weapons had been transported to wage wars of extermination. Conquest and
subjugation of Indians and rivals had been witnessed; but now Rebellion,
a term that has received fresh significance in the late civil war in the
United States, was to be initiated. The British blood and money which
had been lavishly spent for the Anglo-Americans, had only prepared those
colonists to seek other advantages. The Indians held in subjection, the
French conquered, the mother country itself must now be coerced to give
full rein to the spoiled and wayward offspring.




                              DIVISION I.
              THE REBELLION OF 1776—THE THIRTEEN COLONIES.




                              CHAPTER III.

  CONTENTS—First American Rebellion—Independence—Traitors made Heroes—
    Loyalists driven away to found another Colony—The responsibility
    of rebelling—Treatment of the Loyalists—The several Colonies—The
    first Englishman in America—Receives £10—English Colonization—
    Virginia—Convicts—Extent of Virginia—First Governor—Virginians not
    willing to rebel—Quota supplied to the rebel army—New York—Hudson—
    The Dutch—New Netherlands—Price of New Amsterdam (New York)—First
    Legislative Assembly—Not quick to rebel—Quota of rebel troops—Gave
    many settlers to Upper Canada—New Jersey—Its settlement—A battle
    ground—Gave rebel troops; also loyal troops—Furnished settlers to
    Upper Canada—Massachusetts—Captain Smith—New England Puritans—The
    “Mayflower”—First Governor—Cruel treatment of Indians—
    Massachusetts takes the lead in rebelling—Troops—Loyalists—New
    Hampshire—Troops—Delaware—Settlement—Quota of rebel troops—
    Connecticut—Education—Troops—Roman Catholics—Toleration—Rhode
    Island—Providence—Inconsistency of the Puritans—Roger Williams—
    North Carolina—Inhabitants—South Carolina—Many loyalists—
    Pennsylvania—William Penn—Conduct toward Indians—The people
    opposed to rebellion—Georgia—Oglethorpe—Policy of England—New
    England.


In the introductory chapters a brief sketch has been given of the
settlement of America. We now approach the important events which belong
to the first great American rebellion, which culminated in the
Declaration of Independence by the thirteen British American Colonies,
and terminated in the recognition of their independence by the parent
State. The rebellion had resulted in a revolution, and traitors were
made heroes!

It forms a part of the present undertaking to record some of the facts
relative to the steps by which the now powerful United States were, as a
whole, ushered into the arena of nations, and by which a large class of
Americans, true to their British allegiance, were compelled to leave
their native country to found another colony in the northern wilderness.
To be justified in rebelling against the constituted authorities there
must be the most cogent reasons; to take up arms against the State—to
initiate a civil war, is assuming the most fearful consequences.

To present even a brief account of the circumstances which led to the
settlement of Upper Canada, it becomes necessary to dwell for a time
upon the great rebellion of 1776, the result of which was adverse to
those Americans who adhered to the old flag under which they had been
born, had come to the new world, and had prospered; a rebellion which
was attended and followed by persecution and violence, imprisonment and
confiscation, banishment, and, too often, death; which caused a stream
of refugee loyalists to set in toward the wilderness of Canada.

At the time of the rebellion of the English colonists in America, they
consisted of thirteen provinces. Massachusetts, with her colony of
Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South
Carolina, and Georgia. It may be well to briefly notice these several
states, and the part each took in the war for Independence.

The first Englishman to set foot upon the continent of America was John
Cabot, who discovered Newfoundland, and probably the adjacent mainland,
June 4, 1497. The event is noticed in the Privy Purse expenditure thus:
“1497, Aug. 10—To hym that found the new Isle, £10,” which seems to have
been a grant for his services.


                               VIRGINIA.

In the year 1578, Sir H. Gilbert endeavoured to establish a settlement
at the mouth of the Roanoke. Failing in his undertaking, his half
brother, Sir Walter Raleigh, made a similar effort the following year,
which likewise failed. It was Sir Walter Raleigh who gave the name to
Virginia, in honor of Elizabeth, the virgin Queen. A third and
successful effort was made to colonize in 1607–8, at Jamestown. This
dates the commencement of English colonization of America. Some time
later, America was looked upon as a country quite beyond the pale of
civilization, even as Botany Bay was at a still later period; and in the
year 1621, the British Government transported to Virginia 100 convicts.
But notwithstanding, “Virginia,” to use the words of Morse’s Geography,
“the birth-place of Washington, has given six Presidents to the Union.”

The colony of Virginia was originally indefinite in its boundary; and,
judging from old maps, it would seem to have included all of North
America. But a map dated 1614 shows the more northern part as New
England. The first Governor of Virginia entered upon his duties in 1619.

This State was by no means quick to sever the connection with the mother
country. Many of her sons stood up for the crown, and very many families
became refugees. Washington said of Virginia, in a letter, that “the
people of Virginia will come reluctantly into the idea of independence.”
But in time, by the specious representations of Washington and others,
the State produced a certain number of rebels. The quota demanded by the
rebel congress was 48,522. She supplied, in 1776, 6,181; and afterwards
20,491.


                               NEW YORK.

In the year 1609 Hendrick Hudson, an Englishman, in the employ of
Holland, first explored the great river running through New York State,
which now bears his name. He, on behalf of the Dutch took possession of
the country. Settlement first took place in 1614, and by 1620, a
considerable colony was planted. The island of Manhatten, where now
stands New York City, was honestly purchased of the Indians for
twenty-four dollars. The village thus founded was called New Amsterdam,
and the colony was designated New Netherlands.

Having been taken by the English in 1674, the name of the territory was
changed to New York, after James, Duke of York, brother to Charles II.
The first Legislative Assembly for this Province, met in New York, 17th
October, 1683, just one hundred years before Upper Canada began to be
settled.

The State of New York was not among the foremost in rebelling. The Dutch
element which prevailed, was not given to change. Some of the most
exciting events and battles of the war were enacted in this State. Right
royally did the people take up arms against the rebels and drive
Washington from Manhatten. Battalions and regiments were repeatedly
raised and organized in this State. The valleys of the Mohawk and Hudson
became historic grounds. Here was witnessed the ignoble failure of
Burgoyne’s Campaign, which was the commencement of the decline of
British power; and the City of New York was the last ground of the
States occupied by British troops, until the war of 1813. New York
furnished troops for the rebel cause, in 1775, 2,075; in 1776, 3,629;
and subsequently 12,077.

Of all the States, New York gave the largest number of pioneers to Upper
Canada.


                              NEW JERSEY.

New Jersey was settled in 1620 by the Dutch and Swedes. Having been
taken by the English, it was given by Charles II. to the Duke of York.
Retaken by the Dutch in 1673, it was bought by Wm. Penn and his friends.
At one time it was divided into East Jersey and West Jersey, East Jersey
belonging to Penn. In 1702 the two Jersies were united under one
government, and received the name of _New Jersey_.

Upon the grounds of this State were fought some of the most decisive
battles of the war.

Of the Rebel troops Jersey supplied in 1676, 3,193. The quota required
afterwards was 11,396—of which she granted 7,534. But Jersey also gave a
large number of Royal troops.

New Jersey furnished a good many settlers to Upper Canada, of whom one
of the most distinguished is the Ryerson family. Many of the settlers
along the bay retain interesting traditions of their Jersey ancestry.


                             MASSACHUSETTS.

The territory of this State was originally discovered by the Cabots in
1497, and visited by Capt. John Smith in 1614, by whom it was said to
have been named New England. It consisted of the present States of
Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and
Massachusetts. In 1620, upon 22nd December, the Puritan Fathers landed
upon the Plymouth Rock, some 30 miles from Boston, and planted the first
of the New England States. The “Mayflower,” by which they had traversed
the Atlantic was only 180 tons burden. She sailed from Southampton with
102 emigrants. Half of this number died from cold and hardship the first
year. They selected for their first Elder one John Carner, who as chief
officer had great control. He has consequently been called the first
Governor of New England. The territory had been granted by James I. to
the “Plymouth Company.” Although the Puritans had left their homes
because they did not enjoy their rights, they forgot the Golden Rule in
their forest homes. They failed to remember that the Indian had rights.
The untutored native thought he had a right to the soil, and as the
Puritans, unlike Penn, were unwilling to recognize his rights, but
undertook to appropriate the territory, there ensued bloody Indian wars.
The Puritan revenged himself, and the native retaliated. So, for many
years border massacres were common and terrible.

Massachusetts with the other New England States, took the lead in
rebellion, and by great pains succeeded in indoctrinating the midland
and Southern States. The first blood of the rebellion was shed in this
State, at Lexington and Bunker Hill. The State supplied troops in 1775,
16,444; in 1776, 13,372. The quota subsequently required was 52,728, of
which 38,091 was furnished.

But Massachusetts had not a few true-hearted loyalists of whom a
considerable number became settlers in Upper Canada. At the evacuation
of Boston “1,100 retreated in a body with the Royal army. Altogether
there left Massachusetts at least 2,000 United Empire Loyalists.” The
Colony of Maine also had a good many adherents of the crown—(_Sabine._)


                             NEW HAMPSHIRE.

This Province was first colonized by emigrants from Hampshire, England,
in 1623. Subsequently it was peopled by English from other parts, and by
Scotch.

New Hampshire supplied in 1775, 2,824 troops; in 1776, 3,012. Her quota
was 10,194. Granted 6,653. We are at the same time assured by Sabine
that New Hampshire had many and powerful opponents of rebellion.


                               DELAWARE.

Delaware was originally settled by Swedes and Finlanders in 1627. Became
a part of New Netherlands in 1655, and in 1664 fell to the English. It
was included in the grant of Wm. Penn in 1682. In 1701 it was erected
into a colony for legislative purposes.

She supplied rebel troops in 1776, 609. Her quota fixed was 3,974.
Supplied 1,778.


                              CONNECTICUT.

Connecticut was first occupied by emigrants in 1631. The Charter was
granted by Charles II., which continued in existence until 1818, when it
was superseded by the existing constitution. Connecticut “has uniformly
been a nursery of educated men of every class” for the Union. And, it
may be added, a number found their way to Upper Canada, as school
teachers, subsequent to the Revolution. And there was a certain number
of the people of Connecticut among the Loyalists. Sabine says a good
many.

This State furnished for the rebel war in 1775, 4,507; in 1776, 6,390.
The quota fixed was 28,336, of which was given 21,142.


                               MARYLAND.

Maryland was granted to the second Lord Baltimore, a Roman Catholic, by
Queen Mary, in 1632 or 4. He colonized the Province with a company of
Co-religionists of the higher class of English gentry. It was named
after the English Queen, Henrietta Maria. “In 1649, it was made, as has
been well said, ‘a land of sanctuary,’ by the toleration of all
religious denominations, but the Puritans, expelled from Virginia, made
great trouble in the Colony.”

The State supplied troops in 1776, 637. Quota fixed by congress 26,608,
of which she supplied 13,275.


                             RHODE ISLAND.

Massachusetts, planted by Puritans, who came to secure liberty of
conscience, would not allow certain individuals in their midst to enjoy
like religious liberty, and hence the foundation of Rhode Island.
Providence, its original name, was thus significantly called, because
here the Baptists, under Roger Williams (oppressed by the Puritans of
Plymouth), found a _providential_ asylum. This was in 1636. In how short
a time (16 years) had the oppressed learned to act oppressively!

A charter was granted to Roger Williams in 1642. The government
continued to exist under this charter until 1842, a period of 200 years.

Rhode Island gave troops to the number of 1,193 in 1775, and 798 in
1776. Quota demanded, 5,694; furnished 3,917.


                            NORTH CAROLINA.

This colony was planted in 1653 by the older colony of Virginia. The
colony at first included both North and South Carolina, which continued
until 1693, when the south part was erected into a separate colony,
under the name of South Carolina. The inhabitants of North Carolina
consisted, in part, of refugees from England at the overthrow of the
Stuarts. These mainly remained loyal to the crown, and were destined to
again become refugees. At the commencement of the rebellion the people
of this colony were about equally divided between the adherents of the
crown, and the rebels. The loyalists were a devoted band. At the same
time, the rebels—at least some of them—took extreme steps. They formally
demanded a separation from Great Britain in May, 1775, fourteen months
before the 4th July declaration of 1776. The State provided, in 1776,
1,134 rebel troops. The quota asked for was 23,994, but only 6,129 was
granted.


                            SOUTH CAROLINA.

South Carolina was first settled in 1670.

“The great body of the people were emigrants from Switzerland, Germany,
France, Great Britain, and the northern colonies of America, and their
descendants, and were opposed to a separation from the mother country;”
yet South Carolina furnished troops for the rebellion, in 1776, to the
number of 2,069. Subsequently she gave 4,348; although her quota, as
fixed by Congress, was 16,932.

In this colony were many who could not see the justice of a rebellion.
Yankee descendants may say they “bowed their necks to the yoke of
colonial vassalage,” but it was a wise spirit of conservatism which is
expressed in the desire to “look before you leap.” “Persons who had
refused to enlist under the whig banner, flocked to the royal standard
by hundreds.” “Sir Henry Clinton informed the British Government that
the whole State had submitted to the royal arms.” This general
attachment to the British crown made the rebels vindictive and
bloodthirsty, and they sought to drive away the loyal and peaceable by a
vengeful shedding of blood. Consequently, the tories retaliated, and
Chief Justice Marshall said, “the whigs seem determined to extirpate the
tories, and the tories the whigs; some thousands have fallen in this way
in this quarter.” “Being almost equally divided, reciprocal injuries had
gradually sharpened their resentment against each other, and had armed
neighbour against neighbour, until it became a war of extermination.”
Now, it is submitted that rebellion can hardly be justified when the
people are so equally divided. Sabine remarks that “after the fall of
Charleston, and until the peace, the tories were in the ascendant.”


                             PENNSYLVANIA.

This splendid colony was granted to William Penn, the Quaker and
philanthropist, who was the son of Sir William Penn, an eminent English
admiral. Sir William held a claim against the British government for
£16,000; and, some time after his death, his son having his attention
directed to the new world, obtained, in lieu of that amount, the grant
of land now forming this State. The charter was granted by Charles II.
in 1681. Penn sought the new world to escape the persecutions inflicted
upon him at home. This he had brought upon himself, by freely expressing
his decided sectarian views, and by writings, disseminating the
teachings of George Fox, also by attacking the Established Church. He
was repeatedly imprisoned in the Tower, and even in Newgate for six
months. Penn, on procuring the grant of land, determined to make it “a
home for his co-religionists, where they might preach and practice their
convictions in unmolested peace.” To the territory he gave the name of
Sylvania; but afterwards King Charles insisted that Penn should be
prefixed, making it Pennsylvania. Penn sailed from England, with several
friends, in August, 1682. On reaching America he found that some Swedes
and Finns had settled along the banks of the Delaware. Although Penn had
a charter by which he could possess the land, yet, as an European, he
did not forget the original and rightful owners of the soil. Penn’s
conduct in this respect stands out in striking contrast to the course
pursued by the Puritans. It was on the 30th November, 1682, that William
Penn held his famous interview with the Indian tribes, when he effected
a straightforward treaty with them, never to be broken or disturbed, so
that he secured perpetual peace and respect. By this humane course with
the Indians, and by encouraging emigration of all classes, securing to
them the fullest liberty of conscience by a wise constitution, he
succeeded, with his co-religionists, in building up a most flourishing
colony. Subsequently the population was enlarged by numerous accessions
from Scotland and Germany.

                  *       *       *       *       *

The government of Pennsylvania was proprietary, and continued such until
the revolution swept away the charter, and made the children of William
Penn outcasts from the land they and their fathers had made fertile. At
the time of the revolution, John Penn, son of Richard Penn, who was the
grandson of William Penn, was the Governor of the colony. He, with the
masses of the people in the middle States, was opposed to the rebellion.
It is said there were thousands of loyalists in this State who desired
and offered to serve the crown, but whose services were lost through
bungling by those in office. Yet the State gave troops to the rebel
cause; 400 in 1775, and in the following year 5,519. The quota allotted
was 40,416; granted, 19,689.


                                GEORGIA.

This was the last of the thirteen colonies established. The founder was
Oglethorpe, who effected a settlement in 1773, and who lived to see the
colony a State. The colonists landed at Charleston in January, 1733.

When the rebellion broke out, this colony was “justly regarded as highly
loyal.” She refused to send delegates to the first rebel congress; “and
that she was represented in the second was owing to the zeal of a native
of Connecticut, Dr. Seymour Hall. It required time and labour to
organize a party of ‘liberty men’ to complete the Confederacy.” The
number of troops supplied in 1775 was 350; the quota was fixed at 3,974,
and there was supplied 2,328.

The history of England between the periods when Virginia and Georgia,
the oldest and youngest of the colonies that rebelled, were founded, was
one of turmoil and strife, of religious contentions and civil war; and
the colonists cast off during this hundred years carried with them,
across the Atlantic, heartfelt bitterness, and many of them no little
passion for evil. Notwithstanding, we have seen that the Southern
States, with Pennsylvania and New York, did not seek to divide their
connection with the parent State. It was generally admitted that the
policy of England towards them “had been mild—perhaps liberal.” But, as
we have seen, New England, with a few malcontents in other states—
envious office-seekers, managed to disseminate the principles of
rebellion—principles that New England has quite forgotten in her
treatment of the South.


                              NEW ENGLAND.

Of the aforementioned colonies, they all had received and had secured to
them by charter, from an indulgent mother country, governments of the
most liberal nature. Civil and religious liberty were fully enjoyed.
Says Mr. Sabine: “Virtually, republican charters; subject only to the
appointment of a governor on the part of the Crown. Every colony was,
practically, a State within itself; and it is a suggestive fact that the
very earliest assertion of legislative superiority on the part of the
mother country only operated negatively, by forbidding every colony to
make laws repugnant to those of England.”

Certain of the British colonies were, together, called “New England,”
and since the Independence they are known as the New England States.
They consist of New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, and Maine, which was then a colony of Massachusetts. This
region was granted by James I. to the Plymouth Company in 1606. It was
called North Virginia, but it was changed some years later, before it
was actually settled. It was the people of these States to whom the term
“Yankee” was originally applied; and now, in the United States, this
epithet is used solely in reference to these States; but in Canada and
England the word is applied very generally to all Americans. The origin
of the word Yankee is probably traceable to the Indian appellation
“_Yengee_,” for English, or _Anglais_, after the French.




                              CHAPTER IV.

  CONTENTS—American Writers—Sabine—Loyalists had no time to waste—
    Independence not sought at first—Adams—Franklin—Jay—Jefferson—
    Washington—Madison—The British Government—Ingratitude of the
    Colonists—Taxation—Smugglers—Crown Officers—Persistence—
    Superciliousness—Contest between Old England and New England.


It is most refreshing to one who has been accustomed to see American
school books, and even religious American tracts thickly strewn with the
most fulsome self-praise, and wordy accounts of British tyranny, and of
American purity and valor; to read the speeches, and listen to 4th of
July orators, who, with distorted history and hifalutin panegyrics, have
not ceased to wrap their country in a blazing sheet of glory. After
suffering all this, _ad nauseam_, it is most agreeable to read the
writings of one American author upon the subject of their Independence,
who can do some justice to the Loyalists. Reference is made to Lorenzo
Sabine, the author of “Royalists of the American Revolution.”
Considering the prejudices which exist throughout the United States
against every thing British, and the overweening vanity of the people in
respect to the success which crowned their efforts to dismember the
British Empire; it is a matter for grateful recognition that a native of
New England should take up his pen to write redeeming words on behalf of
the Loyalists whom they had been taught to stigmatize, to be read by his
fellow countrymen. Living upon the borders, beyond which he could see
the settled refugees working out their destiny, under adverse
circumstances, and laying the foundation of a nation, he took up his
pen, while the Upper Canadians were yet struggling with the forest, and
without time to gather up the records of their wrongs, their losses,
their persecutions, and more than all, the malicious charges against
them; and hurl them back at their traducers. On behalf of those who will
accept the writer as a representative of the United Empire Loyalists, he
thanks Lorenzo Sabine, for what he has said. He has said nothing but the
substantial truth in our favor, and in saying that, he has said very
much. In his prefatory remarks, after referring to their deficiency of
knowledge of the “Tories” he says, “The reason is obvious. Men who, like
the Loyalists, separate themselves from their friends and kindred, who
are driven from their homes, who surrender the hopes and expectations of
life, and who become outlaws, wanderers, and exiles,—such men leave few
memorials behind them. Their papers are scattered and lost, and their
very names pass from human recollections.”

Before considering the question, whether the American colonies were
justified in taking an extreme step; it is most necessary to state that,
at the first there were but an insignificant number of the colonists who
held the belief that armed rebellion was demanded. Even among those who,
with no mild-toned language denounced the mother country for enacting
laws oppressive to the commerce and industry of the Americans, no one
was found to advocate separation; on the contrary to use the words of
Sabine “The denial that independence was the final object, was constant
and general.” To obtain concessions and preserve the connection with
England, was affirmed everywhere; and John Adams, years after the peace,
went further than this, for he said ‘_There was not a moment during the
Revolution, when I would not have given everything I possessed for a
restoration to the state of things before the contest began, provided we
could have had a sufficient security for its continuance_.’ Again,
Franklin’s testimony, a few days before the affair at Lexington, was,
that he had “more than once travelled from one end of the continent to
the other, and kept a variety of company, eating, drinking, and
conversing with them freely, and never _had heard in any conversation
from any person drunk or sober, the least expression of a wish for
separation, or a hint that such a thing would be advantageous to
America_.” Mr. Jay is quite as explicit. “During the course of my life
and until the second petition of Congress in 1775, _I never did hear an
American of any class, of any description, express a wish for the
independence of the colonies_. It has always, and still is, my opinion
and belief, that our country was prompted and impelled to independence
by _necessity_, and not by _choice_.” Says Mr. Jefferson, “What,
eastward of New York, might have been the dispositions toward England
before the commencement of hostilities, I know not, but _before that_ I
never heard a whisper of a disposition to separate from Great Britain,
_and after that_, _its possibility_ was contemplated with affliction by
all.” Washington, in 1774, sustained these declarations, and, in the
“Fairfax County Resolves” it was complained, that “_malevolent
falsehoods_” were propagated by the ministry to prejudice the mind of
the king; _particularly_ that there is an intention in the American
colonies to _set up for independent States_; and Washington expressed a
wish that the “dispute might be left to posterity to determine.” Mr.
Madison was not in public life until May, 1776, but he says, “It has
always been my impression, that a _re-establishment of the colonial
relations_ to the _parent country_, _as they were previous to the
controversy_, was the real object of _every_ class of the people, till
the despair of obtaining it.”

The testimony of these Fathers of the Republic, cannot be impeached;
and, we must, therefore, seek for the cause of the rebellion in some
other place. We have seen how the British colonies were planted. In
connection with them, two leading influences may be discovered
constantly at work, one of a personal nature; the other referring to the
State. Individuals would not sever the ties of home-ship and brave the
wide ocean, to expose themselves to the varied dangers of the
wilderness, did they not have good reason to expect due returns. The
Government would not afford ships and means to send her sons to distant
shores, unless the colony would become serviceable to the parent State.
The British Government had enabled many a hardy son to lay the
foundation for substantial wealth. More than all, the colonies of
America had been assisted to put under their feet their French rival.
For their benefit the Crown expected, and undertook to enforce some
tribute. But the colonists would not recognize the right of the Crown to
tax them for their labor. For all the British Government had done for
the colonies, for all the money spent, she required that the colonists
should be taxed. Laws were enacted, and officers and revenue collectors
appointed to enforce the laws. It was required that these colonies
should not trade, without certain restrictions, with foreign nations;
but the merchants of Massachusetts, having tasted the sweets of
unrestricted trade, were unwilling to pay revenue to the Crown, although
trading under the protection of the British flag. And so it came that
when royal collectors of customs were sent out; when men of war coasted
the shores of Massachusetts to prevent smuggling, by Hancock and others,
there was no disposition to submit to Imperial taxation. For years the
law relating to revenue had been a dead letter almost, the smugglers
having used hush money. But at last Government determined to put down
illicit trade. It is true the colonies did not object without a special
plea, which was “no taxation without representation.” But the real
points at issue were, whether contraband commerce should continue and
increase, or the Crown receive the dues demanded by law. “Nine-tenths
probably, of all the tea, wine, fruit, sugar, and molasses, consumed in
the colonies were smuggled. To put this down was the determined purpose
of the ministry. The commanders of the ships of war on the American
station were accordingly commissioned as officers of the customs; and,
to quicken their zeal, they were to share in the proceeds of the
confiscations; the courts to decide upon the lawfulness of seizures,
were to be composed of a single judge, without a jury, whose emoluments
were to be derived from his own condemnations; the Governors of the
colonies and the military officers were to be rewarded for their
activity by swearing also, either in the property condemned, or in the
penalties annexed to the interdicted trade.” And was not the Crown
correct in enforcing laws intended for the public weal? Had hostile
fleets approached Boston harbour to invade, instead of smuggling crafts,
freighted with luxuries, would not the colonist have called loudly for
Imperial help to protect? But if the Government had the best of rights
to enforce the laws, it certainly displayed much want of judgment in the
mode adopted to carry out its demands. The foregoing, from Sabine,
recalls to us at once the cause why resistance was strenuously made. The
mode of paying their Crown officers was well calculated to kindle
feelings of the most determined opposition on the part of the illicit
traders, such as John Hancock, John Langdon, Samuel Adams, William
Whipple, George Clymer, Stephen Hopkins, Francis Louis, Philip
Livingston, Eldridge Gerry, Joseph Hewes, George Taylor, Roger Sherman,
Button Gurnett, and Robert Morris, all signers of the declaration of
independence,—all smugglers!

And thus it came about. The Crown was determined to exact taxes, and
ignorant of the feelings of the colonists; and the colonists, grown rich
by unrestricted trade—by smuggling, entered into a contract, which was
only to end in dismemberment of the British Empire. Side issues were
raised, cries of oppression shouted, the love of liberty invoked and
epithets bandied; but they were only for effect, to inflame the public
mind, of which there was much wavering. Of course, there were other
things which assisted to ripen rebellion, at least were so represented,
that they added to the growing discontent. Colonies, when they have
become developed by age, and powerful by local circumstances, will
naturally lose the interest which animates the subject at home. It is in
the nature of things that the love of country should gradually change
from the old home to the new. The inhabitants of the colonies were in
many cases but descendants of European nations, who could not be
expected to retain the warmest attachment to the parent country. The
tide of war had changed the allegiance of many a one. The heterogeneous
whole could not be called English, and hence it was more easy to cast
aside the noble feeling called patriotism. Then there were jealousies of
the Crown officers, and everything undertaken by the home government,
having the appearance of change, was promptly suspected as being
intended to degrade them. The exclusiveness of the regular army and
superciliousness to the provincial troops, during the French war, caused
many a sting, and the thought of insult to the provincial officer
remained to rankle and fester in the mind of many a military aspirant.
The proposal to introduce Episcopal Bishops, to give precedence to the
Established Church, had its effect upon many, yet many of the
non-conformists were equally loyal.

The contest was originally between New England and Old England. While
the Middle and Southern States were for peace, or moderate measures, the
north sedulously worked to stir up strife by disseminating specious
statements and spreading abroad partisan sentiments. Massachusetts took
the lead. Founded by Puritans, (who, themselves were the most intolerant
bigots and became the greatest persecutors America has seen,) these
States possessed the proper elements with which to kindle discontent.

Thus we have learned that independence was not the primary object of
revolt, and we have seen that the leaders in rebellion were principally
New Englanders, and were actuated mainly by mercenary motives, unbounded
selfishness and bigotry.




                               CHAPTER V.

  CONTENTS—The signers of the Declaration of Independence—Their
    nativity—Injustice of American writers for 80 years—Cast back
    mis-statements—The whigs had been U. E. Loyalists—Hancock—
    Office-seekers—Malcontents stir up strife—What the fathers of the
    Republic fought for—Rebel committees—Black mail—Otis, John Adams,
    Warren, Washington, Henry, Franklin—What caused them to rebel—What
    the American revolutionary heroes actually were—Cruelty, during
    and after the war—No freedom—The political mistake of the rebels
    in alienating the loyalists—The consequence—Motives of the
    loyalists—False charges—Conscientious conservatives—Rebellion not
    warranted—Attachment to the old flag—Loyalists driven away—
    _Suppressio veri_—Want of noble spirit towards the South—Effects—
    Comparison between loyalists and rebels—Education—Religion—The
    neutral—The professions.


Of the fifty-six signers of the Declaration of Independence nine were
born in Massachusetts, seven in Virginia, six in Maryland, five in
Connecticut, four in New Jersey, four in Pennsylvania, four in South
Carolina, three in New York, three in Delaware, two in Rhode Island, one
in Maine, three in Ireland, two in England, two in Scotland, and one in
Wales. Of these twenty-one were attornies; ten merchants; four
physicians; three farmers; one clergyman; one printer; and ten men of
fortune.


                              THE MOTIVES.

But let us more carefully consider the motives in connection with the
rebellion of ‘76. So assiduously have our fathers, the U. E. Loyalists,
been branded by most American writers as altogether base, that it
becomes us to cast back the mis-statements—to tear away the specious
covering of the American revolutionary heroes, and throw the sunlight of
truth upon their character, and dispel the false, foul stigma, which the
utterances of eighty years have essayed to fasten upon the noble band of
Loyalists.

Up to 1776, the whigs as well as the tories were United Empire
Loyalists; and it was only when the king’s forces required taxes; when
the colonists were requested no longer to smuggle; when they could not
dispossess the tories of the power and emoluments of office—it was only
then that the Declaration of Independence was signed by those more
particularly interested. John Hancock, whose name stands first upon the
document, in such bold characters, had been a successful smuggler,
whereby he had acquired his millions, and no wonder he staked his
thousands on the issue. Evidence is not wanting to show that many of the
leaders of the rebellion, had they been holders of office, would have
been as true to the British Crown as were those whom they envied. Every
man who took part on the rebel side has been written a hero; but it is
asking too much to request us to believe that all the holders of office
were base, and lost to the feelings of natural independence and
patriotism; more especially when a large proportion of them were,
admittedly, educated and religious men; while, on the contrary, the
rebels alone were actuated by patriotism and the nobler feelings of
manhood. Apart from the merits or demerits of their cause, it must be
admitted that the circumstances of the times force upon us the thought
that a comparatively few needy office-seekers, or lookers-after other
favors from the Crown, not being able to obtain the loaves and fishes,
began to stir up strife. A few, possessed of sufficient education, by
the aid of the wealthy contraband traders, were enabled, by popular
sensational speeches and inflammatory pamphlets, to arouse the feelings
of the uneducated; and, finally, to create such a current of political
hatred to the Crown that it could not be stayed, and which swept away
the ties that naturally attached them to Great Britain.

We may easily imagine the surprise which many experienced in after days,
when the war had ended and their independence was acknowledged, to find
themselves heroes, and their names commemorated as fathers of their
country; whereas they had fought only for money or plunder, or smuggled
goods, or because they had not office. In not a few cases it is such
whose names have served for the high-sounding fourth of July orators;
for the buncombe speechifier and the flippant editor, to base their
eulogistic memoriams. Undoubtedly there are a few entitled to the place
they occupy in the temple of fame; but the vast majority seem to have
been actuated by mercenary motives. We have authenticated cases where
prominent individuals took sides with the rebels because they were
disappointed in obtaining office; and innumerable instances where
wealthy persons were arrested, ostensibly on suspicion, and compelled to
pay large fines, and then set at liberty. No feudal tyrant of Europe in
the olden times enforced black mail from the traveller with less
compunction than rebel “committees” exacted money from wealthy
individuals who desired simply to remain neutral.

It has been said that Otis, a name revered by the Americans, actually
avowed that he “would set Massachusetts in a flame, though he should
perish in the fire.” For what? Not because he wanted liberty, but
because his father was not appointed to a vacant judgeship! It is
alleged that John Adams was at a loss which side to take, and finally
became a rebel because he was refused a commission in the peace! It is
said that Joseph Warren was a broken-down man, and sought, amid the
turmoil of civic strife, to better his condition. And the immortal
Washington, it is related, and has never been successfully contradicted,
was soured against the mother county because he was not retained in the
British army in reward for his services in the French war. Again,
Richard Henry was disappointed in not receiving the office of stamp
distributor, which he solicited. Franklin was vexed because of
opposition to his great land projects and plans of settlement on the
Ohio. Indeed it is averred that mostly all the prominent whigs who sided
with the rebels were young men, with nothing to lose and everything to
gain by political changes and civil war. Thus it will be seen that the
so-called American revolutionary heroes have not altogether clean hands,
however much they may have been washed by their descendants. The
clothing placed upon them may conceal the dirt and dross and blood, but
they are indelibly there.

It is not alone the motives which constituted the mainsprings of the
rebels’ action that we place in the balance, but their conduct towards
those who differed from them. Individual instances of cruelty we shall
have occasion to introduce; but it may here be said that it was the
tories who acted as the conservators of peace against a mobocracy, and
consequently were made to suffer great afflictions. It was because of
this they were forced away to live and die as aliens to the land of
their birth. The tories were Americans as well as the whigs; and when at
last Great Britain ceased to try to coerce the colonies, and their
independence was secured, then a nobler spirit should have obtained
among the conquerors, and no one, because he had conscientiously been a
conservative, should have been treated with opprobrium. It always
becomes the victorious to be generous; and we, with all respect to many
American friends, submit that, had patriotism alone actuated the
revolutionary party, the American loyalists would have been invited to
join with the whigs in erecting a mighty nation. Had _freedom_, indeed,
been the watchword then, as it has flauntingly been since, it would have
been conceded that the tory had a right to his opinion as well as the
whig to his. Do the Americans descant upon the wisdom and far-seeing
policy of those who signed the Declaration of Independence and framed
the constitution of the Union? Monroe, we doubt not, had a different
opinion when he begot the doctrine “America for the Americans.” Had the
U. E. Loyalists been treated honorably; had they been allowed but their
rights; had they not been driven away; then the name _British American_
would forever have passed away; and instead of a belt of British
provinces on their north, to constitute a ceaseless cause of
misunderstanding with England, the star-spangled banner would,
doubtless, long ago, have peacefully floated over all our land. Looking
at the subject from this (an American) stand-point, we see that a
shortsighted policy—a vindictive feeling, a covetous desire for the
property of the tories—controlled the movements of the hour; and when
the terms of peace were signed the birthright of the American tory was
signed away, and he became forever an alien. But, as we shall see, he,
in consequence, became the founder of a Province which, like a rock, has
resisted, and ever will resist, the northward extension of the United
States.


                       MOTIVES OF THE LOYALISTS.

Whatever may have been the incentives to rebellion, yielded to by those
who revolted, there cannot rest upon the mind of the honest reader of
unbiassed history a doubt as to the motives of the loyalists. The
home-spun eulogists of the United States revolutionary soldiers have
never ceased to dwell upon the principles which fired the breasts of the
patriots, and nerved their arms to deeds of daring and successful
warfare; all the time observing silence respecting the bravery of those
who, from the same walks of life, engaged in the strife as the
determined antagonists to rebellion. They have again and again charged
upon the “king’s men” that it was because they were servants of the
Crown and feeders at the government stall that loyalty was assumed and
fought for. But facts, when allowed to stand out uncovered by the cant
of liberatists, declare, in words that may not be gainsayed, that there
were a vast number who held no appointment under the Crown, yet who,
from first to last, were true—naturally true—to their king and country.
The great mass were essentially conservatives, called “tories.” They
held the opinion that to rebel was not only unnecessary but wrong. They
believed that the evils of which the colonists had just reason to
complain were not so great as to justify the extreme step taken by the
signers of the Declaration of Independence; that any injustice existing
was but temporary and would, when properly and calmly represented to the
home government, be remedied; that to convulse the colonies in war was
an unjustifiably harsh procedure; and, entertaining such a belief, it is
submitted that they were noble indeed in standing up for peace—for more
moderate measures. Moreover, not unlikely, many were impressed with the
view that the disaffected were laboring under an erroneous idea of
oppression; that the training incident to pioneer life, the previous
wars with the French Canadians, the constant contentions with the
Indians, had begotten false views of their rights, and made them too
quick to discover supposed wrongs. Candidly impressed with such
thoughts, they could not be otherwise than true to the natural instincts
of their heart, and refuse to take part, or acquiesce in throwing
overboard the government of England, and so become aliens to the flag
under which they were born and had lived, and for which they had fought.
Not many may cast aside their feelings of nationality; not many can
forget the land of their birth; not a large number will bury the
associations of a life-time without the most potent causes. And,
doubtless, the Anglo-American who faithfully adhered to the old flag
possessed all the ardor of a lofty patriotism. But the American writer
has forgotten all this. In the broad sunlight of national success he has
not discovered the sacred longings of the U. E. Loyalists for the Union
Jack. Looking at the events of ‘76 by the lurid glare of civil war, his
eyes are blinded to the fact that a noble band, possessing equal rights
with the rebels, loved England, notwithstanding all her faults, and for
that love sacrificed their all of worldly goods. The citizens of the
United States would prefer to have it said in history that the U. E.
Loyalists, in every instance, voluntarily left their homes during the
war, or at its close. The loyalists are thereby, no doubt, made to
appear more devotedly attached to the British Crown. But it is right to
have it distinctly stated that American writers mostly make themselves
guilty of _suppressio veri_. The latest instance of this is seen in a
report to the Hon. Hugh McCullough, Secretary of the Treasury, prepared
by E. H. Derby, Commissioner of the Treasury Department, dated January
1st, 1866, who, in remarking upon the British Colonial policy from 1776
down to 1830, takes occasion to say that, “at first there was little
fellowship between the United States and the Provincialists, many of
whom were descended from the loyalists who _followed_ the British troops
from our shores.” The fact is, however, that many of them were driven
away. The tories were not loyal without sense; and when the fortune of
war had turned against them, they would, in great numbers, have made the
best of their changed condition, and have lived to become true citizens
of the new-born nation. But this was not to be. The loyalists were to be
made feel that they were outcasts. It is the same ignoble and
unstatesmanlike course which is now being pursued toward the subdued
South. They must needs be made to know they are rebels. It is a
shortsighted policy, even as the former was. The former led to the
establishment of a nation to their north, which will stand, even after
the Union lies in fragments; the latter fosters a feeling of alienation,
which will speak upon the first opportunity, in the thunder tones of
war.

If a comparison is instituted between the rebels of 1776, and those who
were conservators of peace, the contrast is found to be very great. It
is charged against the loyalists that all office-holders were tories;
but is this more worthy of remark than the fact that many became rebels
because they could not obtain office. Nay, the latter is infinitely more
heinous in its nature. If we look at the two parties, with respect to
education and, it may be added, religion, it is found that the great
bulk of the educated and refined, the religious classes, especially the
clergy, the leading lawyers, the most prominent medical men, were all
loyalists. It was not because they were office-holders, it was because
they possessed a moral and elevated mind, educated to a correct
standard. Then, again, there was a large class of citizens who loved
retirement, and who begged to be allowed to remain neutral, but who were
actually compelled to take sides with the rebels or be driven away.

The peaceably inclined, who looked for guidance to their spiritual
instructors, generally beheld them, if not actually advocating the
interests of the crown, at least setting an example against rebellion,
and they were thus strengthened in their feelings of loyalty, or
determination to remain neutral. The flame of patriotism was kept aglow
in many a heart by the earnest prayer of the gospel minister. Says
Sabine: “From what has now been said it is evident that a very
considerable proportion of the professional and editorial intelligence
and talents of the thirteen colonies was arrayed against the popular
movement.” Again: “a large number of the clergy were United Empire
Loyalists.” Also, “the giants of the law were nearly all loyalists.” The
physicians were mostly tories, but were, as a general thing, not
molested. “A few were banished; others became surgeons in the army.”




                              CHAPTER VI.

  CONTENTS—Republicanism—The lesson of the first rebellion—The late
    civil war—The Loyalists; their losses and hardships—Ignored by
    Americans—Unrecorded—The world kept in ignorance—American glory—
    Englishmen—Question of Colonial treatment—The reason why Great
    Britain failed to subdue the rebellion—Character of the rebel
    bravery—The great result—Liberty in England and United States
    contrasted—Slavery—The result to U. E. Loyalists—Burgoyne—
    Mobocracy—Treatment from “Sons of Liberty”—Old men, women and
    children—Instances of cruelty—Brutality—Rapacity—Torture—The lower
    classes—“Swamp Law”—Fiendish cruelty—Worse than Butler’s Rangers—
    Seward and the Fenians—Infamous falsification—Close of the war—
    Recognition of independence by Great Britain—Crushed hopes of the
    Loyalists—In New York—Their conduct—Evacuation day—The position of
    the Loyalists—Confiscation—“Attainting”—Seizing estates—Paine—
    Commissioners at Paris—British Ministry—Loyalists’ petition—King’s
    speech—Division of claimants—Six classes—The number—Tardy justice—
    Noble conduct of South Carolina—Impostors—Loyalists in Lower
    Canada—Proclamation—The soldiers’ families—Journeyings—Meeting of
    families.


                              THE RESULT.

Almost a hundred years have passed away since the war-cloud arose which
swept away thirteen of Britain’s colonies upon the uncertain and
tempest-tossed ocean of Republicanism. That storm is long since stilled,
as well as the hearts of those who took part therein.

While the statesman and politician may, with advantage, study the lesson
then read, and which has been but lately annotated by the United States
civil war, by the determined subjection of eight millions of
Southerners, who desired freedom to establish a new government, let it
be our humble occupation to record some of the immediate individual
results of that great tempest, of which American writers, with but few
exceptions, have never spoken fairly. Writers among them are not wanting
to give lively pen pictures of their revolutionary heroes; not only
forgetting the sufferings of the loyalists—the devoted ones, who gave up
all—property, homes, friends, all the associations of a birth-place,
rather than bow the knee to Baal; but who have wilfully misrepresented
them; have charged them with crimes, at once atrocious and unfounded.
The sufferings, the losses, the hardships, incident to pioneer life,
with the noble purposes and undeviating loyalty of the British American
tories, have never been fully related—never engaged the pen of the
faithful historian. American writers, on the contrary, have recorded in
glowing colors the deeds and actions of the “fathers of the Republic.”
To this no objection; can be made; but may we not charge those
historians with uncharitableness, with unnecessary neglect of the claims
of the loyalists to pure motives, with ignoring their brave deeds, their
devoted sufferings, and with unduly ascribing to the “king’s men”
motives base and cruel. But the sufferings of the U. E. Loyalists are
unrecorded. The world has rarely been told that they were persecuted,
their homes pillaged, their persons maltreated, their valuables seized,
their houses made desolate, their real estate taken from them, without
legal proceedings. The world has been so flooded with the writings of
Americans, describing their own excellencies and eulogizing their own
cause, that no space has been found to do simple justice to the noble
ones who preferred British rule to the uncertain and untried. Indeed, so
strongly and for so long a time has the current been flowing to swell
the ocean of American glory, that hardly a voice or pen is found doing
service for the unfortunate loyalists, who chose to endure a little
rather than rush into the vortex of rebellious strife. Even Englishmen
have so long listened to one-sided statements, that no one of them can
be found to say a word for the old tory party of America. Hence it is
that the U. E. Loyalists are very imperfectly known; their history
unwritten, their tales of sorrow unattended to, their noble doings
unsung. Had there been a hand to guide a describing pen,—to picture the
doings, the sufferings, the self-denying heroism of the loyal party; to
recount the motives underlying all they did; and had there been ears as
willing to listen, and eyes to read, and hearts to receive the facts as
those of a contrary nature have obtained, then a far different
impression would have been made, and fixed upon the world.

That the British Government was right or wise in its treatment of the
American colonies we now have every reason to doubt. At the same time,
that England might have subdued that rebellion, had she put forth her
undivided strength, there is but little reason to question. Had she not
been engaged in a formidable war with France; or even with that, had her
statesmen acquired a correct knowledge of America as to topography, and
as to the feelings and wishes of the people and their just complaints;
or had able generals been entrusted with the command of the armies,
instead of incompetent favorites; or had a little diplomacy been
practiced, and the ringleaders of the whig faction—often hungry
agitators—been conciliated by office; in either event the rebellion
might have been nipped in the bud, or easily overcome. The American
Republic owes its independence to the circumstances in which Great
Britain was then placed, and the incapacity of a few of the British
Generals, rather than to superior bravery, extraordinary military
talent, or any high-toned longing for liberty. No doubt many of the
rebelling party were brave; but it was often the bravery of the
guerilla, or the desperate adventurer.

Of the great result—the recognition of the independence of the rebelling
provinces by the mother country—we design not to speak at length. It
will always remain a question, whether it would not have been better for
the States themselves, and the world at large, if they had remained a
part of the British Empire. That the evils of which they complained
would, in due time, have been removed, upon proper representation, there
is no substantial reason to doubt. That the principles of true freedom
would have advanced and spread quite as rapidly, and that, to-day,
liberty, in the broadest sense, would have reigned in the world fully as
triumphant, the whole history of England and the United States
sufficiently attest. It was many long years after Britain had struck off
the chains of slavery before the United States reached the same point;
and then only because it became a “military necessity.” Looking at the
two nations to-day, and judging by the utterances of the two respective
people, whether enunciated in the halls of legislature, by the head of
the nation, by the bar, in the pulpit, by the press, or from the
platform; or if we be guided by the public deeds of each, it is
submitted that the more genuine ring of the metal sounds from beneath
the wide-spreading banner of old England.

The effect of the successful rebellion, to which it is intended to
refer, has reference to the United Empire Loyalists of America. And
first, the effect upon them during the war.

The defeat of Burgoyne was the first event which immediately led to
severe disaster of the loyalists. This general, with more assurance than
foresight, and perhaps more courage than military skill, succeeded, not
only in leading his army to destruction, but in placing the friendly
inhabitants on his route in such a position that no mercy was
subsequently extended to them by the ruthless rebels. When he
surrendered, instead of securing for them immunity from any harm, he
entirely neglected their interests; notwithstanding they had supplied
his troops with provision. The relentless conduct of the rebels in arms
and the whig government was bloodthirsty and vindictive. Their hate
towards those who would not take sides with them, whether in arms for
the Crown or not, was barbarous. Persons suspected of sympathy with the
tories were subjects of continued molestation. Mobocracy reigned.
Vagabond bodies of men were sent abroad to range the country, to lay
waste and destroy the property of the loyalists, imprison the suspected,
and seize the goods of the unprotected. Tarring and feathering was of
common occurrence. Massachusetts especially gained a name for cruelty
far exceeding any which has been applied to the Indians, with all their
barbarism. There was a villainous band who called themselves the “Sons
of Liberty,” who carried fire and sword—not against an open enemy in the
light of day, but to peaceful firesides in the darkness of night. Their
victims were the old men, the women and children, and the defenceless.
Old men and children were driven to the woods for shelter, or placed in
a closed room, and, with chimney stopped, smoked to suffocation. Females
were subject to insult and the most fiendish treatment. Dwellings were
fired at night, and their occupants left houseless, and exposed to the
inclemency of the weather.

Suspected persons were arrested and put to terrible torture, such as
attaching a rope to the neck and hauling the individual through the
water till insensible; or suspending him to a tree till life was almost
gone. This was frequently done with the object of extracting information
as to the whereabouts of a father or a brother, or as to the place where
money and valuables were concealed. The tales of cruelty the writer has
heard related concerning the treatment the loyal party were exposed to,
would harrow up the soul of any one possessing feelings of pity and
commiseration.

The loyalists who immediately suffered, that is, while the war was in
progress, were many. Military forts were established here and there, to
which many fled precipitately from the several States.

It is a matter of extreme astonishment how men who set up the standard
of revolt under the sacred name of liberty, could so far ignore the
principles of liberty in the treatment of innocent old men, women and
children, as we find stated by honest witnesses. The darkest tales of
savage dealing come to us from our fathers. Families, whose sole offence
consisted in being unwilling to rebel, and in being desirous to remain
faithfully neutral, were the objects of the rapacious prey of a brutal
soldiery. Their substance when not available for the rebel horde, was
scattered to the winds. Devouring fire was cast into peaceful homes. How
gross the hypocrisy, how base the motives that actuated very many of the
adventurers in rebellion. The most hellish means were adopted at times,
to force away persons of property, that the so-called “Sons of Liberty”
might enjoy their substance and homes. Attending these scenes of
desolation and refined cruelty, their imprisonments and torture, were
incidents of thrilling interest, of fearful suffering, of hairbreadth
escapes, of forlorn rescues.

The lower classes of those who rebelled were men of bold and lawless
nature: whether we pass along the shores of New England, among the
fishermen, or travel thorough the woods of Maine and New Hampshire, and
become acquainted with woodmen of the forest, or as they were called
“Loggers and Sawyers.” The spirit that animated the merchants of Boston
and Salem, in their extended operations of smuggling, lived, also, in
the reckless fishermen and woodmen; and for years before the rebellion
really commenced they had been resisting, even by physical force, the
revenue officers, who were often expelled from the woods by what was
called “swamp law.” Men with such nature, finding that their lawlessness
had become popular, and that steps were being taken to resist the
government on a general plan, were not slow to act their part. One
result of the rebellion was a determined and systematic course of
retaliation upon those who had recognized the majesty of the law. A
continued and uncompromising persecution was entered upon toward them.

No history can parallel the deeds of atrocity enacted by the villainous
“Liberty men.” Said an old lady, on the verge of the grave, and with
voice tremulous in remembrance of fiendish acts she had witnessed, “The
Rebels, on one occasion entered a house and stripped it of everything,
even the bed on which lay a woman on the point of confinement. But a
single sheet was left to cover the woman upon a winter’s night, who,
before morning became a mother.” In 1776, there arrived at Fort George,
in a starving state, Mrs. Nellis, Mrs. Secord, Mrs. Young, Mrs. Buck and
Mrs. Bonnar, with thirty-one children, whom the circumstances of the
rebellion had driven away. Talk about the cruelty of Indians and of Tory
oppression. The unprincipled rebels did well to try to hide their
ignominious deeds behind the fabrications respecting the doings of
Butler’s Rangers, and the noble-minded Brant. May we not cease to wonder
that the descendants of the rebels in the year 1866, endeavour to hound
on a pack of thieves and murderers to possess themselves of the homes
our fathers sought out for us. The self-applauding writers of the
revolutionary war, found it convenient to forget the doings of the “Sons
of Liberty” and of Sullivan, while they laid to the charge of Butler’s
Rangers and the Indians, acts of inhumanity (which we are informed on
good authority are unfounded, Butler having never abused woman or
child.) In the same manner, Secretary Seward found it desirable to
falsify dates, by saying the Fenians invaded Canada on the 6th of June,
that it might appear he had vindicated promptly their neutrality laws;
whereas they actually crossed, and engaged in battle, on the morning of
the 2nd. But as time will fully bring out the facts connected with the
first American rebellion, and place them face to face with one-sided
history, so will faithful history record the whole truth of the infamous
invasion of our country by a band of American citizens with United
States arms in their hands. Those deeds of blood, enacted by men under
the hypocritical cry of liberty have not been forgotten by the United
Empire Loyalists, but have been handed down to us, to place on record
against the cruel actors.

Hostilities ceased 19th April, 1783, and on the 20th September, the
independence of the United States was acknowledged.

The recognition of independence by Great Britain, was the death knell to
the cherished hopes of the loyalists. Many had escaped into the
provinces, and many were in the army, and not a few were in England.
Although the majority of them had been driven away, a few still remained
in those places, yet held by the British forces, as New York. “When the
news of peace became known, the city presented a scene of distress not
easily described. Adherents to the Crown, who were in the army, tore the
lapels from their coats and stamped them under their feet, and exclaimed
that they were ruined; others cried out they had sacrificed everything
to prove their loyalty, and were now left to shift for themselves,
without the friendship of their king or country. Previous to the
evacuation, and in September, upwards of 12,000 men, women, and
children, embarked at the city, at Long and Staten Islands, for Nova
Scotia and the Bahamas,” and for Canada. “Some of these victims to civil
war tried to make merry at their doom, by saying they were bound to a
lovely country, where there are nine months winter and three months cold
weather every year, while others, in their desperation tore down their
houses, and had they not been prevented, would have carried off the
bricks of which they were built.” The British had possessed New York
since 15th September, 1776, and on the 25th November, 1783, yielded it
up to the Americans. This is “Evacuation day.”

When Cornwallis surrendered he vainly tried to obtain a promise of
protection for the Loyal Americans, who, in part, formed his army.
Failing in this, he sent an armed vessel away with a large number.

At this time beside the many who had become refugees, there were some
loyalists scattered through the States. Many of these remained in the
now Independent States, and many of them would have returned, to become
faithful citizens under the new order of things, had they been allowed
so to do. But the young Republic knew not how to be magnanimous to those
whom the fortunes of war had left in great distress—whom they had
conquered, and the United Empire Loyalists were made aliens from their
native homes. Their property must be confiscated, and many being large
land owners, rich prizes were thus secured. While the conflict continued
to rage there was some excuse, but when war had ceased, and everything
had been accomplished that the most craving rebel could wish, it was a
ruthless, an ungenerous, nay, a base proceeding on the part of the
revolutionists, to force away their very brethren, often related by the
ties of consanguinity. But it was a spirit as unprincipled as this,
which instigated the rebellion, and which characterized the vast
majority of those who fought under the sacred name of liberty, and such
was the spirit of the conquerors.

The successful rebels determined to possess themselves of the lands and
property of the loyalists, even in violation of treaty. The action of
Congress was sufficiently high-handed and wanting in generosity; but the
proceedings of the State Legislatures, with a few exceptions, were
execrable—characterized by ignoble and vindictive passion.

The Legislatures of each state took early steps to punish the adherents
of Britain, to dispossess them of their property, and to banish them.
Massachusetts took the lead in dealing severely against the loyalists. A
rebel magistrates’ warrant was sufficient to banish one. Hundreds of
Massachusetts Loyalists were prohibited from returning on penalty of
imprisonment and even death. And the other States were active in
“attainting” and confiscating, often without the form of trial. Each
State carried on its function as a government, and trials ought to have
been granted, in common justice to every one. But the Whigs were
intolerant, hot-headed, malevolent, unforgiving. It has been said that
“if it be conceded that rebellion against England was right, then every
step necessary to success was justifiable.” If we grant all this there
remains the fact that after success had crowned rebellion, persecution
and confiscation continued. New York, on the 12th May, 1784, passed “An
act for the speedy sale of the confiscated and forfeited estates within
the States.” The powers consisted in the appointment of “commissioners
of forfeitures.” Among those who lost their land was one Davoe. He had
300 acres near New York, twenty miles, which was confiscated and given
to the notorious Tom Paine, the infidel, whose extreme liberal views
expressed in his work, “Common Sense,” made him the friend of
Washington, and revolutionists generally. Paine, after taking part in
the French Revolutions, came, in 1802, to his place in New York, where
he enjoyed the loyalists’ confiscated property until his death, 8th
June, 1809.

In the terms of peace signed at Paris, there was no security effected
for the losses sustained by the American Loyalists.

As Burgoyne at his inglorious surrender at Saratoga, thought not of the
innocent inhabitants of the Mohawk and Hudson, who had identified
themselves with the loyal cause, and supplied his troops with
provisions, and left them to the merciless “Sons of Liberty,” to be
despoiled of their all, and exposed to fearful cruelty, so at the last,
when the British Government relinquished the attempt to subdue
rebellion, the American Loyalists were of remote consideration. We can
gather now but the outlines of this great wrong done unto noble men. The
particulars are buried in the wreck of fortune, and of happiness,
respecting all worldly matters. The after life of the loyalists was of
too earnest a nature to allow time to place on record the sufferings,
and the wanderings of the disinherited. The lost cause did not stimulate
men to draw upon imagination, such as may be found in gaudy-hued
descriptions of American revolutionary heroes, male and female. But
there is sufficient of facts recorded, and engraven by the iron pen of
extreme anguish upon hearts, that were of flesh, to stamp the
persecutors with infamy, and mark the refugees, that clustered around
the border forts, and found homes at Sorel, Lachine, and Montreal, with
the highest attributes of patriotism and love of country.

The conduct of the ministry, and the commissioners at Paris is open to
the severest censure. They left the claims of the loyalists to be
decided by the American Congress. We may allow them the credit of having
held the belief, that this body would be actuated by a feeling of
justice and right, but the error was a grave one, the wrong grievous and
hard to be endured. In pursuing this course, the British ministry did
not escape condemnation by members of Parliament, and a feeling of
sympathy was evoked that led to a tardy dispensing of justice. Lord
North said “that never were the honor, the principles, the policy of a
nation, so grossly abused as in the desertion of those men, who are now
exposed to every punishment that desertion and poverty can inflict,
because they were not rebels.” Mr. Sheridan “execrated the treatment of
those unfortunate men, who, without the least notice taken of their
civil and religious rights, were handed over as subjects to a power that
would not fail to take vengeance on them for their zeal and attachment
to the religion and government of the mother country,” “and he called it
a crime to deliver them over to confiscation, tyranny, resentment and
oppression.” Lord Loughborough said that “in ancient nor modern history
had there been so shameful a desertion of men who had sacrificed all to
their duty and to their reliance upon British faith.” Others, in terms
of equal severity, denounced the ministry in Parliament for their
neglect. The ministry admitted it all, but excused themselves by the
plea that “a part must be wounded, that the whole of the empire may not
perish”—that they “had but the alternative, either to accept the terms
proposed, or continue the war.”

“A number of loyalists in England, came to the United States to claim
restitution of their estates, but their applications were unheeded,”
except to imprison, and banish them.

The treaty of peace signed, without any provision for the suffering
loyalists, they at once took steps to petition the Imperial Parliament
for justice. “They organized an agency, and appointed a Committee,
composed of one delegate, or agent from each of the thirteen States, to
enlighten the British public.” “At the opening of Parliament the King,
in his speech from the throne, alluded to the ‘American sufferers’ and
trusted generous attention would be shewn to them.” An act was
consequently passed creating a “Board of Commissioners” to examine the
claims preferred. The claimants were divided into six classes.

“_First Class._—Those who had rendered service to Great Britain.”

“_Second Class._—Those who had borne arms for Great Britain.”

“_Third Class._—Uniform Loyalists.”

“_Fourth Class._—Loyal British subjects residents in Great Britain.”

“_Fifth Class._—Loyalists who had taken oaths to the American States,
but afterward joined the British.”

“_Sixth Class._—Loyalists who had borne arms for the American States,
and afterwards joined the British navy or army.”

The claimants had to state in writing, and specifically the nature of
their losses. Great and unnecessary caution was observed by the Board.
The rigid rules of examinations caused much dissatisfaction and gave the
Board the name of “Inquisition.”

The 26th of March, 1784, was the latest period for presenting claims,
which was allowed, and on or before that day, the number of claimants
was two thousand and sixty-three. A “second report which was made in
December of the same year, shows that one hundred and twenty-eight
additional cases had been disposed of.” In May and July 1865, one
hundred and twenty-two cases more were disposed of. In April 1786, one
hundred and forty more were attended to. The commissioners proceeded
with their investigations during the years 1786 and 1787. “Meantime” and
to her honor be it said “South Carolina had restored the estates of
several of her loyalists.”

Years passed away before the commissioners had decided upon all the
claims, and great and loud was the complaint made by the claimants. The
press was invoked to secure a more prompt concession of justice,
pamphlets were published on their behalf, and one printed in 1788, five
years after the peace, contained the following: “It is well that this
delay of justice has produced the most melancholy and shocking events. A
number of the sufferers have been driven by it into insanity, and become
their own destroyers, leaving behind them their helpless widows and
orphans to subsist upon the cold charity of strangers. Others have been
sent to cultivate a wilderness for their subsistence, without having the
means, and compelled through want, to throw themselves on the mercy of
the American States, and the charity of their former friends, to support
the life which might have been made comfortable by the money long since
due from the British Government, and many others, with their families
are barely subsisting upon a temporary allowance from government, a mere
pittance when compared with the sum due them.”

The total number of claimants was 5,072, of whom 924 withdrew or failed
to make good the claim. The sum of money allowed was £3,294,452. We have
seen there was, in addition, given to the widows and orphans, between
20,000 and 30,000 pounds.

There is no doubt that a certain number of the claimants were impostors,
while many asked remuneration above what their losses had actually been,
and this caused the commissioners to examine more closely the claims
proffered. But it is submitted that they ought, in dealing with the
money already granted by a considerate Parliament, to have leaned on the
side of clemency.

At the close of the contest there were a large number of Refugees in
Lower Canada, especially at Fort St. John, about twenty-nine miles from
Montreal. In the main these were American born, and principally from the
New England States; yet there were representatives from England,
Ireland, Scotland and Germany. Besides the Refugees, there were several
Provincial Corps, which were no longer to be retained in the service,
but to be disbanded. Of these there was the 84th, often called Johnson’s
regiment, this was 800 strong, mostly Dutch, from the Mohawk, and
Hudson, descendants of the old stock. This regiment consisted of two
corps, one under Major Jessup, stationed at St. John’s, and the other
under Rogers, a part of which at least, was stationed at Fort Oswego.
Jessup’s corps became the first pioneers upon the St. Lawrence, and
Rogers among the first along the Bay of Quinté. Both settled in 1784.
There were other troops stationed at St. John’s, and likewise not a few
who had discharged irregular, but important duties, as scouts, and in
other ways.

It has been generally estimated that at the close of the struggle, and
as a result, there were distributed of American Loyalists upon the
shores of Canada, about 10,000. At the first, most of these were in
Lower Canada, but there were likewise a few at the frontier forts upon
the Upper waters, and a few detached squatters. Then, “there was not a
single tree cut from the (present) Lower Province line to Kingston, 150
miles; and at Kingston there were but a few surrounding huts; and from
thence all around Lake Ontario and Lake Erie, with the exception of a
few Indian huts on some desolate spot of hunting ground, all was a dense
wilderness.” (Ex Sheriff Sherwood.)

“A proclamation was issued,” says Croil in his history of Dundas, “that
all who wished to continue their allegiance to Britain, should peaceably
rendezvous at certain points on the frontiers. These were, Sackets
Harbour, Carleton Island, Oswego and Niagara, on the Upper Canada
confines; and Isle Aux Nois, on the borders of Lower Canada. Jessup’s
Corps was stationed at Isle Aux Nois, and late in the autumn of 1783,
the soldiers were joined by their wives and little ones, who had
wandered the weary way on foot, to Whitehall, through swamps and
forest,—beset with difficulties, dangers, and privations innumerable.
The soldiers met them there with boats, and conveyed them the rest of
their journey by water, through Lake Champlain. Imagination fails us
when we attempt to form an idea of the emotions that filled their
hearts, as families, that had formerly lived happily together,
surrounded with peace and plenty, and had been separated by the rude
hand of war, now met each other’s embrace, in circumstances of abject
poverty. A boisterous passage was before them, in open boats, exposed to
the rigors of the season—a dreary prospect of the coming winter, to be
spent in pent up barracks, and a certainty should they be spared, of
undergoing a lifetime of such hardships, toil and privation, as are
inseparable from the settlement of a new country.” As soon as the
journey was accomplished, the soldiers and their families, were embarked
in boats, sent down to Richelieu to Sorel, thence to Montreal, and on to
Cornwall, by the laborious and tedious route of the St. Lawrence. (See
settlement of Ernest town.)




                              CHAPTER VII.

  CONTENTS—A spirit of strife—The French war—British American Troops—
    Former comrades opposed—Number of U. E. Loyalists in the field—
    General Burgoyne—Defeat—First reverse of British arms—The
    campaign—Colonel St. Leger—Fort Stanwix—Colonel Baume—Battle of
    Bennington—General Herkimer—Gates—Schuyler—Braemar Heights—
    Saratoga—Surrender—The result upon the people—Sir John Johnson—Sir
    William—Sketch—Indian Chief—Laced coat—Indian’s dream—It comes to
    pass—Sir William dreams—It also comes to pass—Too hard a dream—Sir
    John—Attempt to arrest—Escape—Starving—Royal Greens—Johnson’s
    losses—Living in Canada—Death—Principal Corps of Royalists—King’s
    Rangers—Queen’s Rangers—Major Rogers—Simcoe—The Rangers in Upper
    Canada—Disbanded—The Hessians.


The seven years’ war between Canada and New England, in which a large
number of the Colonists were engaged, had created not a few officers of
military worth and talent, while a spirit of strife and contention had
been engendered among the people generally. The Colonial war, carried on
with so much determination, was stimulated, not so much by the English
nation at home as by New Englanders. It was they who were chiefly
interested in the overthrow of French power in Canada. While money and
men had been freely granted by the Imperial Government, the several
colonies had also freely contributed. They “furnished in that war quite
twenty-eight thousand men, in more than one of the campaigns, and every
year to the extent of their ability.” “On the ocean, full twelve
thousand seamen were enlisted in the Royal Navy and in the Colonial
Privateers.” In this manner had been formed a taste for military life,
which waited to be gratified, or sought for food. When, therefore, the
unsavory acts of England wounded the Colonial vanity, and demagogues
traversed the country to embitter the feelings of the mass against the
king, the hot-headed were not slow to advise an appeal to arms. At the
same time, the loyal in heart, the conservators of Imperial interest,
viewing with wonder and alarm the manifestation of fratricidal war—of
rebellion, felt it their duty to take up arms against the unprincipled
(and often dishonest) agitators, and endeavor to crush out the spirit of
revolt. And thus it came, that very many who had fought side by side at
Ticonderoga, Crown Point, Duquesne, Niagara, Oswego, Frontenac,
Montreal, and around Quebec, under a common flag, were now to be arrayed
in hostile bands. Not state against state, nor yet merely neighbor
against neighbor, but brother against brother, and father against son!
Civil war, of all wars, is the most terrible: in addition to the horrors
of the battle-field, there is an upheaving of the very foundation of
society. All the feelings of brotherhood, of Christian love, are
paralyzed, and the demon of destruction and cruelty is successfully
invoked.

Behold, then, the British Americans divided into two parties; each
buckling on the armor to protect from the other, and sharpening the
weapons of warfare to encounter his kindred foe. The contest of 1776-‘83
is most generally looked upon as one between the English and Americans;
but in reality it was, at first—so far as fighting went—between the
conservative and rebel Americans. In an address to the king, presented
by the loyalists in 1779, it is stated that the number of native
Americans in his service exceeded those enlisted by Congress. Another
address, in 1782, says that “there are more men in his Majesty’s
provincial regiments than there is in the continental service.” Sabine
says that “there were 25,000, at the lowest computation.” If such be the
case, the question may well be asked, how came it that the rebels
succeeded? Looking at the matter from our distant stand-point, through
the light of events we find recorded, there seems but one conclusion at
which we may arrive, namely, that the disaster to the British arms was
due—altogether due—to the incapacity of certain of the generals to whom
was intrusted the Imperial interests in America.


                        THE COMBATANTS—BURGOYNE.

The most notable instance of mistaken generalship was that of Burgoyne.
His campaign in the summer of 1777, and the final overthrow of his army
and surrender at Saratoga, will engage our particular attention;
inasmuch as it was the first decided reverse to the British arms, and by
giving courage to the rebels, assisted much to further their cause.
Thereby their faith was strengthened, and the number of rebels increased
from no inconsiderable class, who waited to join the strongest party.
Again, the scene of this campaign was close to the borders of Canada,
and there followed a speedy escape of the first refugees from the Mohawk
valley and the Upper Hudson to the friendly shores of the St. Lawrence.

A year had elapsed since the Declaration of Independence, and England
had sent troops to America, with the view of assisting the forces there
to subdue the malcontents. In the early part of July, Burgoyne set out
from Lower Canada with about 8,500 soldiers, 500 Indians, and 150
Canadians, intending to traverse the country to Albany, possessing
himself of all rebel strongholds on the way, and thence descend along
the river Hudson, to New York, to form a junction with General Howe,
that city having been captured from the rebels the 15th September
previous. Passing by way of Lake Champlain, he encountered the enemy on
the 6th July, and captured Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, with 128
cannon, several armed vessels, a quantity of baggage, ammunition and
provisions. “This easy conquest inflamed his imagination.” The first
step towards the defeat of his army was the unsuccessful attempt of
Colonel St. Leger, with 800 men, who ascended the St. Lawrence to
Oswego, and thence up the river, to take Fort Stanwix (Rome), intending
to descend the Mohawk and join Burgoyne with his main force, as he
entered the head of the valley of the Hudson. Colonel St. Leger arrived
at Fort Stanwix on the 3rd August, 1777. For a time he was the winner;
but for some reason, it is said that the Indians suddenly left him, and
his troops, seized with a panic, fled. In the meantime, General Burgoyne
was pursuing his way, having driven General Schuyler from Lake St.
George to the mouth of the Mohawk river.

Burgoyne, flushed with this renewed success, after his late capture of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, vainly supposed he could advance
steadily down the Hudson. He sent a body of men, 500 strong, under
Colonel Baume, into the interior, eastward, with the view of encouraging
the inhabitants to continued loyalty, and of arresting the machinations
of the rebels. Near Bennington the rebels had an important post, with
magazines, and a large force under General Stark. Baume, ignorant of
their strength, rushed headlong against the enemy. Nothing daunted, he
led on his 500 brave men. For two hours he contended with the unequal
foe, when his troops were almost annihilated, and he fell from his
horse, mortally wounded. But few escaped to tell the tale. Meanwhile,
Burgoyne, apprised of the danger surrounding Baume, had sent assistance
under Colonel Breynan. Unfortunately, they had not much ammunition, and,
after fighting until all was exhausted, they had to flee. These three
reverses paved the way for the final overthrow of Burgoyne. He was still
marching forward, bent on reaching Albany, to accomplish the object of
the campaign—a juncture with the army of General Howe. But now in his
rear, to the west, instead of Colonel St. Leger descending the Mohawk,
was General Herkimer, who had dispersed St. Leger’s force; and to the
east was General Stark, flushed with his victories over Baume and
Breynan. Burgoyne met Gates at last on Braemar heights, and again, and
for the last time, led his troops on to victory, although the contest
was well sustained. General Schuyler had intrenched his forces at the
mouth of the Mohawk, and Burgoyne, having waited until his provision was
exhausted, at last resolved to make an assault. It was bravely made, but
without success; and before night-fall the army was retreating. Night,
instead of enabling them to regain their spirits and renew their ardor,
only brought the intelligence of the defeats previously sustained at
Stanwix and Bennington. This was the 7th October. Flight now was the
only possible chance for safety. The tents were left standing; his sick
and wounded forsaken. But the enemy now surrounded him; the places he
had taken were already re-taken; and upon the 10th of the month he found
himself helpless upon the fields of Saratoga, where he surrendered. The
whole of the men were sent to Boston and other places south, there to
languish in prison.

Thus it came that the inhabitants in this section of the country came
under the power of the rebels, and those who had adhered to the loyal
side were mercilessly driven away at the point of the bayonet. The
writer has heard too many accounts of the extreme cruelty practised at
this time to doubt that such took place, or question the fiendish nature
of the acts practised by the successful rebels against, not foes in
arms, but the helpless. Many thus driven away (and these were the first
refugees who entered Canada) suffered great hardships all through the
winter. Most of the men entered the ranks subsequently, while not a few,
from their knowledge of the country, undertook the trying and
venturesome engagement of spies. The families gathered around the forts
upon the borders had to live upon the fare supplied by the commissariat
of the army. A large number were collected at Mishish; and the story
goes that a Frenchman, whose duty it was to deal out the supplies, did
so with much of bad conduct and cruel treatment.


                           SIR JOHN JOHNSON.

Among the officers who served with General Burgoyne was Sir John
Johnson, who had been the first to suffer persecution, the first to
become a refugee, and who became a principal pioneer in Upper Canada.

“His father, Sir William Johnson, was a native of Ireland, of whom it
was said, in 1755, that he had long resided upon the Mohawk river, in
the western part of New York, where he had acquired a considerable
estate, and was universally beloved, not only by the inhabitants but
also by the neighboring Indians, whose language he had learned and whose
affections he had gained, by his humanity and affability. This led to
his appointment as agent for Indian affairs, on the part of Great
Britain, and he was said to be ‘the soul of all their transactions with
the savages.’”

Of Sir William’s talents and shrewdness in dealing with the likewise
shrewd Indian, the following is found in Sabine: “Allen relates that on
his receiving from England some finely-laced clothes, the Mohawk chief
became possessed with the desire of equalling the baronet in the
splendor of his apparel, and, with a demure face, pretended to have
dreamed that Sir William had presented him with a suit of the decorated
garments. As the solemn hint could not be mistaken or avoided, the
Indian monarch was gratified, and went away, highly pleased with the
success of his device. But alas for Hendrick’s shortsighted sagacity! In
a few days Sir William, in turn, had a dream, to the effect that the
chief had given him several thousand acres of land. ‘The land is yours,’
said Hendrick, ‘but now, Sir William, I never dream with you again, you
dream too hard for me.’”

At the breaking out of the revolutionary war, Sir John, who had
succeeded to his father’s title, appears, also, to have inherited his
influence with the Indians, and to have exerted that influence to the
utmost in favor of the Royal cause. By this means he rendered himself
particularly obnoxious to the continentals, as the Americans were then
called. Accordingly, in 1776, Colonel Dayton, with part of his regiment,
was sent to arrest him, and thus put it out of his power to do further
mischief. Receiving timely notice of this from his tory friends at
Albany, he hastily assembled a large number of his tenants and others,
and made preparations for a retreat, which he successfully accomplished.

“Avoiding the route by Lake Champlain, from fear of falling into the
hands of the enemy, who were supposed to be assembled in that direction,
he struck deep into the woods, by way of the head waters of the Hudson,
and descended the Raquette river, to its confluence with the St.
Lawrence, and thence crossed over to Canada. Their provision failed soon
after they had left their homes. Weary and foot-sore, numbers of them
sank by the way, and had to be left behind, but were shortly afterwards
relieved by a party of Indians, who were sent from Caughnawaga in search
of them. After nineteen days of hardship, which have had few parallels
in our history, they reached Montreal. So hasty was their flight, that
the family papers were buried in the garden, and nothing taken with them
but such articles as were of prime necessity.” Soon after his arrival at
Montreal he was “commissioned a colonel, and raised two battalions of
loyalists, who bore the designation of the Royal Greens. From the time
of organizing this corps, he became one of the most active, and one of
the bitterest foes that the whigs encountered during the contest. So
true is it, as was said by the wise man of Israel, that ‘a brother
offended is harder to be won than a strong city, and their contentions
are like the bars of a castle.’ Sir John was in several regular and
fairly conducted battles. He invested Fort Stanwix in 1777, and defeated
the brave General Herkimer; and in 1780 was defeated himself by General
Van Rensselaer, at Fox’s Mills.”

The result of his adherence to the Crown was, that his extensive family
estates upon the Mohawk were confiscated; but at the close of the war he
received large grants of land in various parts of Canada, beside a
considerable sum of money. He continued to be Superintendent of Indian
affairs, and resided in Montreal until his death, in 1822.


                         THE LOYAL COMBATANTS.

The following are the principal corps and regiments of loyalists who
took part in the war against the rebels, and who were mainly Americans:

“The King’s Rangers; the Royal Fencible Americans; the Queen’s Rangers;
the New York Volunteers; the King’s American regiment; the Prince of
Wales’ American Volunteers; the Maryland Loyalists; De Lancey’s
Battalions; the Second American regiment; the King’s Rangers, Carolina;
the South Carolina Royalists; the North Carolina Highland Regiment; the
King’s American Dragoons; the Loyal American Regiment; the American
Legion; the New Jersey Volunteers; the British Legion; the Loyal
Foresters; the Orange Rangers; the Pennsylvania Loyalists; the Guides
and Pioneers; the North Carolina Volunteers; the Georgia Loyalists; the
West Chester Volunteers. These corps were all commanded by colonels or
lieutenant-colonels; and as De Lancey’s battalions and the New Jersey
Volunteers consisted each of three battalions, there were twenty-eight.
To these, the Loyal New Englanders, the Associated Loyalists and
Wentworth’s Volunteers, remain to be added. Still further, Colonel
Archibald Hamilton, of New York, commanded at one period seventeen
companies of loyal Militia.”

Respecting the officers and more prominent men of the corps, who settled
in Canada, we have succeeded in collecting the following account.


                          THE QUEEN’S RANGERS.

This corps acted a very conspicuous part during the war. It was raised
by Major Robert Rogers, of New Hampshire, son of James Rogers. He had
served during the French war, with distinction, as commander of Rogers’
Rangers, and was, “in 1776, appointed Governor of Michilimackinac.
During the early part of the rebellion he was in the revolting states,
probably acting as a spy, and was in correspondence with the rebel
Congress, and with Washington himself. He was imprisoned at New York,
but was released on parole, which, it is said, he broke (like General
Scott in 1812), and accepted the commission of colonel in the British
army, and proceeded to raise the corps mentioned.” About 1777 “he went
to England, and Simcoe succeeded him as commander of the Queen’s
Rangers.”

Sabine, speaking of John Brown Lawrence, says he was imprisoned in the
Burlington gaol, New Jersey, and that “Lieut.-Colonel John G. Simcoe,
commander of the Queen’s Rangers, was a fellow-prisoner, and when
exchanged said, at parting, ‘I shall never forget your kindness.’ He did
not: and when appointed Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada, he invited
Mr. Lawrence to settle there,” and, through the Governor, he acquired a
large tract of land.

The Queen’s Rangers were disbanded in 1802, having been associated with
the events of the first government of Upper Canada, their colonel
(Simcoe) having been the first Governor. A detachment of this regiment
were stationed upon the banks of the Don, before there was a single
white inhabitant where now stands Toronto.


                          FERGUSON’S RANGERS.

This corps formed a part of Burgoyne’s army at the time of surrendering,
and, “with other provincial prisoners, retired to Canada, by permission
of Gates.”


                             THE HESSIANS.

The British Government, during the course of the war, procured some
foreign troops from one of the German Principalities upon the Rhine,
mostly from Hesse-Hamburg. This foreign legion was under the command of
General Baron de Reidesel, of their own country. It would seem from the
testimony of their descendants in Marysburgh, that the British
Government employed the men from the Government of the principality, and
that the men did not voluntarily enter the service, but were impressed.
These Hessians were drilled before leaving their country. They were
composed of infantry, artillery, and a rifle company, “Green Yongers.”
They were embarked for Canada, by way of Portsmouth, and reached Quebec
in time to join the British army, and meet the enemy at Stillwater.
Conrad Bongard, of Marysburgh, informs us that his father was one of the
company under General Reidesel. He was in the artillery, and accompanied
Burgoyne in his eventful campaign; was at the battle of Tyconderoga;
and, with the rest of the Hessian troops, was taken prisoner at
Saratoga. They were taken down to Virginia, and there retained as
prisoners of war for nearly two years. Being released on parole, many of
them, with their General, were conveyed back to Germany; but some of
them, having the alternative, preferred to remain in America, to share
with the loyalists in grants of land. (See Marysburgh, where the
Hessians settled). Conrad Bongard became the servant of Surveyor
Holland, and was with him as he proceeded up the St. Lawrence, to
survey. Bongard married a widow Carr, whose husband had been in the 24th
regiment of Royal Fusileers, and had died while the prisoners were
retained in Virginia. He eventually settled in the fifth township, where
he died, January, 1840, aged 89. His wife, Susan, died February, 1846,
aged 98. Both were members of the Lutheran church. Mrs. B. was a native
of Philadelphia.

The wife of the General, Baroness de Reidesel, has left an interesting
record of the battles prior to Burgoyne’s surrender.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

  CONTENTS—Indian Names—The Five Tribes—The Sixth—Confederation—
    Government—Subdivisions—Origin—Hendrick—Death—Brant—Birth—
    Education—Married—Teaching—Christianity—Brant elected Chief—
    Commissioned a British Captain—Visits England—Returns—Leads his
    warriors to battle—Efforts of Rebels to seduce Brant to their
    cause—Attempted treachery of the Rebel Herchimer—Border warfare—
    Wyoming—Attempt to blacken the character of Brant—His noble
    conduct—Untruthful American History—The inhabitants of Wyoming—The
    Rebels first to blame—Cherry Valley—Van Schaick—Bloody orders—
    Terrible conduct of the Rebels, Helpless Indian families—Further
    deeds of blood and rapine by the rebel Sullivan—A month of
    horrible work—Attributes of cruelty more conspicuous in the Rebels
    than in the Indians—The New Englander—Conduct toward the Indians—
    Inconsistent—The “down trodden”—The Mohawks—Indian agriculture—
    Broken faith with the Indians—Noble conduct of Brant—After the
    war—His family—Death—Miss Molly—Indian usage—The character of the
    Mohawk—The six Indians as Canadians—Fidelity to the British—
    Receiving land—Bay Quinté—Grand River—Settling—Captain Isaac,
    Captain John—At present—Mohawk Counsel.


                            THE SIX NATIONS.

This once powerful Confederacy styled themselves Kan-ye-a-ke; also, they
sometimes called themselves _Aganuschioni_ or _Agnanuschioni_, which
signifies _united_ people. The French designated them Iroquois, from a
peculiar sound of their speech. The English knew them as the _Five
Nations_, and _Six Nations_, more generally by the latter term. The
original five tribes that formed the Confederacy, were the Mohawks,
Oneidas, Cayugas, Onondagas, and Senecas. Subsequently in 1712, the
Tuscaroras came from the south, North Carolina, and made the sixth
nation. But according to some authority, there were six nations before
the Tuscaroras joined them. However, we learn from several sources, that
up to 1712, the English, in speaking of them, referred to only five
nations. The Oneidas seem, at one time, to have been omitted, and the
Aucguagas inserted in their stead. The oldest members of the
confederation were the Mohawks, Onondagas, and Senecas. The union of
those three tribes took place prior to the occupation of America by the
Europeans. The time at which the confederation of the five nations was
formed is uncertain, but it is supposed to have been in the early part
of the sixteenth century. The league binding them together was rather of
a democratic nature.

Each tribe was represented in the great council of the nation by one
principal sachem, with a number of associates.

They were always deliberate in their councils, considerate in their
decisions, never infringing upon the rights of a minority, and dignified
in their utterances. They were noted, not only as warriors, but as well
for their agriculture, their laws, and their oratorical ability.

Each tribe was subdivided into classes, and each of these had a device
or “totem,” namely, the tortoise, the bear, the wolf, the beaver, the
deer, the falcon, the plover, and the crane.

They were for hundreds of years the terror of the various Indian tribes
peopling North America, and most of the time could at will, roam the
wide expanse between the Hudson Bay and the Carolinas. Other tribes, too
weak to oppose them, were from time to time completely exterminated. Of
these was the Erie tribe, which had entirely disappeared by the year
1653. Of those who stubbornly resisted the Six Nations, were the Hurons,
the Adirondacks, of the north, the Delawares, the Cherokees, and the
Mohicans.

Smith, an historian of New York, says that in 1756 “Our Indians
universally concur in the claim of all the lands not sold to the
English, from the mouth of Sorel River, on the south side of Lakes Erie
and Ontario, on both sides of the Ohio, till it falls into the
Mississippi; and on the north side of those lakes, that whole territory
between the Outaouais River, and the Lake Huron, and even beyond the
straits between that and Lake Erie.”

“When the Dutch began the settlement of New York, all the Indians on
Long Island, and the northern shore of the Sound, on the banks of the
Connecticut, Hudson, Delaware, and Susquehanna rivers, were in
subjection to the Five Nations,” and in 1756, “a little tribe, settled
at the Sugar-loaf Mountain, in Orange County, made a yearly payment of
about £20 to the Mohawks.”

Among the traditions of this people is one that they had a supernatural
origin from the heart of a mountain, that they then migrated to the
west, where they lived for a time by the sea shore. Then, in time
returned to the country of the lakes. A country now passed into the
hands of the white man, who paid no just price. But the names of many
places yet indicate the history of the ancient owners of the soil.

Among the Mohawks, in the beginning of the eighteenth century, was a
chief known as Old King Hendrick, or Soi-euga-rah-ta, renowned for
eloquence, bravery, and integrity. He was intimate with Sir William
Johnson, and it was between them that the amusing contention of dreams
occurred, that has been narrated.

In 1755, a battle was fought at Lake George, between the French, under
Baron Dieskau, and the English, under Johnson, resulting in the defeat
of the French. The French and English were supported by their respective
allies. At this engagement Old King Hendrick, then seventy years old,
but still full of energy and courage, was killed. Strangely enough it
was at this battle that Brant, then only thirteen years old, first took
part with his tribe in the contest. The mantle of Soieugarahta fell upon
the youthful Thayendinagea.

_Thayendinagea_, or _Joseph Brant_, was born upon the banks of the
Ohio, in the year 1742, while his tribe was on a visit to that
region. According to Stone, his biographer, he was the son of
“Tehowaghwengaraghkwin a full-blooded Mohawk, of the Wolf tribe.”

After the battle at Lake George, Brant continued with his people under
Johnson till the close of that bloody war. At its close, about 1760,
Brant, with several other young Indians, was placed by Johnson at Moor
School, Lebanon, Connecticut. After acquiring some knowledge of the
rudiments of literature, he left the school to engage in active warfare
with the Pontiacs and Ottawas. In 1765, we find him married and settled
in his own house at the Mohawk Valley. It is said he was not married,
except in the Indian mode, until the winter of 1779, when at Niagara,
seeing a Miss Moore, a captive, married, he was also thus married by
Colonel John Butler, to a half-breed, the daughter of Colonel Croghan,
by an Indian woman. Here he spent a quiet and peaceful life for some
years, acting as interpreter in negotiations between his people and the
whites, and lending his aid to the efforts of the missionaries who were
engaged in the work of teaching and converting the Indians.

“Those who visited his house, spoke in high terms of his kindness and
hospitality.” Sir William Johnson died in 1774, and was succeeded by his
son-in-law, Colonel George Johnson, as Indian agent, who appointed Brant
his Secretary. The same year Johnson had to flee from the Mohawk,
westward, to escape being captured by a band of rebels. He was
accompanied by Brant and the principal warriors of the tribe. The rebels
vainly tried to win the Indians to their side; but excepting a few
Senecas, they preferred their long tried friends. The regular successor
of Old King Hendrick, was “little Abraham.” It is said he was well
disposed to the Americans, probably through jealousy of Brant. At all
events, Brant, by universal consent became the principal chief. He
proceeded with the other chiefs, and a large body of Indian warriors to
Montreal, where he was commissioned as a captain in the British army.
“In the fall of 1775, he sailed for England to hold personal conference
with the officers of government. He was an object of much curiosity at
London, and attracted the attention of persons of high rank and great
celebrity.” Brant returned to America in the spring following, landed
near New York, and made his way through his enemy’s country to Canada.
He placed himself at the head of his warriors, and led them on to many a
victory. The first of which was at the battle of “the Cedars.”

But the rebels did not cease endeavoring to seduce Brant to their cause.
In June, 1777, General Herkimer of the rebel militia approached Brant’s
head-quarters with a large force, ostensibly to treat on terms of
equality. Brant had reason to suspect treachery, and consequently would
not, for some time, meet Herkimer. After a week, however, he arranged to
see General Herkimer, but every precaution was taken against treachery,
and it appears that not without cause. Brant and Herkimer were old, and
had been intimate friends. Brant took with him a guard of about forty
warriors. It would seem that Herkimer’s intention was to try and
persuade Brant to come over to the rebels, and failing in this to have
Brant assassinated as he was retiring. Says an American writer,
Brownell, “We are sorry to record an instance of such unpardonable
treachery as Herkimer is said to have planned at this juncture. One of
his men, Joseph Waggoner, affirmed that the General privately exhorted
him to arrange matters so that Brant and his three principal associates
might be assassinated.” Well does it become the Americans to talk about
savage barbarity. Brant thwarted the intentions of his old friend by
keeping his forty warriors within call. During all of the repeated
attempts to get the Mohawks they never swerved, but reminded the rebels
of their old treaties with England, and the ill-treatment their people
had sustained at the hands of the colonists.

The head-quarters of Brant was at Oghkwaga, Owego, upon the Susquehanna.
During the summer of 1777 while Burgoyne was advancing, the Mohawks
under Brant rendered important service. In the attempt to capture Fort
Stanwix, they took a prominent part. In the summer of 1778 the Indians,
with Butler’s Rangers were engaged principally in border warfare. It was
during this season that the affair at Wyoming took place, which event
has been so extravagantly made use of to blacken the character of the
Indians and vilify the “tories.” That Brant was not inhuman, but that he
was noble, let recent American writers testify. Brownell says: “many an
instance is recorded of his interference, even in the heat of conflict,
to stay the hand uplifted against the feeble and helpless.”

It was in the latter part of June that a descent was planned upon the
settlements of Wyoming. Of this event, again we will let Brownell
speak:—“It has been a commonly received opinion that Brant was the Chief
under whom the Indian portion of the army was mustered, but it is now
believed that he had as little share in this campaign as in many other
scenes of blood long coupled with his name. There was no proof that he
was present at any of the scenes that we are about to relate.”

“No portion of the whole history of the revolution has been so distorted
in the narration as that connected with the laying waste of the valley
of Wyoming. No two accounts seem to agree, and historians have striven
to out-do each other in the violence of their expressions of
indignation, at cruelties and horrors which existed only in their
imaginations, or which came to them embellished with all the
exaggeration incident to reports arising amid scenes of excitement and
bloodshed.

Wyoming had, for many years, been the scene of the bitterest hostility
between the settlers under the Connecticut grant, and those from
Pennsylvania. Although these warlike operations were upon a small scale,
they were conducted with great vindictiveness and treachery. Blood was
frequently shed, and as either party obtained the ascendency, small
favor was shown to their opponents, who were generally driven from their
homes in hopeless destitution. We cannot go into a history of these
early transactions, and only mention them as explanatory of the feelings
of savage animosity which were exhibited between neighbors, and even
members of the same family, who had espoused opposite interests in the
revolutionary contest.” Such, be it noted, was the character of the
inhabitants of Wyoming valley, who have been so long held up as innocent
victims of Indian barbarity. By the above, we learn that prior to this,
there had been contentions between the loyalists and rebels. The party
who entered Wyoming to attack the Fort, were under Colonel John Butler,
and were composed of some 300 British regulars and refugees, and 500
Indians. Now, it would seem that the depredation which was committed
after Colonel Zebulon Butler, the rebel leader, had been defeated, and
the Fort had capitulated, was to a great extent due to retaliatory steps
taken by the loyalists who previously had been forced away, and had seen
their homes committed to the flames. Such was the border warfare of
those days. It was not Indian savagery, it was a species of fighting
introduced by the “Sons of Liberty.” And if we condemn such mode of
fighting, let our condemnation rest first, and mainly upon those who
initiated it. Not upon the Indians, for they were led by white men—not
upon Brant, for he was not there—not so much upon the loyalists, for
they had been driven away from their homes; but let it be upon those who
introduced it.

The rebels were not slow to seek retribution for their losses at
Wyoming. Aided by a party of Oneidas who lent themselves to the rebels,
“Colonel Wm. Butler with a Pennsylvania regiment, entered the towns of
Unadilla and Oghkwaga, and burned and destroyed the buildings, together
with large stores of provisions intended for winter use.” In turn,
Walter Butler led a party of 700, a large number being Indians under
Brant, to attack a fort at Cherry Valley which was “garrisoned by troops
under Colonel Ichabod Alden.” It will be seen that the Indians and
loyalists did not enter an unprotected place to burn and destroy. They
attacked a garrison of troops. But the Indians exasperated by the cruel
procedure at Oghkwaga, became ungovernable, and about fifty men, women
and children fell by the tomahawk. This was the retaliation which the
Indian had been taught to regard as justifiable for the wrongs which had
been inflicted upon his own tribe—his little ones; yet be it remembered,
and later American writers admit it, that the commanders, Butler and
Brant, did all they could to restrain the terrible doings of the
exasperated men. “Specific instances are reported in which the Mohawk
Chief interfered, and successfully, to avert the murderous tomahawk.”

And now begins the bloody revenge which the rebels determined to inflict
upon the Indians, without respect to tribes. In April, 1779, Colonel Van
Schaick was despatched with a sufficient force for the purpose, with
instructions “to lay waste the whole of their towns, to destroy all
their cattle and property.” “The Colonel obeyed his orders to the
letter, and left nothing but blackened ruins behind him.” It was merely
a march of destruction, for the Indians were not there to oppose their
steps. The villages and property that were destroyed belonged to the
Onondagas, although they had not taken a decided stand with the loyalist
party. It was enough that they were Indians, and would not join the
rebels. But this was merely a prelude to what was preparing, in
pursuance of a resolution of the rebel congress. The infamous duty of
commanding this army of destruction, town destroyers the Indians called
them, was entrusted to General Sullivan, whose nature was adequate to
the requirements of the command.

On the 22nd August, 1779, five thousand men were concentrated at Tioga,
upon the Susquehanna. The men were prepared for their uncivilized duty
by promises of the territory over which they were about to sow blood and
fire. The Indians had no adequate force to oppose their march westward
over the Six Nations territory. Brant with his warriors, with the
Butlers and Johnsons made a gallant resistance upon the banks of the
Chemung, near the present town of Elmira. But, after suffering
considerable loss, the vastly superior force compelled them to flee, and
there remained nothing to arrest the devastating rebel army, and during
the whole month of September they continued the work of despoliation.

It has been the custom of almost all American historians to give the
Indians attributes of the most debasing character. At peace, unworthy
the advantages of civilization; at war, treacherous and ferociously
cruel. For this persistent and ungenerous procedure it is impossible to
conceive any cause, unless to supply an excuse for the steady course of
double-dealing the Americans have pursued toward the original owners of
the soil, and provide a covering for the oft-repeated treachery
practised toward the credulous Indian by the over-reaching New
Englander. To the Mohawk Nation particularly, since they proved true
allies of the British, have American writers found it agreeable to
bestow a character noted for blood and rapine. Nothing can be more
untrue than the character thus gratuitously portrayed, nothing more at
variance with the essential nature of the Indian, when free from
European intrigues, and the cursed fire-water. The aboriginal races of
North America are not by nature, blood-thirsty above Europeans. That
they are honest, just and true, capable of distinguishing between right
and wrong, with a due appreciation of well-kept faith, is well attested
by the conduct which has ever been observed by them toward, not alone
the Pennsylvanians, but every man found to be a Quaker. No instance can
be found recorded throughout the long bloody wars of the Indians, where
a hair of the head of a single man, woman or child of that denomination
was injured by the Indian; and thus because the upright Penn never
defrauded them. The Americans, while British colonists, with the
exception alluded to, made themselves obnoxious to almost all Indian
tribes. They never secured that hearty and faithful alliance that the
French did. There seemed to be something in the air, especially of the
New England States, which in a few generations blinded the eye, by which
the golden rule is to be observed.

The Americans, who have ever set themselves up as the champions, _par
excellence_, of liberty, to whom the “down-trodden of the old world”
could look for sympathy, if not direct support, have signally failed to
observe those lofty principles at home toward the natives of the soil,
while they continued for eighty years to keep in chains the sable sons
of Africa. They have found it convenient and plausible to prate about
the political “tyranny of European despots;” but no nation of northern
Europe has shown such disregard for the rights of their people as the
United States have exhibited toward the original owners of the soil.
Avarice has quite outgrown every principle of liberty that germinated
ere they came to America. The frontier men, the land-jobber, the New
England merchant, as well as the Southern Planter, have alike ignored
true liberty in defrauding the Indian, in sending out slavers, and in
cruel treatment of the slave. Then can we wonder that the noble-minded
Indian, naturally true to his faith, should, when cheated, wronged,—
cruelly wronged, with the ferocity natural to his race, visit the
faithless with terrible retribution?

The unbiassed records of the past, speak in tones that cannot be hushed,
of the more noble conduct of the natives, than of those who have sought
to exterminate them. The Mohawks, although brave warriors, fought not
for the mere love of it. They even at times strove to mediate between
the French and New Englanders.

To the Mohawks, the American writer has especially bestowed a name
bloody and ignoble. And all because they listened not to their wily
attempts to seduce them to join the rebels, but preferred to ally
themselves with the British. No doubt the Indian had long before
discriminated between the rule of British officers, and the selfish
policy of local governments. And hence, we find, in every scrap of paper
relating to the Mohawks, unfounded accounts of savage doings. But
taking, as true, the darkest pages written by the Americans against the
Six Nations, they present no parallel to the deeds of brutal vengeance
enacted by the American army under Sullivan, when he traversed the
fruitful country, so long the home of the Iroquois. Says an American
writer: “When the army reached the Genesee Valley, all were surprised at
the cultivation exhibited, by wide fields of corn, gardens well stocked,
their cattle, houses, and other buildings, showing good design, with
mechanical skill, and every kind of vegetable that could be conceived.
Beautiful as was the scene in the eyes of the army, a few days changed
it to utter desolation; neither house, nor garden, grain, fruit tree, or
vegetable, was left unscathed.”

Says Stone: “Forty Indian towns were destroyed. Corn gathered and
ungathered, to the amount of 160,000 bushels, shared the same fate;
their fruit trees were cut down; and the Indians were hunted like wild
beasts, till neither house, nor fruit tree, nor field of corn, nor
inhabitant, remained in the whole country.” And the poor Indian women,
and children, and old men, were thus left at the approaching winter to
seek support at the British garrisons. Truly the rebels of ‘76 were
brave and civilized!

Thirteen years after, one of the chiefs said to Washington, “Even to
this day, when the name of the town-destroyer is heard, our women look
behind them and turn pale, and our children cling close to the necks of
their mother; our sachems and our warriors are men, who cannot be
afraid, but their hearts are grieved with the fears of our women and
children.” Thus the brave Sullivan, with his thousand rebels, made war
against old men, women and children, who were living in their rightful
homes. This was fighting for liberty!

The blood of the Indian, as well as the slave, has risen up to reproach
the American, and it required much of fresh blood to wash away the
stains remaining from their deeds of cruelty and rapine, inflicted
during their revolutionary war, under the name of liberty. The soldiers
of Sullivan were stimulated in their evil work by promises of the land
they were sent to despoil; and the close of the war saw them return to
claim their promises, while the rightful owner was driven away. A
certain portion of the Six Nations having received pledges from the
United States Government for their welfare, remained to become subjects
of the new nation. But excepting Washington himself, and General
Schuyler, not one heeded their promises made to the Indian. The most
unjust proceedings were begun and ruthlessly carried on by individuals,
by companies, by legislators, by speculators, to steal every inch of
land that belonged by all that is right, to the Senecas. How unlike the
benignant and faithful conduct of the British Government in Canada.

Brant continued during the war to harass the enemy in every possible
way, and in the following year, August, planned a terrible, but just
retaliation for the work of Sullivan’s horde. It was now the turn of the
rebels to have their houses, provisions and crops, despoiled. But all
the while “no barbarities were permitted upon the persons of defenceless
women and children, but a large number of them were borne away into
captivity.” Again, in October, Johnson and Brant, with Corn Planter, a
distinguished Seneca chief, invaded the Mohawk Valley. In this foray,
the same conduct was observed toward women and children. On one
occasion, Brant sent an Indian runner with an infant, that had been
unintentionally carried from its mother with some captives, to restore
it. Still, again the following year, the Indians under Brant, and the
Royalists under Major Ross, were found over-running their old homes
along the Mohawk and Schoharie. On this their last expedition, they were
met by the rebels in force under Colonel Willet, with some Oneida
warriors, and defeated them. Colonel Walter N. Butler, whom the rebels
have so often tried to malign, was shot and scalped by an Oneida Indian,
under the command of the rebel Willet.

We learn by the foregoing that the Iroquois were not only brave as
warriors, but they had attained to a much higher position in the scale
of being than other tribes inhabiting America. They were not ignorant of
agriculture, nor indifferent to the blessings derived therefrom. The
rich uplands of the country lying to the north of the Alleghenies, were
made to contribute to their wants, as did the denizen of the forest.
They were equally at home, whether upon the war path, the trail of the
deer, or in the tilling of land. The plow of the Anglo-Saxon has not in
seventy years completely effaced the evidences of their agricultural
skill. And not less were their sachems noted for wisdom in council, and
for eloquence. Not only corn, but beans and other cereals were
cultivated, particularly by the Six Nations. Fruits and edibles,
introduced by the Europeans, were propagated by the natives, and when
the rebel Sullivan, in accordance with orders from Washington, swept
over their country, large orchards of excellent fruit, as well as fields
of grain, were met with and ruthlessly destroyed, as were the women and
children, with their peaceful homes.

According to Rochefoucault, Brant’s manners were half European; he was
accompanied by two negro servants, and was, “in appearance, like an
Englishman.” Brant visited England in December 1785, and was treated
with great consideration.

After the close of the war, Brant settled at Wellington Square, upon
land conferred by the Crown, where he lived after the English mode. He
died here 24th November, 1807. His wife, who never took to civilized
life, after her husband’s death, removed to the Grand River, and lived
in her wigwam. Some of her children remained in the “commodious
dwelling,” and others accompanied her to the life of the wigwam.
According to Weld, Brant had at one time thirty or forty negro slaves,
which he kept in the greatest subjection. He also says that Brant’s half
pay as a captain, and his presents yearly received, amounted to £500.

His last days were made unhappy by a debased son, who, after threatening
his father’s life, was at last killed by him, in self defence, by a
short sword which Brant wore at his side. Respecting another of his
sons, the Kingston _Herald_, September 5th, 1832, says:

  “It is with unfeigned sorrow that we announce the death of CAPTAIN
  JOHN BRANT, Chief of the Six Nations Indians. He died of Cholera, at
  Brantford, on the 27th ult., after an illness of only six hours. Mr.
  Brant was the son of the celebrated Indian Chief, whose memory was
  unjustly assailed by Campbell the Poet, and for the vindication of
  which the subject of this notice some years ago purposely visited
  England. Possessing the education, feelings, and manners of a
  gentleman, he was beloved by all who had the pleasure of his
  acquaintance, and his death cannot fail to be deeply and very
  generally regretted.”

We have spoken of the intimacy that existed between the Mohawks and Sir
William Johnson, the Colonial Agent of England. This, be it remembered,
was more than a hundred years ago, and great changes have taken place in
the opinion of many with regard to certain irregularities of society. We
cannot excuse the conduct of Sir William, when he had lost his European
wife, in taking the sister of Brant, Miss Molly, without the form of
matrimonial alliance; but we must concede every allowance for the times
in which he lived. But while grave doubt may rest upon the moral
principle displayed by him, we see no just reason to reflect in any way
upon the Indian female. Miss Molly took up her abode with Sir William,
and lived with him as a faithful spouse until he died. However, this
must not be regarded as indicating depravity on the part of the
simple-minded native. It must be remembered that the Indian’s mode of
marrying consists of but little more than the young squaw leaving the
father’s wigwam, and repairing to that of her future husband, and there
is no reason to doubt that Miss Molly was ever other than a virtuous
woman. And this belief is corroborated by the fact that four daughters,
the issue of this alliance, were most respectably married.

Of the Six Nations, this tribe always stood foremost as brave and
uncompromising adherents to the British Government, notwithstanding the
utmost endeavors of the rebels to win them to their side. It becomes,
consequently a duty, and a pleasing duty to refer more particularly to
this race, a remnant of which yet lives upon the shore of the bay. Among
the Mohawks are, however, remnants of some of the other tribes.

The tribe is so-called, after the river, upon whose banks they so long
lived. They did not formerly acknowledge the title, but called
themselves by a name which interpreted, means “just such a people as we
ought to be.” This name is not known, unless it may be Agniers, a name
sometimes applied by the French.

This tribe was the oldest and most important of the Six Nations, and
supplied the bravest warriors, and one of its chiefs was usually in
command of the united warriors of all the tribes.

It must not be forgotten that the Mohawks, who came to Canada, and other
tribes of the Six Nations, were to all intents, United Empire Loyalists.
At the close of the struggle, we have seen elsewhere, that the
commissioners at Paris, in their unseemly haste to contract terms of
peace, forgot how much was due to the loyalists of America, and urged no
special terms to ameliorate the condition of the many who had fought and
lost all for the maintenance of British power. Likewise did they forget
the aboriginal natives who had equally suffered. The fact that these
Indians were not even referred to, gave Brant a just cause of complaint,
which he duly set forth in a memorial to the Imperial Government. But,
as the British Government and nation subsequently strove to relieve the
suffering condition of the refugees, so did they afford to the loyal
sons of the forest every possible facility to make themselves
comfortable. Indeed, the British officers in command, at the first, gave
a pledge that all that they lost should be restored. The promise thus
given by Sir Guy Carleton, was ratified by his successor, General
Haldimand, in 1779, Captain General and Commander-in-Chief in Canada,
and confirmed by Patent, under the Great Seal, January 14, 1793, issued
by Governor Simcoe.

At the close of the war, a portion of the Mohawks were temporarily
residing on the American side of Niagara River, in the vicinity of the
old landing place above the Fort. The Senecas, who seem to have been at
this time more closely allied than other tribes to the Mohawks, offered
to them a tract of land within the territory of the United States. But
the Mohawks would not live in the United States. They declared they
would “sink or swim with England.”

Brant proceeded to Montreal to confer with Sir John Johnson, General
Superintendent of Indian affairs. “The tract upon which the chief had
fixed his attention, was situated upon the Bay de Quinté.” General
Haldimand, in accordance with this wish, purchased a tract of land upon
the bay from the Mississaugas, and conveyed it to the Mohawks.
Subsequently, when Brant returned to Niagara, the Senecas expressed
their desire that their old and intimate friends, the Mohawks, should
live nearer to them than upon the Bay de Quinté. Brant convened a
council of the tribe to consider the matter, the result was, that he
went a second time to Quebec to solicit a tract of land less remote from
the Senecas. Haldimand granted this request, and the land, six miles
square, upon the Grand River was accordingly purchased from the
Mississaugas, and given to them, forty miles off from the Senecas. The
above facts are taken from Brant’s MS. and History. We may infer from
this fact, that the party who did come to the bay under Captain John,
felt less attachment to the Senecas than the other portion of the tribe.
The quantity of land on the bay originally granted was 92,700 acres; but
a portion has been surrendered.

In the early part of the rebellion, the Mohawk families fled from their
valley with precipitation. They mostly went to Lachine, where they
remained three years. They then ascended the river in their canoes, and
probably stayed a winter at Cataraqui, the winter of 1783–4. The whole
tribe was under Brant. Second in command was Captain John, a cousin of
Brant, and his senior in years.

In the spring, a portion of the tribe entered the Bay Quinté, and passed
up to the present township of Tyendinaga. The majority, led by Brant,
passed up along the south shore of Lake Ontario to Niagara.


                       THE MOHAWKS AS CANADIANS.

Descendants of the bravest of all the brave Indian warriors of America,
we find them peaceable and in most respects imbibing the spirit of the
day. Ever since the party settled on the bay, they have manifested no
turbulent spirit, none of those wild attributes natural to the
wild-woods Indian, toward their white neighbors. Among themselves there
has been one occasion of disturbance. This arose from the quarrelsome
nature of one Captain Isaac Hill. This Chief, with his people, formed a
part of Brant’s company that settled on the Grand River. After a few
years, having disagreed with his nation, and become exceedingly
disagreeable from his officious and selfish conduct, he removed to the
bay, and united himself with Captain John’s party, which received him.
But he failed to live peaceably with them. Eventually the disagreement
resulted in a serious hostile engagement between the two branches, who
fought with tomahawks and knives. But one person was killed, a chief of
Captain John’s party, Powles Claus, who was stabbed in the abdomen. But
subsequently Captain Isaac Hill became a worthy inhabitant. His house
still standing, then considered large, was frequently open to the more
festive, across the Bay in Sophiasburgh.

Out of the six hundred Indians, now living upon the Reserve, there is
only one with pure Indian blood. His name is David Smart. It has been
elsewhere stated, that the custom prevailed among the Mohawk nation, to
maintain the number of the tribe, by taking captive a sufficient number
to fill the vacancies caused by death of their people. The result was,
that these captives marrying with Indians, they gradually underwent a
change, and the original appearance of the Mohawk has lost its
characteristic features. The circumstances of the Indians during the
revolutionary war, and subsequently in settling in Canada, led to
frequent unions between the white men of different nationalities and the
Indian women. Therefore, at the present day there remains but little
more than a trace of the primal Indian who lorded it, a hundred years
ago, over no inconsiderable portion of the North American Continent.

When visiting the Indians, on our way, we met some eight or ten sleighs
laden with them, returning from a funeral. We were much struck with the
appearance of solid, farmer-like comfort which their horses and
conveyances exhibited, as well as they themselves did in their half
Canadian dress.

While drunkenness has prevailed among the older Indians, it is pleasing
to know that the younger ones are far more regular in their habits. For
this, much credit is due to the Christian oversight of their former and
present pastors. They have 1800 acres of land. They number 630, and are
increasing yearly.

The seal of the Mohawk Counsel may be seen with the Rev. Mr. Anderson.
The armorial bearings consist of the wolf, the bear and the turtle.
These animals, in the order here given, indicate, not tribes, nor
families exactly, but rank. The wolf is the highest class, the bear next
in rank, and the turtle the lowest grade.




                              CHAPTER IX.

  CONTENTS—Individuals—Anderson—Bethune—Burwell—Butler—Canliff—Claus—
    Coffin—Doune—Jarvis—Jones—McDonald—McGill—McGilles—Merrit—Munday—
    Peters—Robinson—Singleton—Ross—McNab—Allen—Allison—Ashley—Bell—
    Burritt—Casey—Carscallion—Church—Clark—Crawford—Dame—Daly—Diamond.


                         INDIVIDUAL COMBATANTS.

The immediately following notices of the combatants who settled in Upper
Canada are extracted from Sabine.

“At the beginning of the revolution, Samuel Anderson, of New York, went
to Canada. He soon entered the service of the Crown, and was a captain
under Sir John Johnson. In 1783 he settled near Cornwall, in Upper
Canada, and received half-pay. He held several civil offices: those of
Magistrate, Judge of a district court, and associate Justice of the
Court of King’s Bench, were among them. He continued to reside upon his
estate near Cornwall, in Upper Canada, until his decease in 1836, at the
age of one hundred and one. His property in New York was abandoned and
lost.”

“Joseph Anderson, lieutenant in the King’s regiment, New York. At the
peace he retired to Canada. He died near Cornwall, Canada West, in 1853,
aged ninety. He drew half pay for a period of about seventy years. One
of the last survivors of the United Empire Loyalists.”

“John Bethune, of North Carolina, chaplain in the Loyal Militia. Taken
prisoner in the battle at Cross Creek in 1776. Confined in Halifax gaol,
but ordered finally to Philadelphia. After his release, his continued
loyalty reduced him to great distress. He was appointed chaplain to the
84th regiment, and restored to comfort. At the peace he settled in Upper
Canada, and died at Williamstown in that colony, in 1815, in his
sixty-fifth year.”

“James Burwell, of New Jersey, born at Rockaway, January 18, 1754. Our
loyalist enlisted in his Majesty’s service in the year 1776, at the age
of twenty-two, and served seven years, and was present at the battle of
Yorktown, when Lord Cornwallis surrendered, and was there slightly
wounded.”

“Came to Upper Canada in the year 1796, too late to obtain the King’s
bounty of family land, but was placed on the United Empire list, and
received two hundred acres for himself and each of his children. He
removed to the Talbot settlement in the year 1810. He died in the County
of Elgin, Canada, July, 1853, aged ninety-nine years and five months.”

“John Butler, of Tyron, now Montgomery county, New York. Before the war,
Colonel Butler was in close official connection with Sir William, Sir
John, and Colonel Guy Johnson, and followed their political fortunes. At
the breaking out of hostilities he commanded a regiment of New York
Militia, and entered at once into the military service of the Crown.
During the war his wife was taken prisoner, and exchanged for the wife
of the whig colonel, Campbell. Colonel John Butler was richly rewarded
for his services. Succeeding (in part) to the agency of Indian affairs,
long held by the Johnsons, he enjoyed, about the year 1796, a salary of
£500 stg. per annum, and a pension, as a military officer, of £200 more.
Previously, he had received a grant of 500 acres of land, and a similar
provision for his children. His home, after the war, was in Upper
Canada. He was attainted during the contest, and his property
confiscated. He lived, before the revolution, in the present town of
Mohawk.”

“Joseph Canliff, in 1781 a lieutenant in the first battalion New Jersey
Volunteers.” This person is probably of the same lineage as the writer
of this work, great confusion often existing with regard to the spelling
of names in the early days of America.

“Daniel Claus. He married a daughter of Sir William Johnson, and served
for a considerable time in the Indian Department of Canada, under his
brother-in-law, Colonel Guy Johnson.”

“William Claus, Deputy Superintendent General of Indian affairs, was his
son.”

Coffin—There were several of this name who took part in the war against
the rebellion. Of these, the following are connected with Canadian
history:

“Sir Thomas Aston Coffin, baronet, of Boston, son of William Coffin. He
graduated at Harvard University in 1772. At one period of the rebellion
he was private secretary to Sir Guy Carleton. In 1804 he was Secretary
and Comptroller of Lower Canada.” Afterwards Commissary General in the
British army.

“Nathaniel Coffin, of Boston. After the revolution he settled in Upper
Canada.” Served in the war of 1812. “For a number of years was
Adjutant-General of the Militia of Upper Canada. Died at Toronto in
1846, aged 80.”

“John Coffin: was Assistant Commissary General in the British army, and
died at Quebec in 1837, aged 78.”

“Doane, of Bucks County, Pennsylvania. Of this family there were five
brothers, namely: Moses, Joseph, Israel, Abraham, Mahlon. They were men
of fine figures and address, elegant horsemen, great runners and
leapers, and excellent at stratagems and escapes. Their father was
respectable, and possessed a good estate. The sons themselves, prior to
the war, were men of reputation, and proposed to remain neutral: but,
harassed personally, their property sold by the whigs because they would
not submit to the exactions of the time, the above-mentioned determined
to wage a predatory warfare upon their persecutors, and to live in the
open air, as they best could do. This plan they executed, to the terror
of the country around, acting as spies to the royal army, and robbing
and plundering continually; yet they spared the weak, the poor and the
peaceful. They aimed at public property and at public men. Generally,
their expeditions were on horseback. Sometimes the five went together,
at others separately, with accomplices. Whoever of them was apprehended
broke jail; whoever of them was assailed escaped. In a word, such was
their course, that a reward of £300 was offered for the head of each.

“Ultimately, three were slain. Moses, after a desperate fight, was shot
by his captor; and Abraham and Mahlon were hung at Philadelphia.

“Joseph, before the revolution, taught school. During the war, while on
a marauding expedition, he was shot through the cheeks, fell from his
horse, and was taken prisoner. He was committed to jail to await his
trial, but escaped to New Jersey. A reward of $800 was offered for his
apprehension, but without success. He resumed his former employment in
New Jersey, and lived there, under an assumed name, nearly a year, but
finally fled to Canada. Several years after the peace he returned to
Pennsylvania, ‘a poor, degraded, broken-down old man,’ to claim a legacy
of about £40, which he was allowed to recover, and to depart. In his
youth he was distinguished for great physical activity.”

The only separate mention of Israel is, that “in February, 1783, he was
in jail; that he appealed to the Council of Pennsylvania to be released,
on account of his own sufferings and the destitute condition of his
family, and that his petition was dismissed.”

“Stephen Jarvis, in 1782 was a lieutenant of cavalry in the South
Carolina Royalists. He was in New Brunswick after the revolution, but
went to Upper Canada, and died at Toronto, at the residence of the Rev.
Dr. Phillips, 1840, aged eighty-four. During his service in the
revolution he was in several actions.”

“William Jarvis, an officer of cavalry in the Queen’s Rangers. Wounded
at the siege of Yorktown. At the peace he settled in Upper Canada, and
became Secretary of that Province. He died at York in 1817. His widow,
Hannah, a daughter of the Rev. Dr. Peters, of Hebron, Connecticut, died
at Queenston, Upper Canada, 1845, aged eighty-three.”

“David Jones was a captain in the royal service, and is supposed to
‘have married the beautiful and good Jane McCrea, whose cruel death, in
1777, by the Indians, is universally known and lamented.’ According to
Lossing, he lived in Canada to an old age, having never married. Jane
McCrea was the daughter of the Rev. James McCrea, of New Jersey,
loyalist.”

“Jonathan Jones, of New York, brother of Jane McCrea’s lover. Late in
1776 he assisted in raising a company in Canada, and joined the British,
in garrison, at Crown Point. Later in the war he was a captain, and
served under General Frazer.”

McDonald—There were a good many of this name who took part as
combatants, of whom several settled in Canada.

Alexander McDonald was a major in a North Carolina regiment. “His wife
was the celebrated Flora McDonald, who was so true and so devoted to the
unfortunate Prince Charles Edward, the last Stuart, who sought the
throne of England. They had emigrated to North Carolina, and when the
rebellion broke out, he, with two sons, took up arms for the Crown.”

Those who settled in Canada were “Donald McDonald, of New York. He
served under Sir John Johnson for seven years, and died at the Wolfe
Island, Upper Canada, in 1839, aged 97.”

“Allan McDonald, of Tryon, New York,” was associated with Sir John
Johnson in 1776. “He died at Three Rivers, Lower Canada, in 1822, quite
aged.”

“John McGill.—In 1782 he was an officer of infantry in the Queen’s
Rangers, and, at the close of the war, went to New Brunswick. He removed
to Upper Canada, and became a person of note. He died at Toronto, in
1834, at the age of eighty-three. At the time of his decease he was a
member of the Legislative Council of the Colony.”

“Donald McGillis resided, at the beginning of the revolution, on the
Mohawk river, New York. Embracing the royal side in the contest, he
formed one of a ‘determined band of young men’ who attacked a whig post
and, in the face of a superior force, cut down the flag-staff, and tore
in strips the stars and stripes attached to it. Subsequently, he joined
a grenadier company, called the Royal Yorkers, and performed efficient
service throughout the war. He settled in Canada at the peace; and,
entering the British service again in 1812, was commissioned as a
captain in the Colonial corps, by Sir Isaac Brock. He died at River
Raisin, Canada, in 1844, aged eighty years.”

“Thomas Merrit, of New York, in 1782 was cornet of cavalry in the
Queen’s Rangers. He settled in Upper Canada, and held the offices of
Sheriff of the District of Niagara and Surveyor of the King’s Forests.
He received half pay as a retired military officer. He died at St.
Catharines, May, 1842, aged eighty-two.”

“Nathaniel Munday, in 1782 was an officer in the Queen’s Rangers. He was
in New Brunswick after the revolution, and received half pay; but left
that colony and, it is believed, went to Canada.”

“John Peters, of Hebron, Connecticut; born in 1740. A most devoted
loyalist. He went to Canada finally, and raised a corps, called the
Queen’s Loyal Rangers, of which Lord Dorchester gave him command, with
the rank of lieutenant-colonel.”

“Christopher Robinson, of Virginia, kinsman of Beverley. Entered William
and Mary College with his cousin Robert; escaped with him to New York,
and received a commission in the Loyal American regiment. Served at the
South, and was wounded. At the peace he went to Nova Scotia, and
received a grant of land at Wilmot. He soon removed to Canada, where
Governor Simcoe gave him the appointment of Deputy Surveyor-General of
Crown Lands. His salary, half pay, and an estate of two thousand acres,
placed him in circumstances of comfort. He was the father of several
children, some of whom were educated in the mother-country. He died in
Canada. His widow, Esther, daughter of Rev. John Sayre, of New
Brunswick, died in 1827. His son, Beverley Robinson, who was born in
1791, was appointed Attorney-General of Upper Canada in 1818; Chief
Justice in 1829; created a Baronet in 1854; and died in 1863.”

“Singleton—A lieutenant in the ‘Royal Greens,’ was wounded in 1777,
during the investment of Fort Stanwix.” Probably Captain Singleton, who
settled in Thurlow, Upper Canada, was the same person.

“Finley Ross, of New York, was a follower of Sir John Johnson to Canada
in 1776. After the revolution he served in Europe, and was at Minden and
Jena. He settled at Charlotteburgh, Upper Canada, where he died, in
1830, aged ninety.”

“Allan McNab, a Lieutenant of cavalry in the Queen’s Rangers, under
Colonel Simcoe. During the war he received thirteen wounds. He
accompanied his commander to Upper Canada, then a dense, unpeopled
wilderness, where he settled. He was appointed Sergeant-at-arms of the
House of Assembly of that Province, and held the office many years. His
son, the late Sir Allan McNab, was a gentleman who filled many important
offices in Upper Canada.”

The Hamilton _Spectator_, speaking of the death of Sir A. N. McNab,
says: “The Hon. Colonel Sir Allan Napier McNab, Bart., M.L.C., A. D. C.,
was born at Niagara in the year 1798, of Scotch extraction,”—his
grandfather, Major Robert McNab, of the 22nd regiment, or Black Watch,
was Royal Forester in Scotland, and resided on a small property called
Dundurn, at the head of Loch Earn. His father entered the army in her
Majesty’s 7th regiment, and was subsequently promoted to a dragoon
regiment. He was attached to the staff of General Simcoe during the
revolutionary war; after its close he accompanied General Simcoe to this
country. When the Americans attacked Toronto, Sir Allan, then a boy at
school, was one of a number of boys selected as able to carry a musket;
and after the authorities surrendered the city, he retreated with the
army to Kingston, when through the instrumentality of Sir Roger Sheaffe,
a friend of his father’s, he was rated as mid-shipman on board Sir James
Yeo’s ship, and accompanied the expeditions to Sackett’s Harbor,
Genesee, and other places on the American side of the lake. Finding
promotions rather slow, he left the navy and joined the 100th regiment
under Colonel Murray, and was with them when they re-occupied the
Niagara frontier. He crossed with the advanced guard at the storming and
taking of Fort Niagara. For his conduct in this affair he was honored
with an ensigncy in the 49th regiment. He was with General Ryall at
Erie, and crossed the river with him when Black Rock and Buffalo were
burned, in retaliation for the destruction of Niagara, a few months
previous. After the termination of this campaign, Sir Allan joined his
regiment in Montreal, and shortly after marched with them to the attack
of Plattsburgh. On the morning of the attack he had the honor of
commanding the advanced guard at the Saranac Bridge. At the reduction of
the army in 1816 or 1817, he was placed on half-pay.

It is impossible at this time to give anything like a history of the
disbanded soldiers who settled on the shores of the Bay and the St.
Lawrence. There could not be allowed the space necessary to do justice
to the character of each. But even if such were possible we are wanting
in the essential matter of information. We propose, however, to insert
the names of every one known to have been a loyal combatant, whether an
officer or private, with such statements relative to his history as we
possess. We shall not confine ourselves to this particular region of the
Province, but include those who settled at Niagara, and in Lower Canada.
And while we may not supply a complete account of any one, it is trusted
that the instalment will not be unacceptable to the descendants of those
to whom we refer. We shall arrange them alphabetically without reference
to rank or station.

Captain Joseph Allen, formerly Captain Allen of New Jersey, held a
commission in the British Army at New York for some time during the war.
He owned extensive mill property, and was regarded as a very wealthy
person. All his possessions were confiscated, and he in 1783, found his
way, among other refugees, first to Sorel, where he stayed a winter, and
finally to Upper Canada. His family consisted of two sons, John and
Jonathan, and three daughters, Rachel, Ursula, and Elizabeth. Captain
Allen was one of the first settlers in Adolphustown, and his descendants
still live in the township, among whom are Parker Allen, Esq., J. D.
Watson, Esq., and David McWherter, Esq. Captain Allen had extensive
grants of land in Adolphustown, and in Marysburgh, and elsewhere; as
well as his children. Jonathan Allen, succeeded his father upon the
homestead, and was for many years an acceptable Justice of the Peace.
His brother, Joseph Allen, moved to Marysburgh, and was a Captain of
militia during the war of 1812. Captain Allen brought with him several
slaves, “who followed his fortunes with peculiar attachment, even after
their liberation.”

We have seen that the rebellion led to the divisions of families. It was
so with the Allison family of Haverstraw, New York. There were seven
brothers; two sided with the rebels. One Benjamin, being a boy, was at
home, while the other four took part with loyalists. One settled in New
Brunswick, probably the Edward Allison Sabine speaks of, who had been
captain in De Lancey’s third battalion, and who received half-pay, and
after whom _Mount Allison_ is called.

Joseph Allison was living at Haverstraw, New York. He was for a time
engaged in the navy yard at New York. At one time he and another entered
the rebel camp, and after remaining a few days availed themselves of a
dark night and carried off five excellent horses belonging to a troop of
cavalry. They were pursued and barely escaped. Allison took these horses
in return for the loss of his house and other property which the rebels
had ruthlessly burned. He was at the battle of White Plains, and had
narrow escapes, his comrade beside him was shot down, and his canteen
belt cut in two by a ball. As he could not carry the canteen, h$1 $2
took time to empty that vessel of the rum which it contained.

His neighbors at Haverstraw were exceedingly vindictive against him.
After several years, he visited there to see his aged mother, when a mob
attempted to tar and feather him, and he had to hide in the woods all
night. Allison came to Canada with Van Alstine, and drew lot 17, in
Adolphustown. A strong, healthy and vigorous man, he contributed no
little to the early settlement. Died upon his farm, aged eighty-eight.
His wife’s name was Mary Richmond, of a well-known Quaker family. His
descendants still occupy the old homestead, a most worthy family.
Benjamin Allison, the youngest, came to Adolphustown in 1795.

William Ashley, sen., was born in the city of London, England, in the
year 1749, and joined the army at an early age.

During the American Revolutionary war, he came out under General Howe,
serving in all his campaigns until the close of the struggle. He had two
brothers also in the army with him, one of whom returned to England, and
the other settled somewhere in the United States, the exact locality not
now being known. General J. M. Ashley, Republican member of Congress
from Ohio, is, so far as can be ascertained, a descendant of this
brother.

After the termination of the war, William Ashley came to Canada, and
first settled in the township of Loborough, county of Frontenac, where
he married Margaret Buck, the daughter of a U. E. L., and one of the
first settlers in this part of Canada. He resided here until about 1790,
when he removed to Kingston, where he followed the employment of a
butcher, and was the first butcher in Kingston, a fact he often
mentioned in his old age. He built a house of red cedar logs, cut from
the spot, which continued to stand until 1858, when it was taken down
and a small brick building, the “Victoria Hotel,” built on the site.
When removed the logs were found in a perfectly sound condition, they
having been covered with clapboards many years ago, which preserved them
from the weather.

This house stood on Brock street, near the corner of Bagot street. At
the time of its erection there were scarcely twenty residences in the
place, and that part of the city now lying west of the City Hall was
then covered with a dense forest of pine, cedar and ash. William Ashley
lived to see this pass away and a flourishing city spring up. He died in
1835, leaving a family of ten children—Margaret, Mary, Elizabeth,
William, John, James, Thomas, Henry, Adam and George: all of whom are
now dead excepting Thomas, who resides near Toronto.

James also died in 1835, and Henry, who was the first gaoler in Picton,
died in 1836, at the early age of thirty-one.

William Ashley, Jun., married Ann Gerollamy, daughter of an officer in
the British army, serving through the Revolutionary War, and acting as
Orderly in the war of 1812. He left Kingston in 1830, and resided until
1842 near the mouth of Black River, in the township of Marysburgh, and
then returned, and continued to reside there, teaching, and filling
various offices until his death, August 16, 1867.

The _British Whig_ newspaper when recording his death, remarked, “Mr.
Ashley was one of our oldest citizens, and has lived to witness many
changes in his native place. He was born on the very spot where the
_British Whig_ office now stands.” The last sentence is a mistake, he
was not born in the city, but in the township of Loborough; although the
building containing the _British Whig_ office still belongs to the
‘Ashley property’ on Bagot Street.

John Ashley was gaoler in Kingston for a number of years when the gaol
stood near the site of the present Post Office, and filled public
situations from the time he was nineteen years of age until his death in
1858. He was a prominent member of the County Council for nearly twenty
years, and was Colonel of the militia at the time of his death.

Adam and George Ashley both died in 1847.

William Bell—We shall have occasion to speak of William Bell in
different places in these pages. He was born August 12, 1758, in County
of Tyrone, Ireland.

At the time of the Revolutionary War he was a sergeant in the 53rd
regiment of the line. Some time after the close of the war, he succeeded
in procuring his discharge from the service, at Lachine, and came to
Cataraqui, sometime in 1789. He was on intimate terms with John
Ferguson, and, we believe, related by marriage. It was at Ferguson’s
solicitation that Bell came to the Bay. We have before us an old account
book, by which we learn that Ferguson and Bell commenced trading on the
front of Sidney in the latter part of 1789. They remained here in
business until 1792. Subsequently Bell became school teacher to the
Mohawks, and seems to have done business there in the way of trading, in
1799. In 1803 we find him settled in Thurlow. Ferguson, who was living
at Kingston, had been appointed Colonel of the Hastings Militia, and
Bell was selected by him to assist in organizing the body. He was
commissioned captain in December 1798, Major in August 1800; and in 1809
Lieutenant-Colonel. Colonel Bell was well known as a public man in
Thurlow. He was appointed to several offices—Magistrate, Coroner, and
finally Colonel of the Hastings Battalion. As magistrate he took an
active part in the doings of Thurlow and Belleville for many years. He
was also an active person in connection with the agricultural societies,
until a few years before his death, 1833. The papers left by Colonel
Bell have been of great service to us. His wife’s name was Rachel Hare,
who died 1853, aged eighty-one.

Colonel Stephen Burritt took part in the war against the rebels, being
seven years in the army, in Roger’s Rangers. He settled upon the Rideau,
the 9th of April, 1793. In the same year was born Colonel E. Burritt,
who was the first child born of white parents north of the Rideau. This
interesting fact was given to the writer by Colonel E. Burritt in 1867.
Colonel Burritt is a cousin of the celebrated Learned Blacksmith.

Willet Casey was born in Rhode Island. His father was killed in battle
during the war. At the close of the war he settled near Lake Champlain,
upon what he supposed to be British territory, but finding such was not
the case, and although he had made considerable clearing, he removed
again. Turning his steps toward Upper Canada with his aged mother and
wife, he reached in due time, the 4th township. The family, upon
arriving, found shelter in a blacksmith’s shop until a log hut could be
built. Three months afterwards the old mother died. Willet Casey had a
brother in a company of horsemen, who fought for the British. He
remained in the States and went South. It is probably the descendants of
this Casey, who took an active part in the late civil war in the United
States.

The writer has seen the fine, erect old couple that came to Canada, when
on the verge of eighty, and two nobler specimens of nature’s nobility
could not be imagined.

Luke Carscallian was an Irishman by birth, and had served in the British
army; he had retired and emigrated to the American colonies prior to the
rebellion. He desired to remain neutral, and take no part in the
contest. The rebels, however, said to him that inasmuch as he was
acquainted with military tactics he must come and assist them, or be
regarded as a King’s man. His reply was that he had fought for the king,
and he would do it again, consequently an order was issued to arrest
him; but when they came to take him he had secreted himself. The escape
was a hurried one, and all his possessions were at the mercy of the
rebels—land to the amount of 12,000 acres. They, disappointed in not
catching him, took his young and tender son, and threatened to hang him
if he would not reveal his father’s place of concealment. The brave
little fellow replied, hang away! and the cruel men under the name of
liberty carried out their threat, and three times was he suspended until
almost dead, yet he would not tell, and then when taken down one of the
monsters actually kicked him.

Oliver Church was Lieutenant in the 84th regiment. He settled with the
many other half-pay officers, on the front of Fredericksburgh, three
miles west of Bath. He had three sons, and three daughters, who settled
upon the Bay, but are now dead except one daughter. Lieutenant Church
died in 1812, and his wife some years later. They were both very old
when they died.

A grand-child of the old veteran, Mrs. H. of Belleville informs us that
she has often heard about her grandfather having to crush grain by hand,
and spending a week going to the Kingston mill.

Robert Clark, late of the Township of Ernest town, in the County of
Addington, was born March 15, 1744 on Quaker Hill, Duchess County,
Province of New York. He learned the trade of carpenter and millwright,
of a Mr. Woolly. He left his family and joined the British standard in
the revolutionary war, was in General Burgoyne’s army, and was requested
by the General that he and other Provincial volunteers, should leave the
army and go to Canada, which place, he reached after some weeks of great
suffering and privation. The day after he left (October 17, 1777,)
General Burgoyne capitulated, and surrendered his arms to the American
Generals Gates and Arnold. Robert Clark subsequently served two years in
his Majesty’s Provincial Regiment, called the Loyal Rangers, commanded
by Major Edward Jessup, and in Captain Sabastian Jones’ company, and was
discharged on the 24th December, 1783. He owned two farms in Duchess
County, one of 100, the other of 150 acres, both of which were
confiscated. He was employed by the government in 1782–3 to erect the
Kingston mills, (then Cataraqui) preparatory to the settlement of the
loyalists in that section of Upper Canada, at which time his family,
consisting of his wife and three sons, arrived at Sorel in Lower Canada,
where they all were afflicted with the small pox, and being entirely
among strangers they were compelled to endure more than the usual amount
of suffering incident to that disease, their natural protector being at
a distance, and in the employ of the government, could not leave to
administer to their necessity. In 1784, his family joined him at the
mills, after having been separated by the vicissitudes of war for a
space of seven years. In 1785 he removed with his family to lot No. 74,
1st concession Ernest town, in which year he was again employed by
government to erect the Napanee mills. He was appointed Justice of the
Peace for the district of Mecklenburgh, in July 1788, and a captain in
the militia in 1809, and died 17th December, 1823.

John C. Clark was married to Rachel Storer, and had a family of ten sons
and three daughters.

Captain Crawford, of the Rogers corps, settled on lot No. 1 of
Fredericksburgh. Became a magistrate, and lived to be an old man, was
also colonel of militia.

George Dame was the son of Theophilus Dame, evidently a veteran soldier,
from the copy of his will now before us. He gave to his “son, George
Dame, the one-half of my (his) real estate in Dover, England, to hold to
him forever,” also his wearing apparel, books, gold watch, gilt-headed
cane, horses, sleigh and harness, and one hundred dollars. He bequeathed
to his grandson, John Frederick Dame, his camp bedstead, and curtains
and valence for carriage of camp bedstead, and his silver-mounted
hanger. To his grandson Augustus Dame, his fusee, gorget, and small seal
skin trunk. To another grandson he left his double-barrelled pistol. By
reference to these items we learn that Theophilus Dame must have been a
British officer of some standing.

His son, George Dame, followed in the footsteps of his father in
pursuing the profession of arms. We have before us a document, dated
1765, which declares that “Ensign George Dame of the 8th or King’s Own
Regiment of foot, was admitted burgess of the Burgh of Dumfries, with
liberty to him to exercise and enjoy the whole immunities and privileges
thereof, &c.” For some reason this commission in the 8th regiment was
relinquished; but ten years later we find he has a commission from
General Carleton, Major-General and Commander-in-chief of His Majesty’s
forces in the Province of Quebec, and upon the frontier thereof,
appointing him “Ensign in the Royal Regiment of Highland Emigrants
commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Commandant Allan McLean.” “Given under
my hand and seal at the Castle of Saint Lewis, in the city of Quebec,
21st of November, 1775.” In 1779 he received a commission from Frederick
Haldimand, Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief, &c., appointing him
“Captain in a corps of Rangers raised to serve with the Indians during
the rebellion, whereof John Butler, Esq., is Major Commandant”.

After the close of the war, Captain Dame lived at Three Rivers, Lower
Canada, where we find him acting as Returning Officer in 1792, Mured
Clarke being Lieutenant Governor. He died at Three Rivers, April 16th,
1807.

An official paper before us sets forth that “Guy, Lord Dorchester,
authorizes Frederick Dame, ‘by beat of drum or otherwise,’ forthwith to
raise from amongst the inhabitants of Upper and Lower Canada, as many
able-bodied men as will assist the completing of a company, to be
commanded by Captain Richard Wilkinson. This company to be mainly
provincial, and for the service of Canada, and to serve for the space of
three years, or during the war. This order shall continue in force for
twelve months.” Dated at the Castle of St. Lewis, Quebec, 21st June,
1796. This is signed “DORCHESTER.”

The same year, bearing date the 17th December, is a commission from
Robert Prescott, Esq., Lieutenant-Governor, appointing Frederick Dame
ensign to the second battalion Royal Canadian Volunteers.

In the year 1802 John Frederick Dame received his commission as Surveyor
of Lands in Upper and Lower Canada, from Robert Shore Milnes,
Lieutenant-Governor, upon the certificate of Joseph Bouchette, Esq.,
Deputy Surveyor-General. Up to this time it would seem he had been
living at Three Rivers.

Allan Dame, a son of the aforementioned, is now residing in Marysburgh,
not far from McDonald’s Cove. He is now in the neighborhood of sixty:
this is his native place. He is a fine specimen of an English Canadian
farmer; and well he may be, being a descendant of a worthy stock, of
English growth. He is married to the granddaughter of Colonel McDonald.

Daly—P. K. Daly, Esq., of Thurlow, has kindly furnished us with the
following interesting account:

Captain Peter Daly, my grandfather, was the son of Capt. Daly, of an
Irish regiment, that was stationed in New York for some years before the
outbreak of the old revolutionary war, but was called home to Ireland
before the commencement of hostilities; and finally fell a victim to
that cruel code of honor which obliged a man to fight a duel.

At the earnest solicitation of a bachelor friend, of the name of Vroman,
he had been induced to leave his son Peter behind. Vroman resided upon
the banks of the Mohawk, where the city of Amsterdam now stands. He was
a man of considerable wealth, all of which he promised to bestow upon
his son, Peter Daly; a promise he would, in all probability, have kept,
had circumstances permitted; but he was prevented by the stern realities
of the times—those stern realities that tried men’s souls, and called
upon every man to declare himself. The subject of this sketch could not
dishonor the blood that flowed in his veins, and, although but 16 years
of age, he clung firmly to the old flag that, for “a thousand years had
braved the battle and the breeze.” He joined a company, and followed the
destiny of his flag along the shores of Lake Champlain, where, in one
night, he assisted in scaling three forts. He assisted in taking Fort
Tyconderoga, and gradually fought or worked his way into Canada. The war
closing, he, in company with other loyalists, came up the Bay of Quinté,
and subsequently married and settled in the second concession of Ernest
town, in the vicinity of the village of Bath, where, by cultivating his
farm, and by industry, he secured a comfortable living.

He was remarked through life for his strictly honorable dealing, and his
adherence to “the old flag.” In religion he was a firm Presbyterian.
From his old protector, Vroman, he never heard anything definite. He
cared but little for the land that had driven him into exile, to dwell
among the wild beasts of the unbroken forest.

It is supposed that Vroman, in his declining years, gave his property to
some other favorite. Be that as it may, Peter Daly saw none of it, but
came into this country naked, as it were; carved out of the forest his
own fortune, and left a numerous and respected family. There are now
only two of his sons living, Thomas and Charles, who live on the old
farm, near Bath. His eldest daughter, Mrs. Aikens, is still living, in
Sidney. My father, Philip, was the eldest. He died at Oak Shade, in
Ernest town, in 1861, in the 71st year of his age. David, the next son,
lived and died at Waterloo, near Kingston; and Lewis lived and died at
Storrington. The first wife of Asal Rockwell, of Ernest town was a
daughter of his. Jacob Shibly, Esq., ex M.P.P., married another
daughter; and the late Joshua Boatte another. Their descendants are
numerous.

John Diamond was born in Albany, with several brothers. An elder brother
was drafted, but he tried to escape from a service that was distasteful
to him; was concealed for some time, and upon a sick bed. The visits of
the doctor led to suspicion, and the house was visited by rebels.
Although he had been placed in a bed, and the clothes so arranged that,
as was thought, his presence would not be detected, his breathing
betrayed him. They at once required his father to give a bond for
$1,200, that his son should not be removed while sick. He got well, and,
some time after, again sought to escape, but was caught, and handcuffed
to another. Being removed from one place to another, the two prisoners
managed to knock their guard on the head, and ran for life through the
woods, united together. One would sometimes run on one side of a
sapling, and the other on the opposite side. At night they managed to
rub their handcuffs off, and finally escaped to Canada. Of the other
brothers, two were carried off by the rebels, and never more heard of.
John was taken to the rebel army when old enough to do service; but he
also escaped to Canada, and enlisted in Rogers’ Battalion, with which he
did service until the close of the war, when he settled with the company
at Fredericksburgh.

John Diamond married Miss Loyst, a native of Philadelphia, whose
ancestors were German. She acted no inferior part, for a woman, during
the exciting times of the rebellion. They married in Lower Canada. They
spent their first summer in Upper Canada, in clearing a little spot of
land, and in the fall got a little grain in the ground. They slept,
during the summer, under a tree, but erected a small hut before winter
set in.




                               CHAPTER X.

  CONTENTS—Ferguson—Frazer—Gerollemy—Goldsmith—Harrison—Hudgins—Hicks—
    Howell—Hover—Hogle—Ham—Herkimer—Holt—Jones—Johnson—Ketcheson—
    Loyst—Myers—McArthur—Miller—Mordens—McDonald—McDonnell—McDonell—
    Ostrom—Peterson.


                    INDIVIDUAL COMBATANTS—CONTINUED.

Among the early and influential settlers upon the bay, was John
Ferguson. It has been our good fortune to come into possession of a good
many public and private letters penned by his hand, and invaluable
information has thus been obtained. The following letter will inform the
reader of the part he took in the service during the war. It is
addressed to Mr. Augustus Jones.

                                            KINGSTON, 22nd July, 1792.

  DEAR SIR.—

  Inclosed is my old application for the land on the carrying place,
  which I send agreeable to your desire. I need not attempt to explain
  it better, as you know so well what I want. I wish, if consistent,
  that land, 200 acres, Mrs. Ferguson is entitled to, might be joined
  to it. if I cannot get a grant of the carrying place, will you be so
  good as to let me know what terms it may be had on. I have it in my
  power to settle the place immediately, had I any security for it. I
  am certain Mr. Hamilton will interest himself for me, but I am loth
  to apply to him at present, as in all probability he has too much
  business to think of besides. Should it be asked how and where I
  served, I will mention the particulars. The 24th June, 1774, I was
  appointed, and acted as barrack-master until 24th March, 1778, when
  I was ordered to Carleton Island, being also commissary at the post.
  Thirteenth April, 1782, I was appointed barrack-master of Ontario,
  where I remained until ordered to Cataraqui in September, 1783, and
  acted as barrack-master for both posts, until 24th June, 1785, when
  I was obliged to relinquish it, having more business in the
  commissary’s department than I could well manage, with the other
  appointment, occasioned by the increase of loyalists settling in
  this neighborhood. Twenty-fifth February, 1778, my father then being
  commissary of Oswegotchie, delivered the stores to me, as he was
  unable to do the duty himself. He died 13th March, following, when I
  was appointed his successor.

  The 13th April, I was ordered to Carleton Island to assist Mr.
  McLean in the transport business. In November, 1778, I was again
  sent to Oswegotchie, where I remained commissary of the post until
  24th June, 1782, when I was sent to Ontario to take charge there,
  from thence I was sent to this place, 24th September, 1783, where I
  remained until a reformation took place in the commissary
  department, and I was on the 24th June, 1787, served like a great
  many others, sent about my business without any provision, after
  having spent my best days in His Majesty’s service.

  You see I was eleven years barrack-master, and nine years a
  commissary, I was also six years in the Commissary General’s office
  at Montreal (a clerk,) during which time my father was permitted to
  do my duty as barrack-master. I will write you again by next
  opportunity.

                          Your very humble servant,
                                          (Signed)      JOHN FERGUSON.

Ensign Frazer, of the 84th regiment settled at the point of Ernest town.
Had three sons. His widow married Colonel Thompson.

The Cornwall _Freeholder_, notices the death of Mr. Frazer, of St.
Andrew’s, C. W., the discoverer of Frazer river, and of Mrs. Frazer, who
departed this life a few hours afterwards. Mr. Frazer was one of the few
survivors of the find old “Northwesters,” and his name, as the first
explorer of the golden stream which bears it, will be remembered with
honor long after most of the provincial cotemporaries are forgotten. The
_Freeholder_ says: “Mr. Frazer was the youngest son of Mr. Simon Frazer,
who emigrated to the State of New York, in 1773. He purchased land near
Bennington; but upon the breaking out of the revolutionary war, he
attached himself to the royal cause, and served as captain, at the
battle of Bennington; where he was captured by the rebels. He died in
Albany jail, about thirteen months afterwards, his end being hastened by
the rigorous nature of the imprisonment. He was married to Isabella
Grant, daughter of Daldregan, and had issue, four sons and five
daughters. The widow, with her children, came to Canada after the peace
of 1783. Simon Frazer, the elder, the father of the object of this
notice, was the second son of William Frazer, the third of Kilbockie,
who, by his wife, Margaret, daughter of John McDonell, of Ardnabie, had
nine sons:—1st. William, the fourth of Kilbockie; 2nd. Simon, who came
to America, as we have seen; 3rd. John, who was captain in Wolf’s army,
shared in the honors of the capture of Quebec, and was subsequently, for
many years, Chief Justice of the Montreal district; 4th. Archibald, who
was Lieutenant in Frazer’s regiment, under General Wolfe, was afterwards
captain of the Glengarry Fencibles, and served in Ireland during the
rebellion in ‘98; 5th. Peter, a doctor of medicine, who died in Spain;
6th. Alexander, who served as captain in General Caird’s army, and died
in India; 7th. Donald, a Lieutenant in the army, who was killed in
battle in Germany; 8th. James, also a Lieutenant in the army, and one of
the sufferers in the Black Hole of Calcutta, in 1756; 9th. Roderick, who
died at sea.”

Mr. J. B. Ashley, a native of Marysburgh, to whom much valuable
information we possess is due, says: “My great grandfather, James
Gerollamy, was but seventeen years of age when he joined General
Clinton’s army in 1779, and remained in the service until the virtual
close of the war in 1782, when he came from New York to Quebec, and
thence to Bath, where he settled, on what was until lately known, as the
“Hichcock Farm.”” He afterwards removed to the fifth town, and settled
on lot No. 11, 1st concession, lake side. He received from government
certain farming implements, the same as before mentioned. A part of them
coming into the hands of my father, Augustus Ashley, of Marysburgh. The
hatchet, I have often used when a young lad in my childish employments.
It is now lost. The share and coulter belonging to the plough, remain
among a collection of old iron in my father’s woodshed until the present
day. James Gerollamy, married Ann Dulmage, the daughter of Thomas
Dulmage, who came with him to Canada and settled near him at Bath, in
the second town, and subsequently moved to lot No. “D,” at the head of
South Bay, in the township of Marysburgh, where he died. The graves of
himself and wife being still under a large maple tree, close to the site
of his house.

James Gerollamy, and his two sons, James and John, served through the
war of 1812, under General Provost, Brock and Drummond. The old man
holding the rank of Orderly, and his son James that of Lieutenant. The
latter received a grant of 1000 acres of land for services as a “spy,”
he was one of the number who planned the successful attempts upon
Oswego, Black Rock and Buffalo, and at the battle of Niagara, generally
known as “Lundy’s Lane.” He fought in the company or regiment known as
“Grenadiers,” which, in their manœuvering were compelled to run and
wallow over a field of corn with mud ankle deep.

The whole family were remarkable for large size, being over six feet in
height, of great strength, and healthy, with robust constitutions. The
old gentleman was acknowledged the surest marksman in this section of
the country, and his “fusil,” was his constant companion. He died about
ten years ago, aged about ninety-five years, being in full possession of
his faculties until the last. I can well remember seeing him sauntering
through the garden, bent with his weight of years, and leaning on his
staff.

Thomas Goldsmith, a native of Ulster Co., Montgomery town, New York. He
was engaged as a spy, and discharged important and successful duties, in
carrying information from Gen. Burgoyne to Lord Cornwallis, and
returning with despatches. He frequently passed the guards of the
Continental army, and often was subjected to a close search, but
succeeded in eluding detection. Goldsmith owned one thousand acres of
land, on which was a flouring mill with two run of stones. Also, a
sailing vessel launched, but not entirely finished, for the West India
trade. The boat was sacrificed. The produce of his farm was paid for in
Continental bills. The malleable iron of his mill was taken to make a
chain to put across the Hudson to stop boats. His neighbors, the rebels,
catching him one day from home, covered him and his horse and saddle,
with a coat of tar and feathers. After the close of the war, he was
compelled to part with his land to get away. It was sold for a mere
trifle. He came into Canada in 1786, bringing with him some cattle, most
of which died for want of something to eat. He was accompanied by David
Conger, and reached Kingston, June 24. Settled at first in the fourth
township; but soon after removed to Holliwell, where he received a grant
of 400 acres of land, 1st. con., lot 9. Here he lived and died, aged
ninety.

Sergeant Harrison was a native of Ireland, and served for many years in
the fifty-third regiment. For some time during the revolutionary war, he
was in the Quartermaster’s store, and post office. He was altogether
twenty-eight years in the service. At the close of the war, he settled
in Marysburgh, with the first band, not connected with the Hessians, and
was probably under Wright in the commissary department for the
settlement. He settled on lot nine, east of the Rock.

William Hudgins was born on a small island, known as Ginn’s Island,
lying about three and a half miles from the Virginia shore, in
Chesapeake bay, where his father, Lewis Hudgins, had a farm of two
hundred acres. He joined the Royal army with his younger brother Lewis,
in 1778, serving in the regiment known as the Queen’s Rangers, under
Lord Cornwallis; where he held the rank of sergeant, and his brother
that of corporal. At the battle of Yorktown, he was wounded and taken
prisoner, and his brother was killed. After his exchange he came to New
Brunswick, and settled about thirty miles above Frederickton, on the St.
John’s river, where he lived until 1809, when he removed to Canada.
First settling in Adolphustown, near what is known now as Cole’s Point.
He joined the incorporated militia during the war of 1812, serving under
Colonel McGill, and Colonel Shaw. He received the right to considerable
land; but after the capture of York, now Toronto, by the Americans in
1813, and the consequent destruction of property, the documents
pertaining to the same were burnt, and he could not, as a consequence,
get his grant. Immediately after the war of 1812, he removed to
Marysburg, where he remained until his death.

The above information is received from Mr. William Hudgins, son of the
above mentioned William Hudgins, who is now an old man, he having served
with his father in the war of 1812.

“It would have done you good to have heard the old gentleman, with his
silver locks flowing in the wind, whitened with the frosts of four-score
winters, as he descanted upon scenes and incidents in connection with
the war, through which he served, and to have witnessed his eye twinkle
with pride, when he referred to the loyalty of his honored parent.”—
(_Ashley._)

Edward Hicks, who settled in Marysburgh, was placed in prison with his
father. His father was taken out and hanged before his window upon an
apple tree, (a piece of refined cruelty worthy a rebel cause). This
aroused Edward to a state of desperation, who with manacled hands, paced
his cell. To carry out his intention, he feigned illness, and frequently
required the guard to accompany him to the outer yard. At night fall he
went out accompanied by the guard. Watching the opportunity, he drew up
his hands and struck a furious blow upon the head of the soldier with
his handcuffs, which laid the man prostrate. Edward darted away to a
stream which ran near by, and across which was a mill-dam and a slide.
He rushed under this slide, and before a cry was raised, he concealed
himself under the sheet of water. He could hear the din and tumult, as
search was everywhere made through the night. Cold, wet, benumbed,
hungry and handcuffed, he remained in his hiding place until the
following night, thirty-six hours, when he crept out and escaped to the
woods. After nine days of fasting he reached the British army. Edward
Hicks did not forget the death of his father. He “fought the rebels in
nine battles afterward, and still owes them grudge.”

Joseph, Joshua and Edward, belonged to Butler’s Rangers, and saw no
little service. They were from Philadelphia, and left considerable
property. They had granted them a large tract of land west of Niagara,
where sprung up Hicks’ settlement. Joseph Hicks afterwards settled on
lot six, Marysburgh, west of the Rock.—(_Ashley._)

Edward Hicks is represented as having been a very powerful man, often
performing remarkable feats of strength, such as lifting barrels of
flour and pork to his shoulders, and such like.

He went to Boston in 1778, in the character of a spy, and was detected
by the Americans, and taken prisoner. He represented himself as a young
man searching for his mother, who had removed to that section of the
country; but it is supposed that his captors considered him as rather
too smart looking a young man to be lost in any enterprise, he being of
fine build, standing good six feet, and possessing an intelligent
countenance, and at his trial, condemned him as a spy to be dealt with
accordingly.—(_Ashley._)

John Howell, a son of Richard Howell, from Wales, was born in New Jersey
in 1753. When 24 years old he took up his residence at Johnstown, on the
Mohawk river. At the commencement of hostilities, in 1776, he joined Sir
John Johnson’s 2nd battalion, and was raised to the position of
serjeant-major. His name appears as such upon the battalion roll, now
before the writer. He remained in the army during the war, doing duty at
St. Johns, Coteau du lac, and at many other places. When his company was
disbanded at Oswego, in 1782, he came immediately to Kingston, and
thence to Fredericksburgh, where he settled upon his lot of 200 acres.
By adhering to the loyal cause, Sergeant Howell suffered serious loss in
real estate. The pleasant town of Rome now stands upon the land which
was his. His valuable property was not yielded up to the rapacious
rebels without a legal effort to recover possession. The case was in
court for many years, and Sergeant Howell spent $1,400 in vain efforts
to recover. No doubt it was pre-judged before he spent his money. An
event in Howell’s life during the war is not without a touching
interest. Before joining the regiment, he had courted and won the heart
of a fair lady at Johnstown. While stationed at Coteau du lac he
obtained permission during the winter, when hostilities were suspended,
to go to Johnstown to obtain his bride. Guided by seven Indians, he set
out to traverse a pathless wilderness, on snowshoes. The wedding trip
had its perils, and almost a fatal termination. On their return they
lost their way in the interminable woods, and soon found themselves
destitute of food. For days they were without anything to eat. One day
they shot a squirrel, which, divided among them, was hardly a taste to
each. The thongs of their shoes were roasted and eaten, to allay the
pangs of hunger. At last they succeeded in shooting a deer, which had
well nigh proved the death of some, from over-eating. Two of the men
were left behind, but they subsequently came in.

Sergeant Howell’s loss as a loyalist was great; but, so far as could be,
it was made good by Government. He drew 1,200 acres of land as an
officer, and the same quantity for his family. At an early date after
his arrival at the Bay he was appointed Commissioner in the Peace; and
subsequently he was made Colonel of the Prince Edward Militia.

Soon after settling in Fredericksburgh he built a windmill, probably the
first mill built by an individual in the Province. He afterwards sold it
to one Russell. The remains still mark the spot.

He finally settled in Sophiasburgh, while it was yet considered by the
infant colony as the backwoods of the settlement. He was a man of
liberal education for the times, and was conversant with the Dutch and
French languages, and understood the Indian dialect. From his former
connection with the Johnson settlement upon the Mohawk, and his close
contiguity to the Mohawk Indians upon the Bay, he held a high place in
their regard. He often visited them; and their chiefs as often paid him
state visits. They often called upon him to settle their disputes, which
he never failed to do by his sternness and kindness combined. His
presence was sufficient to inspire awe amongst them when disposed to be
troublesome, which was increased by his long sword which he would hang
to his side.

Henry Hover was quite a boy when the rebellion was progressing, being
about sixteen when the Declaration of Independence was signed. Living
along the Hudson, near New York, he went out one day for the cows, when
he was caught by some rebels and carried to Lancaster jail. After being
in prison for some time he was released, and permitted to go to New
York. He some time after, by some means, enlisted in Butler’s Rangers,
and set out, with four others (one his brother), to traverse the wide
country on foot, from New York to Fort Niagara, the head-quarters of the
company. Lying one night under the trees, they were suddenly attacked by
a scouting party of rebels, by being fired upon. One was killed, and the
rest taken prisoners. Henry Hover remained in prison, in chains, until
the close of the war, nearly two years. The hardships and cruelties he
endured were, indeed, terrible. When he was taken prisoner he had on a
pair of linen trowsers; no others were ever given him; and when he was
released these were hanging in shreds upon him. They had nothing to lie
upon but the cold brick floor, two persons being chained together. Years
after, a stranger called one day at Hover’s in Adolphustown. Hover not
being at home, the man wrote his name, “Greenway,” the man to whom Henry
had been chained for many a weary day and month in prison. Hover being
released at the close of the war, reported himself at Niagara, and was
discharged with the rest of his company. He received all his back pay,
while in jail, and a grant of land at St. Davids; but his father, Casper
Hover, a refugee, had settled in Adolphustown, having come in Major Van
Alstine’s corps. Henry wished to see his parents, from whom he had been
so long separated, and sought a chance to go down from the Niagara
frontier. He entered on board an old “hulk,” an old French vessel coming
down the lake, and so got to Kingston, which place he reached soon after
Van Alstine’s company had settled in the fourth Township. Henry set out
from Kingston on foot, along the bay, through the woods. In time he
arrived at the third township. He was misdirected across to Hay Bay.
Following its shores, he met Holland’s surveying party, who told him
that he was astray, and put him on the correct track. Henry Hover
determined to remain at the bay, and was included among the original
settlers under Van Alstine, drawing land like the rest, being the only
one who did not belong to that company. He sleeps from his warfare—from
his long life of well-spent industry, in the “old U. E. burying ground,”
at the front, in Adolphustown.

Among those who fought the unequal battle of Bennington was Captain
Hogle, who was shot dead. He was a native of Vermont. He left a widow
and three sons, who were yet young. They were under the necessity of
leaving their valuable possessions and removing to Canada. They buried
plate in the garden, which was never regained. At the expiration of the
war they settled in Ernest town.

David Hartman—was present at the battle of Bennington, and was shot
through the chest. Notwithstanding, he lived for many years. He settled
in Ernest town.

John Ham, the founder of the Ham family of Canada, so well and so
favorably known in different sections of the Province. He was born near
Albany. His father was a native of Germany, although of English
parentage. John Ham was a soldier during the war, and in one of several
engagements, was wounded in the leg. The ball, lodging in the calf, was
cut out, and, at the request of the suffering but brave hero, was shot
back at the foe. He was one of the company who settled in Ernest town.
He had a family of ten children, eight of them being sons, namely: John,
Henry, Peter, George, Jacob, Philip, Benjamin, and Richard, all of whom
lived and died in Canada.

The name of Herkimer is engraved upon the history of America, both in
the United States and in Canada. “Colonel Hanjost Herkimer, or John
Joost, was a son of Johan Jost Herkimer, one of the Palatines of the
German Flats, New York, and a brother of the rebel general, Nicholas
Herkimer. His property was confiscated. He went to Canada, and died
there before 1787.”—(_Sabine._) Prior to the war he had occupied several
public offices. He served as an officer in Butler’s Rangers. We find his
name inserted for lot 24 of Kingston, on which now stands part of the
city. His son Nicholas settled upon the Point now bearing the family
name. He married a Purdy, and had several children. His end was a sad
one, being murdered by a blacksmith, named Rogers, who escaped. A
daughter was married to Captain Sadlier, another to an officer in the
army, and a third to Mr. Wartman.

The old family place in New York State is yet indicated by the name of
Herkimer County.

William Johnson Holt was ensign in Ferguson’s Rangers. This corps formed
part of the army of Burgoyne at the time of his surrender, and, with
other provincial prisoners, retired to Canada, by permission of Gates.
The subject of this notice settled in Montreal, where he held the
lucrative office of Inspector of Pot and Pearl Ashes, and received half
pay for nearly fifty years. He died at Montreal, in 1826. By his first
wife (Ruah Stevens, of Pittsfield, Massachusetts), he was the father of
a large family of sons and daughters; by his second wife (Elizabeth
Cuyler) he left no issue. His sixth son, Charles Adolphus, alone has
surviving male children, of whom the eldest, Charles Gates Holt, is
(1864) a distinguished counsellor-at-law, and a gentleman of the highest
respectability, at Quebec. In February, 1864, he was appointed one of
“Her Majesty’s Counsel, learned in the law,” and thus entitled to wear
the “silk robe.”

“John Jones, of Maine, captain in Rogers’ Rangers. Being of a dark
complexion, he was called ‘Mahogany Jones.’ Prior to the war he lived at
or near Pownalborough, and was Surveyor of the Plymouth Company. As the
troubles increased, the whigs accused him of secreting tea, and broke
open his store. Next, they fastened him to a long rope, and dragged him
through the water until he was nearly drowned. Finally, to put an end to
his exertions against the popular cause, he was committed to jail in
Boston. He escaped, went to Quebec in 1780, and received a commission in
the Rangers. In Maine, again, before the peace, he annoyed his personal
foes repeatedly. Among his feats was the capture of his ‘old enemy,’
General Charles Cushing, of Pownalborough. Jones, immediately after the
peace, was at the Bay of Fundy, and interested in lands granted on that
island to loyalists. In 1784 he resumed his business as surveyor, on the
river St. Croix.—At length, ‘his toryism forgotten,’ he removed to the
Kennebec. He died at Augusta, Maine.”

Captain William Johnson, of the King’s Royal regiment, afterwards
colonel of the Militia of Addington. Besides the celebrated Sir John
Johnson’s family, there were a large number of combatants and loyalists
of this name, and mostly all of them were conspicuous for their gallant
deeds in arms. Captain William Johnson settled some miles west of
Kingston, on the front. Left one child, a daughter, who married McCoy.
They removed to Toronto. It is said by Mr. Finkle that the first militia
mustered in Upper Canada was by Col. William Johnson, at Finkle’s
tavern.

The name of Johnson has become somewhat famous in Canadian history.
James Johnson, an Irishman, was a soldier in Rogers’ Battalion. He came
to Upper Canada with the first settlers of Ernest town, and was captain
of the cattle-drivers that came at that time, or a year later. He got
his location ticket at Carleton Island. He had a family of seven sons
and six daughters. Six of the sons’ names were: Daniel, James, William,
Matthew, Jacob, Andrew. The last-mentioned supplies us with the above
information. He is now upwards of one hundred years of age.—(See U. E.
Loyalists).

William Ketcheson, of Sidney, who was born September, 1782, at Bedford,
New York, says that his father, William Ketcheson, was a native of
England, and came to America with his grandfather, his father being
dead. They settled in South Carolina, and lived there until the
rebellion broke out. William Ketcheson, sen., was then about seventeen
years of age, and entered the British service as a dragoon, under Lord
Cornwallis. He served during the war; took part in many engagements, and
was wounded in the thigh. Shortly before the close of hostilities he was
married to Mary Bull, daughter of John Bull, a loyalist. After the peace
he went to Nova Scotia, and engaged in fishing for a while; lived in a
shanty at a rock-bound place, called Portoon. A fire ran over the place,
burning up mostly everything, and almost our informant, who was then
only about 18 months old. He and his mother were put on board a boat and
taken to New York. The father remained to settle his affairs at Nova
Scotia, and then came on into Canada, alone, in 1786. He worked a farm
on shares, in the third township, belonging to John Miller. Raked in the
grain; went for his family, and then subsequently worked Spence’s farm
on shares for many years. Finally moved to Sidney, in 1800, and settled
in the fifth concession.

“John Waltermeyer a tory partisan leader. He was noted for enterprise
and daring, but not for cruelty or ferocity. In 1781, at the head of a
band of Tories, Indians, and Canadians, he attempted to carry off
General Schuyler, whose abode at that time was in the suburbs of Albany.
The party entered the dwelling, commenced packing up the plate, and a
search for the General. But that gentleman opened a window, and, as if
speaking to an armed force of his own, called out,—“Come on, my brave
fellows; surround the house, and secure the villains who are
plundering.” The happy stratagem caused Waltermeyer and his followers to
betake themselves to flight.”

The foregoing statement is taken from Sabine; we shall now give
information derived from Captain Myer’s descendants, and others who knew
him well. It is without doubt correct.

Captain Myer’s father and brother identified themselves with the rebel
party, and we have heard it stated that he was at first, a rebel also,
but not receiving promotion as he expected, forsook the cause, and upon
the offer of a captaincy in the British forces allied himself to them.
That this was the pure invention of his enemies is sufficiently plain.
At the beginning of the rebellion Captain Myers, with his father, was a
farmer in the vicinity of Albany, and could have had no reason for
promotion. As to the captaincy, we find that he did not receive it until
1782, when the war had virtually closed, as the following shows:

Frederick Haldimand, Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of the
Province of Quebec and territories depending thereon, &c., &c., &c.
General and Commander-in-Chief of His Majesty’s forces in said Province
and territories thereof, &c., &c., &c.

  TO JOHN WALTER MYERS, ESQ.:

  _By Virtue_ of the power and authority in me vested, I do hereby
  constitute, appoint you to be _captain_ in the corps of Loyal
  Rangers whereof Edward Jessup, Esq., is Major-Commandant. You are
  therefore carefully and diligently to discharge the duty of
  _captain_ by exercising and well disciplining both the inferior
  officers and soldiers of the corps, and I do hereby command them to
  obey you as their _captain_, and you are to observe and follow such
  orders and directions as you shall from time to time receive from me
  your Major, Major-Commandant, or any other of your superior
  officers, according to the rules and discipline of war. In pursuance
  of the trust hereby reposed in you. _Given_ under my hand and seal
  at Arms, at the Castle of _St. Louis, at Quebec_, this thirtieth day
  of May, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-two, and in the
  twenty-second year of the reign of our Sovereign, Lord George the
  Third, by the Grace of God, Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
  Defender of the Faith, and so forth.

                                        (Signed)      FRED. HALDIMAND.

  By His Excellency’s Command,
                        R. MATHEWS.

It is true that during the war he made the attempt to take General
Schuyler a prisoner. He went with ten men to Albany for the purpose of
seizing the General, and carrying him away captive. On entering the yard
at night, they looked through the window and saw the object of the
expedition, but when they had entered the house he could no where be
found, although search was made from cellar to garret. But in the garret
were a number of puncheons turned up side down. Some of them were
examined, but not all. After the war had closed, the Governor called on
Myers and told him that had he turned over the other puncheons he would
have found him. A faithful female slave had placed him there. The men
with Myers had instruction to touch none of the Governor’s property,
after leaving the place, however, he found one of the men in possession
of a silver cup. This was sent back to the Governor afterward.

During the war, Myers on one occasion, perhaps when he was returning
from his attempt to take Schuyler, was nearly starved to death. He had
with him a favorite dog, which became sick for want of food. He carried
the dog for days, not knowing but he would have to kill him for food.
But they all got safely out of it, and he retained the dog for many a
day, and on one occasion he showed him to Schuyler. After the war
Captain Myers enjoyed a pension of 5s. 6d. a day. He lived in Lower
Canada two years. A certificate of Masonry informs us that he was in
Quebec in 1780. He frequently carried despatches to New York, in the
first years of the war; upon one occasion he was in a friend’s house
when the rebels came up, he jumped out of the back window and ran to the
woods, he was seen, and persons on horseback came rapidly to the woods,
and tied their horses, to pursue him on foot, which they hastily did;
Myers had, however, hidden himself close by, and when they had fairly
entered the woods in pursuit of him, he jumped up and deliberately
selected the best horse, upon which he mounted, and so made an easy
escape to New York.

He came up the bay at an early date, and it would seem squatted on the
front of the ninth town before it was surveyed. He then moved up to
Sidney where he lived until 1790, when he returned to the Moira River.

Captain Myers was a bold man, with limited education, but honest, and,
like many others of the Dutch Loyalists, given to great hospitality. He
was a pioneer in mill building, in trading, and in sailing batteaux and
schooners, up and down the bay.

Charles McArthur, a native of Scotland, came to America before the
rebellion, and settled upon the Mohawk Diver. Took part in the war, in
Burgoyne’s army. Lived for some time at Oswegotchie, when he removed to
head of the bay. There were living then west of the Trent River only the
following families: Peter Huffman, Donald McDonell, John Bleeker, Esq.,
and John McArthur. A daughter of Charles McArthur still lives at
Belleville, having been born at Oswegotchie, now aged 78, (Mrs. Maybee.)

Ensign Miller, of Jessup’s corps, was a native of Duchess County. He had
a brother an ensign, who lived and died at Montreal. Settled in
Fredericksburgh, adjacent Adolphustown; drew in all 2,000 acres of land,
in different places. Died 1805, aged forty-seven. Another brother came
to the Province the year after the U. E. list had closed. He was the
father of Rev. Gilbert Miller of Picton, and died at the age of ninety.
Mr. G. Miller informs us that two great uncles, named Ogden, were with
the British troops at the taking of Fort Frontenac.

All of this name (Ogden) are supposed to be related. They were, it is
thought, of Welsh origin. One of that name settled upon the Delaware
River previous to the rebellion. It is not quite certain whether this
first Ogden died by the banks of the Delaware, or as is thought came to
the Bay Quinté. He had three sons, one of whom died before their
removal, leaving four sons. They, with their uncles, came at a very
early date to Hamilton, but the four nephews removed to the Bay Quinté
about 1790. Their names were James, John, Joseph and Richard. The
numerous body living around the bay of this name, have all sprung from
these four brothers. (Marshal R. Morden.)

Mr. James Morden was a private in His Majesty’s Provincial Regiment,
King’s Royal of New York, Sir J. Johnson Commander. Discharged 1785 at
Montreal, at the age of twenty, having served three years.

Colonel McDonald, as he was subsequently called, as an officer of
militia, served under Sir John Johnson. He was one of the first settlers
of the fifth township at the Bay Quinté. He landed first in the cove
bearing his name, near Mount Pleasant, 1784. We have stood upon the spot
where he first set foot upon the land, and pitched his tent. This cove
is marked upon some of the old maps as Grog Bay, but in reality, Grog
Bay was a small inlet from the cove. Colonel McDonald lived to be
eighty-five years old. He drew large quantities of land, besides
receiving many other favors from government. He left but one offspring,
a daughter, who married a native of France named Prinyea, whose
descendants are worthy inhabitants of the place.

We find the following newspaper record: “Died on the 3rd October, 1815,
Sergeant Alexander McDonald, in his 78th year. This worthy veteran
enlisted in 1757 in the 78th or Frazer’s regiment, in which he served at
the taking of Louisburg and Quebec. In 1763 he was drafted into the
60th, and served in the active campaigns during the American war, under
the late General Provost, in Carolina and Georgia. In 1799 he was
drafted from the 60th into the 41st regiment, in which he served till
August 1811, when he was discharged, after a faithful service of
fifty-five years.”

The Canadian _Courant_ spoke of J. McDonnell, as follows:—“The subject
of this memoir was born in Glengary, in the Highlands of Scotland, about
the year 1750. His father was principal tacksman on the estate. The
spirit of emigration prevailed very much in Scotland, and particularly
in the Highlands, a little before the commencement of the American war.
The father of Mr. R. McDonnell partaking of the feelings of his clan,
and anticipating many advantages in this new world, accompanied a
considerable emigration from Glengary estate, of which he was one of the
principal leaders. Mr. R. McDonnell landed at New York with his father,
and a number of the same name, in 1773, but the disputes between Great
Britain and the colonies having assumed a very serious appearance, it
was thought prudent to send him into Canada. Being designed for
commerce, he was placed in a counting house, but the war breaking out,
the spirit of his ancestors burst forth with an ardor which could not be
restrained. He joined the Royal Standard, and was immediately appointed
to an ensigncy, in the 84th regiment. In this subordinate situation he
did not fail to distinguish himself by his bravery and good conduct, and
on one singular and trying occasion he exhibited the greatest
intrepidity and coolness. He was advanced to the command of a company in
Butler’s Rangers. Many of your readers still remember that the services
required by this regiment were of the most arduous kind. They were sent
out on scouting parties, and employed in picking up intelligence, and in
harassing the back settlements of the enemy. As their marches lay
through pathless forests, they were frequently reduced to the greatest
necessities, nor had they even, while on service, any of those comforts
which are so common in regular camps. In the many expeditions and
contests in which this regiment was engaged, during the war, Captain
McDonnell bore a distinguished part, but the great hardships which he
had to surmount, undermined a constitution naturally excellent, and
entailed upon him a severe rheumatism which embittered the remaining
part of his life.

During some time he acted as Pay-master of the regiment, and by his own
care and attention he found himself at the end of the war in the
possession of a small independence. This he considered equally the
property of his father, brothers and sisters as his own, and proved by
his generosity that his filial love and brotherly affection were equal
to his other virtues. In 1794 when it was thought proper to levy a
regiment in this country to remedy the great desertion which attended
regiments from Europe, he raised a company.

“In 1795 he was promoted to the majority, and the regiment having been
divided into two battalions, he became Lieutenant-Colonel of the 2nd, in
1796.

“He commanded at Niagara during the building of Fort George, and in 1802
he again retired on half-pay, the Royal Canadian Regiments having been
most injudiciously reduced during the continuance of the ephemeral peace
of Amiens. While at Fort George he married Miss Yates, a lady from the
States, whose amiable and obliging manners gained the esteem of all who
had the honor of her acquaintance. By this lady, in whom the Colonel
enjoyed all that has to be wished in a companion and friend, he has a
son, a promising boy, who, it is to be hoped, will inherit the virtues
of his father. The Colonel’s active benevolence was known to all, and
experienced by many of his friends.

“There was something so generous, so noble in his manner of doing a
kindness of this sort, as to give it a double value.

“In 1807 he was appointed Pay-master to the 10th Royal Veteran
Battalion, a situation certainly far below his merits—but his
circumstances, which, owing to his generous disposition, were by no
means affluent, induced him to accept it.

“He had been exceedingly infirm for many years, and perhaps the severe
climate at Quebec was too much for his weak constitution. Certain it is
that this city has been fatal to several respectable characters from the
Upper Province. He caught a severe cold in the beginning of November,
1809, accompanied with a violent cough and expectoration; he was not,
indeed, thought dangerously ill, till within a short time of his death,
but his feeble constitution could not support the cough, and he expired
on the twenty-first.

“Such are the scanty materials which I have been able to collect
respecting the life of a most excellent officer and honorable man, who
became dearer to his friends and acquaintances the longer he was known
to them.

“He was rather below the middle size, of a fair complexion, and in his
youth, uncommonly strong and active. For some time past his appearance
was totally altered; insomuch that those who had not seen him for many
years, could not recognize a single feature of the swift and intrepid
captain of the Rangers.

“An acute disease made it frequently painful for him to move a limb,
even for days and weeks together, but though his body suffered, his mind
was active and benevolent, and his anxiety to promote the interests of
his friends ceased only with his life.”

Among those who took part in the unequal engagement at Bennington, was
Alexander Nicholson, a Scotchman, who came to America shortly before the
war broke out. He enlisted as a private under Burgoyne; but before the
close of the war, received a commission. He was one of a company which
was all but annihilated at Bennington. He stood by his Colonel when that
officer was shot from his horse. Vainly trying to get him re-horsed,
that officer told him it was no use, that he had better flee. The day
being evidently lost, he proceeded to escape as best he could. With his
arm wounded, he managed to escape through a field of corn to the woods.
Coming to a river, he was arrested by an Indian upon the opposite bank,
who, mistaking him for a rebel, fired at him. The Indian being
undeceived, he forded the river. Making good his escape, he, with many
others, wandered for days, or rather for nights, hiding by day, as
scouts were ranging the woods to hunt out the tories. There were,
however, friends who assisted to conceal them, as well as to furnish
them with food. He often spoke of his sufferings at that fearful time;
lying upon the cold ground without covering, and sleeping, to wake with
the hair frozen to the bare ground. Subsequently Nicholson was attached
to Rogers corps. He settled in Fredericksburgh, at the close of
hostilities, and subsequently removed in 1809, to the township of
Thurlow.

Ostrom was engaged to carry despatches through the enemy’s line. On one
occasion he had the despatch in a silver bullet, which he put in his
mouth. Having reason to believe he would be diligently examined, he took
it from his mouth as he would a quid of tobacco, threw it in the fire
and thus escaped.

Nicholas Peterson, with his three sons, Nicholas, Paul and Christopher,
were living near New York, and took a part in the war.

They assisted in fighting one of the most remarkable battles of the
revolution. It took place on the west side of the North River, opposite
the city of New York, when seventy-five British Militiamen resisted an
attack made by 5,500 rebels, for several hours. The British had a Block
House, made of logs, with a hollow excavation behind, and in this hollow
they loaded their guns, and would then step forward and discharge them
at the enemy. Only three of the British were slain; the rebels lost
many. These Petersons lost everything of any importance, when they left
New York. Some of their valuables they buried to preserve them from the
enemy, and the rest they left to their use.

Nicholas and Paul settled on lots No. 12 and 13, in the first concession
of Adolphustown, south of Hay bay.




                              CHAPTER XI.

  CONTENTS—Rogers’ family—Ryerson—Redner—Sherwood—Taylor—Van Dusen—
    Williamsburgh—Wright—Wilkins—Young—Officers who settled in Niagara
    District.


Under Queen’s Rangers will be found some account of Major Rogers,
derived from Sabine. We here give further information, procured from
Robert D. Rogers, Esq., and Dr. Armstrong, of Rochester, New York, who
is a native of Fredericksburgh, and who, for many years, practised his
profession in Picton and Kingston.

Robert D. Rogers, of Ashburnham, writes: “My grandfather, James Rogers,
settled first in Vermont, and had several large tracts of land there;
he, and his brothers were officers in the Queen’s Rangers, of which his
brother Robert was the chief officer; they were employed in the wars of
the French and Indians, until the taking of Quebec by the British, after
which the said Robert Rogers was ordered by General Amherst to proceed
westward and take possession of all the forts and places held by the
French, as far west as Detroit and Michilimackinac, which he did in the
fall of 1760; and he afterwards went to England, where he published a
journal kept by him during the French and Indian wars, and up to 1761,
which was published in London 1765. He also wrote another book, giving a
description of all the North American Colonies. My grandfather continued
to reside in Vermont, until the time of the revolution, when he joined
the British army, and after peace was proclaimed, settled near the East
Lake in Prince Edward. I have heard that he was buried in
Fredericksburgh, but do not know the place. My father represented Prince
Edward in the first Parliament of Upper Canada, of which he was a member
for twenty-six years.”

From Dr. Armstrong, we learn that “Major Rogers was born in Londonderry,
New Hampshire, about the year 1728.” His wife was the daughter of the
Rev. David McGregor, pastor of the Presbyterian church, Londonderry, of
which his father, the Rev. James McGregor, formerly of Londonderry,
Ireland, was the founder, April 12, 1719. Major Rogers was the father of
three sons and three daughters. He removed with his family to Vermont,
where he had become the proprietor of a large tract of land. Here he
lived until the breaking out of the rebellion, (see Queen’s Rangers.)
After the conclusion of the war, Major Rogers, abandoning his property
in Vermont, much of which had been destroyed, his herds of cattle driven
off and appropriated to their own use by his neighbors, removed with his
family to Canada and settled in Fredericksburgh. That he had been there
previously and explored the country, and that he had taken with him a
corps of soldiers, is altogether probable, for I well remember to have
seen in my earliest boyhood, evidences of previous military strife, such
as numerous broken guns, swords, and other worn-out weapons. At
Fredericksburg, Major Rogers erected, as he had done before at
Londonderry, Vermont, the first frame house in the township. How long he
remained here I am unable to say, but probably several years. My own
birth-place, August 29, 1789, was in a little village one or two miles
below his residence, and as I was one of his legatees, he probably
remained there for some time after that event. I find no record of his
death, but it probably took place about the year 1792. He was buried in
Fredericksburgh, as were his widow and eldest daughter (my mother),
1793. His eldest son James, returned to Vermont and recovered a
considerable portion of the land in Londonderry. He afterward, in 1819,
removed with his family to Haldimand, where he died several years ago.
His second son, David McGregor, familiarly known also as “Major Rogers,”
remained in Canada up to the time of his death, about 1823. While quite
a young man, he was elected a member of the first Parliament of Upper
Canada. He then resided at Little Lake in the township of Hallowell. He
afterwards removed to Cramahe, where I found him in 1803, engaged as a
merchant, holding the office of clerk of the Peace, clerk of the
District Court, and Registrar of Deeds, besides being a member of
Parliament, and carrying on a farm. His name is pretty closely
identified with the early history of Upper Canada. He was a man of great
energy of character and sound judgment, was highly respected and
esteemed, and died greatly lamented. After remaining in Fredericksburgh
several years, the family of the late Major (James) Rogers removed to
the “Little Lake,” so called. This was the scene of my earliest
recollections. In the same neighborhood had resided Mr. Peters, and his
family. He was a native of New England, remained loyal to the Crown,
became an officer in the Queen’s Rangers, and was among the early
refugees to Canada. He afterwards became sheriff of Newcastle, having
removed from the Little Lake, first to the Carrying Place, and
afterwards to Cramahe, about the year 1804, where he died many years
ago.

Joseph Ryerson, of New Jersey, one of the five hundred and fifty
volunteers who went to Charleston, South Carolina. For his good conduct
in bearing despatches one hundred and ninety-six miles into the
interior, he was promoted to a Lieutenancy in the Prince of Wales’
Volunteers. Subsequently he was engaged in six battles, and once
wounded. At the peace he went to New Brunswick, thence to Canada, where
he settled and became a Colonel in the militia. In the war of 1812, he
and his three sons were in arms against the United States. He died near
Victoria, Upper Canada, in 1854, aged ninety-four, one of the last of
the “old United Empire Loyalists.”—(_Sabine._)

One of Captain Ryerson’s old comrades, Peter Redner, of the bay, says,
he was “a man of daring intrepidity, and a great favorite in his
company.” He often related an instance when Captain Ryerson, commanding
a scouting party, for which peculiar service he was eminently fitted,
ventured to crawl up to a tent of American officers, and discovering one
standing in the door who saw him, he walked boldly up, thus lessening
suspicion, and drawing his bayonet immediately ran him through the body,
and escaped before his companions had sufficiently recovered from the
shock to give pursuit. He represented Captain Ryerson as being one of
the most determined men he ever knew, with the service of his country
uppermost in his mind, he often exposed himself to great danger to
accomplish his desires.

Samuel Ryerson, of New Jersey, brother of Joseph, joined the Royal
Standard, and received a commission as captain in the Third Battalion of
New Jersey Volunteers; went to New Brunswick at the peace, thence to
Canada, where he settled.

Peter Redner, a native of New Jersey, was connected with the service for
some time. He was in the same division as Captain Ryerson, and during
his subsequent life was always delighted to tell of the incidents in
connection with the several campaigns through which he passed,
especially such as related to “his friend Ryerson,” to whom he was much
attached.

At the close of the war he went to Nova Scotia, where he drew land; but
not liking the place, he disposed of his land and came to Canada. He
purchased lot ninety-four in Ameliasburgh for a small consideration,
from William Fox, a United Empire Loyalist, of Pennsylvania, who had
drawn it.—(_Ashley._)

Walter Ross—He arrived, an emigrant from Scotland, at Quebec, the night
before the fall of Montgomery. He, with others from the ship,
immediately took up arms, and assisted to repulse the enemy in a most
distinguished manner. He subsequently lived with Major Frazer, and
became so great a favorite that the Major assisted him to an ensigncy.
After the close of the war he married Miss Williams, of Ernest town, and
settled in Marysburgh, on the lake shore.

The Ruttans were descendants of the Huguenots. Says Sheriff Ruttan: “My
grandfather emigrated to America about the time of Sir William Johnson,
Bart., in 1734, and settled at a town called New Rochelle, in
Westchester county, New York. This town, or tract of land, was purchased
in 1689, expressly for a Huguenot settlement, by Jacob Leister,
Commissioner of the Admiralty, under Governor Dongan of New York. It
soon increased, and in 1700 had a vast number of militia officers, loyal
to the backbone. To this settlement my grandfather repaired soon after
his arrival. My father and uncle Peter were born here about 1757, and
1759. Both entered the army in the 3rd battalion of Jersey volunteers,
one as Lieutenant, the other as Captain. This was about the year 1778.
In the year 1778, my uncle Peter accompanied Brant from New York to
Western Canada, on a tour of observation, being a great favorite, so
much so that he named his son Joseph Brant Ruttan, as a token of his
friendship. As a further token of his esteem, Brant, at parting,
presented him with a handsome brace of pistols, which he valued highly.
At his decease, they came into my possession. My father and uncle had
grants of 1200 acres of land each, at Adolphustown, in the Midland
District; this was in 1783 or 1784.”

Sheriff Ruttan, when a child, met with a slight accident which probably
turned the current of his life from one of comparative obscurity to
notoriety. Henry Ruttan went out with his brother one spring morning to
tap trees for sugar making. Accidentally two of Henry’s fingers were
severed from his hand by an untoward stroke of the sharp axe. This loss
led his father to send him to school, as he could not perform manual
labor. Respecting his education, the reader is referred to the division
on “Early Education.” With the education obtained in Adolphustown, he
went to Kingston and was apprenticed with John Kerby, a successful
merchant. By industry as well as talent, Henry advanced to be a partner,
and was entrusted to open a store in the “new township” near Grafton, in
Newcastle. Subsequently, he distinguished himself as a soldier, in 1812,
then as a member of Parliament, as Speaker, and for a long time as
Sheriff. Latterly his name is associated with inventions for ventilation
of buildings and cars.

Captain Schermerhorn was among the first settlers upon the bay Quinté.
Respecting the nature of his services during the war we have no record,
nor have we learned in what regiment he served; but most probably in
Johnson’s. The writer has in his possession a portion of an epaulet
which belonged to this officer. He drew large quantities of land in the
western part of the Province, as well as a lot in Fredericksburgh. He
died in 1788 when on a visit to Montreal to procure his half-pay. His
widow and eldest son died soon after. His youngest son, John, settled on
lot 95, 9th concession Ameliasburg.—(_J. B. Ashley._)

“Colonel Spencer” was an officer in Roger’s Battalion, settled on lot 9,
1st concession Fredericksburgh additional. He died shortly after the
commencement of the war of 1812, having been Colonel of the militia, and
active in preparing to meet the foe. He was buried, with military
honors, upon his own farm.

His brother Augustus was an ensign, and settled at East Lake, on
half-pay. His wife, Sarah Conger, lived to be ninety-four years old.

In the former part of last century there were born three brothers, Seth,
Thomas, and Adiel Sherwood, in old Stratford, in the Province of
Connecticut. The three brothers removed, 1743, to New York State, five
miles north of Fort Edward, within a short distance of the spot where
Burgoyne surrendered. At the commencement of the rebellion, Seth and
Adiel identified themselves with the rebel party, becoming officers in
the army, while Thomas adhered to his Sovereign. It was probably after
the defeat of Burgoyne, when he proceeded to St. John, Lower Canada, and
was subsequently employed by the British Government on secret service in
the revolting State. His knowledge of the country enabled him to bring
from the territory of the enemy not a few who were desirous of serving
in the British army. In 1779 his family removed to St. Johns, and he
received an appointment as subaltern in Major Jessup’s corps.

At the close of the war, Thomas Sherwood came with his corps to the St.
Lawrence, and became the first actual settler in the county of Leeds. He
was well known as an active public man, “he was ever ready to give
assistance and instructions to the new comers.” He also assisted in the
first survey of that part. He was among the first magistrates. He lived
on his farm forty-two years, and died, aged 81, in peace.

Adiel Sherwood, from whom we receive the foregoing facts, was the son of
Thomas, and was born at the homestead in New York State, 16th May, 1779,
shortly before the family left for Canada. He says: “I remained with the
family at St. Johns until May, 1784, when we came in the very first
brigade of batteaux to the Upper Province, where my father pitched his
tent, about three miles below Brockville, so that I may say I saw the
first tree cut, and the first hill of corn and potatoes planted by an
actual settler.” Mr. Adiel Sherwood at an early date, 1796, was
appointed an ensign in the first regiment of Leeds Militia. He was
promoted from time to time until he became Colonel. He was commissioned
a Magistrate, Clerk of the Peace, Commissioner of Land Board, and
finally Sheriff for the district of Johnstown. He was connected with the
militia fifty years, when he retired on full rank. Was Treasurer of the
District twenty-five years, and Sheriff thirty-five. Mr. Sherwood still
lives, an active, genial, and Christian-minded gentleman, and we take
this occasion to express our feelings of gratitude for his assistance
and sympathy in this our undertaking.

There were a good many of the name of Taylor among the loyalists
residing at Boston, New York, and New Jersey. They were all in the
higher walks of life, and some filled high public stations. One family,
consisting at the time of the rebellion, of a mother and three sons, has
a tragic and deeply interesting history. For many of the particulars I
am indebted to Sheriff George Taylor, of Belleville, a descendant of the
youngest of the brothers.

Sheriff Taylor’s father was earned John, and was born upon the banks of
the Hudson, of Scotch parents. He was fourteen years old when the
rebellion broke out. His two brothers were officers in the British army,
and were employed in the hazardous duties of spies. The only knowledge
he has of his uncles, is that they were both caught at different times,
one upon one side of the Hudson and the other the opposite side; both
were convicted and executed by hanging, one upon the limb of an apple
tree, the other of an oak. John Taylor was at home with his mother upon
the farm, at Kinderhook. But one day he was carried off while from the
house, by a press gang, to Burgoyne’s army. He continued in the army for
seven years, until the end of the war, when he was discharged. During
this time he was in numerous engagements, and received three wounds at
least, one a sabre wound, and a ball wound in the arm. It is stated on
good authority, (Petrie) that he once carried a despatch from Quebec to
Nova Scotia, following the Bay of Fundy. His mother in the meantime was
ignorant of his whereabouts, and held the belief that he was dead, or
carried off by the Indians. At the expiration of the war he went to New
Brunswick by some means, subsequently he undertook to walk on snowshoes,
with three others, from St. Johns to Sorel, which he accomplished, while
the three others died on the way; he saved his life by killing and
eating his dog. He procured his discharge at Sorel. In 1783 he came up
the St. Lawrence to Cataraqui, and thence walked up the bay as far as
the mouth of the Moria River, accompanied by one William McMullen.
Ascending the Moria he chose the land, where is now the 4th concession
of Thurlow, the “Holstead farm.” He lived here a few months, but the
Indians drove him away, declaring the river belonged to them. He then
bought lot No. 5, at the front, of Captain Singleton, property which yet
bears his name. John Taylor married the daughter of a U. E. Loyalist by
the name of Russell.

Two or three years after he came to Thurlow, he visited his old home at
Kinderhook, to see his mother, who knew not he was alive. She
accompanied him back to Canada, although hard on ninety years old. She
did not live long in her new home.

Two intimate comrades of John Taylor in the army, were Merritt and
Soles, father of D. B. Soles, formerly of Belleville.

Respecting the brothers of John Taylor, the following appeared in the
Hastings _Chronicle_ of Belleville, 13th November, 1861.

“A SPY OF THE REVOLUTION.—In the year 1776, when Governor Clinton
resided in Albany, there came a stranger to his house one cold wintry
morning, soon after the family had breakfasted. He was welcomed by the
household, and hospitably entertained. A breakfast was ordered, and the
Governor, with his wife and daughter employed in knitting, was sitting
before the fire, and entered into conversation with him about the
affairs of the country, which naturally led to the enquiry of what was
his occupation. The caution and hesitancy with which the stranger spoke,
aroused the keen-sighted Clinton. He communicated his suspicion to his
wife and daughter, who closely watched his every word and action.
Unconscious of this, but finding that he had fallen among enemies, the
stranger was seen to take something from his pocket and swallow it.
Meantime Madam Clinton, with the ready tact of a woman of those
troublesome times, went quietly into the kitchen, and ordered hot coffee
to be immediately made, and added to it a strong dose of tartar emetic.
The stranger, delighted with the smoking beverage, partook freely of it,
and Mrs. Clinton soon had the satisfaction of seeing it produce the
desired result. From scripture out of his own mouth was he condemned. A
silver bullet appeared, which upon examination was unscrewed and found
to contain an important despatch from Burgoyne. He was tried, condemned
and executed, and the bullet is still preserved in the family.”

“The foregoing article we clip from the Boston _Free Flag_ of the 2nd
November, 1861; this, there is reason to infer, is a special reference
to a relative of one of the oldest families in this part of Canada. John
Taylor in his life time, well known to the first inhabitants of
Belleville, had two brothers employed upon secret service for the
British Government during the American revolutionary war; their names
were Neil and Daniel. At different times they were each apprehended and
suffered the severe penalty of the law. A tradition of the Taylor family
of this place, agrees in all particulars with the above article, and
points to one of the Taylor brothers as the person therein alluded to.”

Sabine says that “Daniel Taylor in 1777, was dispatched by Sir Henry
Clinton to Burgoyne, with intelligence of the capture of Fort
Montgomery, and was taken on his way by the whigs as a spy. Finding
himself in danger, he turned aside, took a small silver ball or bullet
from his pocket and swallowed it. The act was seen, and General George
Clinton, into whose hands he had fallen, ordered a severe dose of emetic
tartar to be administered, which caused him to discharge the bullet. On
being unscrewed, the silver bullet was found to contain a letter from
the one British General to the other, which ran as follows:

                                       FORT MONTGOMERY, October 2, 1777.

_Nous voici_—and nothing between us but Gates. I sincerely hope this
little success of ours may facilitate your operations. In answer to your
letter of 28th of September, by C. C., I shall only say, I cannot
presume to order, or even advise, for reasons obvious. I heartily wish
you success.

                           Faithfully yours,

                                                             H. CLINTON.

 To General Burgoyne.

Taylor was tried, convicted, and executed, shortly after his detection.”

Conrad VanDusen was a native of Duchess County, N. Y., born 23rd April,
1751. His father was Robert VanDusen. At the commencement of the
rebellion he was in business as a tailor, in New York City. He served
during the whole of the war, seven years, in Butler’s Rangers. During
this time, his wife, who was also from Duchess County, formerly a Miss
Coon, carried on the tailoring business in New York, and succeeded in
saving fifty-three guineas. On leaving for Canada with VanAlstine, they
brought with them two large boxes of clothing. They also had some
jewelry.

During the war VanDusen was sometimes employed upon secret service, and
upon one occasion was caught, and condemned to be hanged. Upon leaving
the room in which he had been tried, he managed to convey to a woman
present, whose earnest demeanor led him to believe she was friendly, a
gold ring, a keep-sake of his wife. By some means VanDusen escaped,
having concealed himself in a swamp under water, with his face only
above water, and in after years he was surprised and rejoiced to receive
by letter the identical ring, which had been sent to him by the woman
into whose hands he had so adroitly placed it. She had directed the
letter to Cataraqui.

The close of the war found VanDusen at New York, and he joined
VanAlstine’s band of refugees, and settled in Adolphustown. Subsequently
he removed to Marysburgh, lot No. 9, where he died, aged seventy-six
years and seven months. He lies buried in the U. E. burying ground,
Adolphustown.

Frederick Frank Williamsburgh, at the time of the war lived upon the
Susquehanna, and owned a thousand acres of land. He was a sickly man.
His family consisted of a son eleven years old, and three daughters. One
day he went some distance to a mill, taking his children with him, and
leaving his wife and mother at home. That day the rebels made a raid,
and he was taken prisoner from his children on the road; and coming to
his barn, it, with all his grain was burned up. His wife and old mother
sought safety in the woods, and the house was stripped of everything.
The children arriving home without their father, found no mother, or
grandmother, only the smoking ruins of the barn and the dismantled
house. Frightened almost to death, and expecting to be killed before
morning, they lay down on the floor. About midnight came a knock at the
door; after a time they summoned sufficient courage to ask who was
there, when it was found to be neighbor who had been hunted in the woods
for three days and who was almost starved. He was admitted, and having
slept for a short time, he proceeded to prepare a raft upon the river;
upon this he placed some flour he had concealed in the woods, and the
children, with himself, and floated down the river. But the morning
brought the enemy, and they were taken. The children were conveyed to a
place where they found their mother; but the father having been thrown
into a prison, in three months his weak constitution succumbed to the
cruelty of his prison house.

The family found their way to Lower Canada, after a time, living upon
the rations dealt out from day to day from the commissariat department.
They, after a time, went to Montreal, and one son, when twelve year old,
enlisted. For a time he acted as tailor to the regiment, but
subsequently became a favorite with the Colonel and was promoted. The
descendants of this William Williamsburgh now live in Belleville.

Sergeant Daniel Wright was born in the city of London, 1741. He was
sergeant in the 74th regiment. Sergeant Wright was present at the battle
before Quebec, when Montgomery was killed. He settled in Marysburgh in
1784. He was commissary officer for the fifth township, and was
subsequently appointed magistrate and then registrar, which office he
held for upwards of thirty years. Was Lieut. Colonel in the Prince
Edward Militia. “Old Squire Wright” was a man of education and
gentlemanly deportment, strictly religious, and noted for his urbanity;
he obtained the soubriquet of “Squire civil.” It is said he was never
known to smile. Unlike other retired officers, it is said, he did not
seek to acquire extensive tracts of land. Died April, 1828, aged
eighty-seven.

The following is from the Kingston _Chronicle_: “Died at the Carrying
Place, 27th February, 1836, Robert Wilkins, Esq., in the ninety-fourth
year of his age. He entered the army at the early age of seventeen, in
the 17th Light Dragoons, then commanded by the late Colonel Hale. Soon
after he joined the regiment it was ordered to Scotland. There it did
not long remain; the “Whiteboy” conspiracy had been formed in Ireland.
From Ireland he sailed with the same distinguished regiment for the
British American Colonies, then raising the standard of revolt, landed
at Boston, and a few days after bore a conspicuous part in the battle of
Bunker’s Hill, on which occasion he had two horses shot under him. He
was present at most of the engagements in the northern colonies. At the
battle of White Plains, he was one of the forlorn hope, where he
received a severe contusion on the breast, and lost the thumb of his
right hand. After recovering from his wounds, he retired from the army,
and entered into mercantile pursuits in the city of New York. There he
carried on a prosperous business until peace was concluded; but when
that city was evacuated by the British troops (in 1783) he was too
strongly attached to his king to remain behind. He then accompanied them
to Shelburne, Nova Scotia. In the improvements of that luckless place,
he expended a large sum of money, but finding that the place would not
succeed, he left, and in 1789, returned to his native country, from
which, three years after, he was induced to follow Governor Simcoe to
this colony, just after it had received its constitution, and became a
distinct government. From that time he remained in Upper Canada, and
most of the time at this place. Of Christian doctrine and Christian
duty, he had a much deeper sense than was obvious to occasional
visitors. His hospitality was proverbial, and never under his roof was
the poor refused food or shelter. His remains were followed to the
church, and thence to the house appointed for all living, by not less
than 300 of his friends and neighbors.”

For an account of the son of the above, see notices of U. E. Loyalists.

Col. H. Young—His father was a native of Nottingham, England, and came
to New York when eighteen years old, and settled at Jamaica, Long
Island. He was a gunsmith by trade. Subsequently he removed to Husack,
northern New York. He had four sons, George, Henry, William, John, and
two daughters. His second son Henry, was born at Jamaica, 10th March,
1737. At the age of eighteen he joined the British army, as a volunteer.
He was present at the battle of Tyconderoga, under General Abercrombie.
He was also with the army under General Amherst, which went from Albany
to Montreal, to join the army from Quebec, under General Murray.
Continued in the army until 1761, when he returned home, married a Miss
Campman, and lived in peace until the rebellion broke out. He again
joined the British army as a private, and was at the battle of
Bennington, but he so distinguished himself that he was promoted to an
ensigncy in the King’s Royal Regiment, of New York. During the war he
took part in seventeen battles, but escaped with one wound in the hand.
In the year 1780, he was sent with Major Ross to Carleton Island. For
three years he was at this place, or Oswego. In 1783 he was discharged
on half pay, and received grants of land—3,000 acres, with the privilege
of selecting the place. Immediately after his release he set out,
sometime during the summer or autumn of 1783, to prospect for land. In a
small canoe, he, with a brother officer, named, it is said, McCarty,
proceeded up the bay Quinté, and into Picton bay to its head, thence to
East Lake. Having decided to take land here, he left his son during the
winter. In the following spring 1784, he brought his family from St.
Johns, where they had been staying. (See settlement of Prince Edward).
Colonel Young died at East Lake. 3rd December, 1820, aged eighty-three
years and nine months.

Daniel Young was in the Engineer Department during the latter part of
the revolutionary war. He died at East Lake, 30th September, 1850, aged
eighty-five.

Henry Young was Lieutenant of Militia in the war of 1812. Went to
Kingston on duty, where he died, latter part of December, 1812.

Among the first settlers of the Upper Province, especially upon the St.
Lawrence, and who took part in the war, may be mentioned, Captain Thomas
Frazer, Captain William Frazer, Lieutenant Solomon Snider, Lieutenant
Gideon Adams, Captain Simon Covelle, Captain Drummond, Ensign Dulmage,
Ensign Sampson, Lieutenant Farrand, Captain Amberson, Lieutenant McLean,
Lieutenant James Campbell, Lieutenant Alexander Campbell, Sergeant
Benoni Wiltsie, Ensign E. Bolton, Captain Justus Sherwood, Captain John
Jones, Lieutenant James Breakenridge, of Roger’s corps.

Colonel Clarke, of Dalhousie, gives a “list of half pay officers who
settled in the Niagara District after the rebellion of the colonies:”

Colonel John Butler, originator of Butler’s Rangers, an Irishman, a
connection of Lord Osmore; Captain Andrew Brant, Butler’s Rangers;
Captain B. Fry, Captain P. Hare, Captain Thos. Butler, Captain Aaron
Brant, Captain P. Paulding, Captain John Ball, Captain P. Ball, Captain
P. Ten Brock, Lieutenant R. Clench, Lieutenant Wm. Brant, Lieutenant Wm.
Tweeny, Lieut. Jocal Swoos, Lieut. James Clements, Lieut. D. Swoos, all
of Butler’s Rangers; Captain James Brant, Indian Department; Captain H.
Nelles, Captain James Young, Captain Robert Nelles, Captain Joseph
Dockater, Captain C. Ryman, Lieut. J. Clement, Lieut. W. B. Shuhm,
Lieut. A. Chrysler, Lieut. S. Secord, Lieut. F. Stevens, Surgeon R.
Kerr, Commodore T. Merritt, father of the late Hon. W. H. Merritt, all
of the Indian Department.




                              DIVISION II.
               TRAVELING IN EARLY TIMES—ORIGINAL ROUTES.




                              CHAPTER XII.

  CONTENTS—Indian paths—Portages—Original French routes—Mer de Canada—
    Original names of St. Lawrence—Ontario—Huron—Route by Bay Quinté—
    Old French maps—Original English routes—Four ways from Atlantic to
    the Lakes—Mississippi—Potomac—Hudson—Indian name of Erie—From New
    York to Ontario—The Hudson River—Mohawk—Wood creek—Oneida Lake—
    Oswego River—The carrying places—West Canada Creek—Black River—
    Oswegotchie—The navigation—Military highway—Lower Canada—An
    historic route—The paths followed by the Loyalists—Indian paths
    north of Lake Ontario—Crossing the Lake—From Cape Vincent to the
    Bay Quinté—From Oswego by Duck Islands—East Lake—Picton Bay—
    Coasting Ontario—Two ways to Huron—By Bay Quinté and Trent; by Don
    River—Lake Simcoe—Point Traverse—Loyalists—Traveling by the St.
    Lawrence—First road—Long remembered event.


Although the European found the American continent a vast unbroken
wilderness, yet the native Indians had well defined routes of travel.
Mainly, the long journeys made by them in their hunting excursions, and
when upon the war path, were by water up and down rivers, and along the
shores of lakes. And at certain places around rapids, and from one body
of water to another, their frequent journeyings created a well marked
path. These portages or carrying places may even yet, in many places be
traced, and are still known by such appellations. The arrival of the
European in America was followed by his penetrating, step by step, to
the further recesses of the north and west. The opening of the fur trade
with the Indians led to increased travel along some of the original
paths, and probably to the opening of new ones. While the French by the
waters of the Lower St. Lawrence, found it convenient to ascend by the
great streams, the English had to traverse the high lands which separate
the sources of the rivers which empty into the Atlantic, from those
which rise to flow to the lakes and rivers of fresh water to the north.

The original routes of travel taken by the French were up the St.
Lawrence, at first called the “Grand River of Canada,” while the gulf is
marked Galpo di Canada O’S Larenzo. The water of the Atlantic, south of
the Chesapeake River to Newfoundland and the gulf, was known as the _Mer
de Canada_. From the seaboard the traveler sometimes, having ascended to
the mouth of the Sorel River, turned west to lake Champlain, and thence
into the western part of the present New York State, or continuing up
the St. Lawrence to its confluence with the Ottawa, or as it was
sometimes called Grand River, selected one or the other of these
majestic streams, by which to continue the journey westward. Following
the Ottawa, the way led to the north as far as Lake Nippissing, and
thence westward to the Georgian Bay. Sometimes the voyager would
continue to ascend the St. Lawrence to Lake Ontario, a portion of the
St. Lawrence sometimes called Cataraqui River, or the Iroquois River,
that is to say, the river which leads to Cataraqui, or the Iroquois
country. Lake Ontario was called by Champlain, Lake St. Louis, and
subsequently for a time it was known as Lake Frontenac. According to a
map observed in the French Imperial Library the Indian name of Ontario
was Skaniadono, 1688.

From Lake Ontario to Lake Huron, at first named Mer Douce, and, then
after the Huron Indians, who were expelled from that region by the
Iroquois in 1650, a very common route was up the Bay Quinté, the River
Trent, Lake Simcoe, and to Georgian Bay. That this was a not unfrequent
way is well exhibited by the old French maps, which, prepared to
indicate the principal waterways to the traveler, had the waters of the
Bay and Trent, even to its source, made broad, so that the observer
might imagine that the bay and the river were one continuous bay of
navigable waters. As this route was adjacent to the territory of the
Iroquois nation, it was only when the French were at peace with them
that this course was taken, until the establishment of the fort at
Cataraqui. Again, the French occasionally followed the south shore of
Lake Ontario to the Niagara River and ascended it to Lake Erie, and thus
approached the far west.

While the French with comparative ease, reached the vast inland seas,
the English by more difficult channels sought the advantages, which
intercourse with the lake Indians afforded. An early writer of American
history, Isaac Weld, says: “There are four principal channels for trade
between the ocean and the lakes. One by the Mississippi to Lake Erie, a
second by the Potomac and French Creek to Lake Erie. (Lake Erie was at
first called Okswego, and the territory to the south of Lake Erie was
sometimes called Ontario Nous.) A third by the Hudson, and a fourth by
the St. Lawrence.” A later writer says: “It is worthy of notice, that a
person may go from Quebec to New Orleans by water all the way except
about a mile from the source of Illinois River.” The last mentioned
route we have seen belonged to the French, and was the best to follow,
as well as the most direct to Europe. Of the other three, we have only
to speak of that by the Hudson.

The distance from New York to Lake Ontario is laid down as being 500
miles. From New York Bay to Albany, the Hudson is navigable, 180 miles.
Ten miles north of Albany the river divides into two branches. The
western branch is the Mohawk and leads to Rome, formerly Fort Stanwix. A
branch of the Mohawk, Wood Creek, leads toward Oneida Lake, which was
reached by a portage. A branch of Wood Creek was called Canada Creek,
and led toward Lake Champlain. From Oneida Lake, the larger lake,
Ontario, is reached by the Oswego River. Weld probably refers to this
route when he says that the distance over which boats had to be hauled
by land, (perhaps, from New York to Ontario) was altogether thirty
miles. This was no doubt the most speedy route by which to reach Upper
Canada from the Hudson. Frequent reference is made to it, in the
accounts of journeying, by the U. E. Loyalists, which have come under
notice. It was by far the most commonly traveled way, taken by those who
came into Canada after the close of the war. And, it is stated, 1796,
that the chief part of the trade between New York and the lake is by
this way. But sometimes, the traveler up the Mohawk, instead of turning
into Vilcrik, or Wood Creek, would continue to ascend the Mohawk, which
turned more toward the east; and then into a branch sometimes called,
1756, West Canada Creek, by which he was brought contiguous to the head
waters of the Black River, which empties into the lake at Sacket’s
Harbor. But the Black River was sometimes reached by ascending the
Hudson, above the mouth of the Mohawk, away eastward to the Mohegan
mountains, where the Hudson rises. Crossing these mountains he would
strike the Moose River, which is a tributary to the Black River.
Occasionally, instead of Moose River, the Oswegotchie was reached, and
followed to its mouth at La Présentation, the present town of
Ogdensburgh That this route was well known, is shown from the statement
of Weld, that, “It is said that both the Hudson and Oswegotchie River
are capable of being made navigable for light batteaux to where they
approach within a short distance, about four miles.” All of these
branches of the Hudson are interrupted by falls.

Still another way was now and then taken, after having crossed the
Mohegans, namely, by Long Lake which feeds Racket River, that empties
into the St. Lawrence, at St. Regis, opposite Cornwall. Again, numerous
accounts have been furnished the writer, in which the traveler followed
the military highway to Lower Canada, by Whitehall, Lake Champlain, Fort
Ticonderoga, Plattsburgh, and then turning northward proceeded to
Cornwall. But this way was the common one to Lower Canada, and by the
Sorel. This historic route was no doubt long used by the Indians, before
the European trod it, and Champlain at an early period penetrated to the
lake, to which his name is forever attached. Along this road passed many
a military expedition; and during the wars between the colonies of
France and England, here ebbed and flowed the tide of strife. The
rebellion of 1776 witnessed Burgoyne with his army sweep by here
westward to meet his disastrous fate; and thereafter set in the stream
of refugees and loyalists, which ceased not to flow for many a year,
along this path.

While the great majority of the loyalists who came to Canada, followed
one or other of the routes above mentioned, there were some who came
around by the Atlantic, and up the St. Lawrence. There were at least two
companies, one under the leadership of Captain Grass, and one under
Captain Van Alstine, who sailed from New York in ships under the
protection of a war vessel, shortly before the evacuation by the British
forces in 1783.

Directing our attention to the territory north of Lake Ontario, and the
Upper St. Lawrence, we find some interesting facts relative to the
original Indian paths; sometimes, followed on hunting and fishing
expeditions, and sometimes in pursuit of an enemy. There is evidence
that the Mohawks, upon the southern shore of Lake Ontario, were
accustomed to pass across the waters, to the northern shores by
different routes. Thus, one was from Cape Vincent to Wolfe Island, and
thence along its shore to the west end, and then either to Cataraqui, or
up the Bay Quinté, or perhaps across to Amherst Island, where, it seems,
generally resided a Chief of considerable importance. A second route,
followed by them, in their frail bark canoes, was from a point of land
somewhat east of Oswego, called in later days Henderson’s Point, taking
in their way Stony Island, the Jallup Islands, and stretching across to
Yorkshire Island, and Duck Island, then to the Drake Islands, and
finally to Point Traverse. Following the shore around this point,
Wappoose Island was also reached; or, on the contrary, proceeding along
the shore westward they reached East Lake. From the northernmost point
of this lake they directed their steps, with canoes on their heads,
across the carrying place to the head of Picton Bay, a distance of a
little over four miles. It is interesting to notice that upon the old
maps, by the early French navigators, the above mentioned islands are
specified as “_au des Couis_;” while at the same time the Bay of Quinté
bears the name of _Couis_, showing unmistakably that the Mohawk Indians
passed by this way to the head waters of the bay and to the Trent River.
Herriot designates one of these islands, Isle de Quinté. Two maps in the
Imperial library of Paris, give these islands, above mentioned, the name
of Middle Islands, and the waters east of them are named Cataraqui Bay.
It is not at all unlikely that Champlain, when he first saw Lake
Ontario, emerged from the water of East lake. Again, instead of entering
the Bay Quinté with a view of passing up the River Moira, or Trent, they
would continue along the south shore of Prince Edward, past West Lake
and Consecon Lake, and proceed westward, sometimes to the river at Port
Hope, sometimes further west, even to the Don, and ascend some one of
the rivers to the head waters of the Trent or Lake Simcoe. The early
maps indicate Indian villages along at several points. Owing to the
dangerous coast along the south shore of Prince Edward, sometimes they
chose the longer and more tedious route through the Bay Quinté to its
head. That here was a common carrying place is well attested by the
statements of many. Indeed, at this point upon the shores of the lake
was an Indian village of importance. An old graveyard here, upon being
plowed, has yielded rich and important relics, showing that the Indians
were Christianized, and that valuable French gifts had been bestowed.

It would seem from a letter of DeNonville, that there were two ways to
reach Lake Huron from Lake Ontario: one by the Bay Quinté and the Trent;
the other by the way of the Don River and Lake Simcoe, called by him
“Lake Taranto.” In the selection of routes they were guided by Indians.

The route by the Trent and the Bay Quinté was for many a day regarded as
the most direct, and the best route to Lake Huron, even since the
settlement by Europeans. Its supposed importance was sufficient to lead
to the attempt to construct a canal with locks, to make it navigable.
Gourlay says, sometime after the war of 1812, that “in course of time it
may become an object of importance to connect Rice Lake by a canal with
Lake Ontario direct, instead of following the present canoe route by its
natural outlet into the Bay Quinté.”

The Marquis DeNonville, in 1685, moved on the Five Nations with his
little army in canoes, in two divisions. On the 23rd June, one-half
proceeded on the south side from the fort Cataraqui, and the other on
the north side of the lake, and met near Oswego. Now, there can be no
doubt, that the latter party crossed the bay to Indian Point, passed
along its southern shore, then across the bay by Wappoose Island, and
then around, or crossing Point Traverse struck far into the lake, by the
islands which constituted the guides of this early Indian route. It may
be that this was so commonly traveled that the old name of Point
Traverse was thus derived.

We have indicated the several routes followed by the Indians, the
French, the English, and finally by the Refugees, so far as relate to
the territory now comprising Upper Canada, that is by which it was
originally reached and settled. Beside, there were some who found their
way by land from the head waters of the Susquehanna to Lake Erie and
Niagara. But the vast majority of pioneers of Upper Canada entered by
the channels aforesaid.

For many years, the only road from Lower Canada was by the St. Lawrence,
ascending wearily up the dangerous rapids in canoes and batteaux; and it
will be found that the lots in the first townships were surveyed narrow
in order to secure a water frontage to as many as possible, because
there was no other means of transit than by water. But those who settled
in the second concessions, a year or two later, were obliged to tread
the length of the long front lots, in order to reach the water. At the
same time the communication with Lower Canada, up and down the rapids,
was attended with many hazards and inconveniences. It consequently
became a matter of no little importance to have a road through the
settlements to Montreal, which might be traveled by horse, a King’s
highway from the eastern Provincial line. It was, however, some years
after the first settlement before this was secured. The original survey
for a road was made by one Ponair, assisted by one Kilborne. “The
opening” Sherwood says, “of this road from Lower Canada to Brockville
and thence to Cataraqui, a distance of 145 miles, was an event long
remembered by the pioneers. At the end of each mile was planted a red
cedar post with a mark upon it indicating the number of miles from the
Provincial line.”—(See First Years of Upper Canada—Construction of
Roads).




                             CHAPTER XIII.

  CONTENTS—Indians traveled by foot or by canoe—Secreting canoes—
    Primeval scenes—Hunting expeditions—War path—In 1812—Brock—A night
    at Myers’ Creek—Important arrival—The North West Company—Their
    canoes—Route—Grand Portage—The Voyageurs—The Batteaux—Size—
    Ascending the rapids—Lachine—A dry dock—Loyalists by batteaux—
    Durham boats—Difficulties—In 1788, time from Lachine to
    Fredericksburgh—Waiting for batteaux—Extracts from a journal,
    travelling in 1811—From Kingston to Montreal—The expenses—The
    Schenectady boats—Trade between Albany and Cataraqui—The Durham
    boat—Duncan—Description of flat-bottomed boat by “Murray”—
    Statement of Finkle—Trading—Batteaux in 1812—Rate of traveling—The
    change in fifty years—Time from Albany to Bay Quinté—Instances—
    Loyalists traveling in winter—Route—Willsbury wilderness—Tarrying
    at Cornwall—The “French Train”—Traveling along north shore of
    Ontario—Indian path—Horseback—Individual owners of batteaux—Around
    Bay Quinté—The last regular batteaux—In 1819—“Lines” from
    magazine.


                          TRAVELING BY CANOE.

Having pointed out the several general routes by which the aborigines
and the first Europeans in America, were wont to traverse the country
from the seaboard to the far west, and indicated more particularly the
smaller paths of the Indians around the Bay Quinté and Lake Ontario, we
purpose glancing at the means by which they made their way through the
wilderness.

The Native had but two modes of transporting himself from place to
place; namely, by foot and by the canoe. He was trained to make long
expeditions upon the war-path, or after prey. When his course lay along
a water way, he employed his birch canoe. This being light, he could
easily ascend rapids, and when necessary, lift it from the water, and
placing it, bottom upward, upon his head, carry it around the falls, or
over a portage with the greatest facility. When upon the chase, or about
to attack a foe, the canoe was so carefully secreted, that the passing
traveler would never detect its whereabouts. The French and English at
the first followed this Indian mode of traveling. From the graphic
descriptions which are given to us by the early writers of this Indian
mode of traveling in America, ere the sound of the axe had broken upon
the clear northern air, and while nature presented an unbroken garment
of green, it is not difficult to imagine that scenes of Indian canoe
traveling were in the extreme picturesque. It is not necessary to go
beyond the Bay Quinté, to find a place where all the natural beauty was
combined with the rude usages of the aboriginal inhabitant, to create a
picture of rare interest and attraction. In those primeval times there
was no regular passage made between one part of the country and another.
The Indian in his light canoe glided along here and there, as his fancy
led him, or the probability of obtaining fish or game dictated. At
certain seasons of the year there was a general movement, as they
started off on their hunting expeditions; and at other times the
warriors alone set out, when only intent upon surprising the hated foe.
On these occasions one canoe would silently and swiftly follow in the
wake of the other, until the place of debarkation was reached. For a
long time the birch canoe was the only mode of traveling, and when the
French came with their batteaux, the canoe continued for a long time the
principal means of transit. Even so late as the war of 1812, canoes were
employed, and many of the gallant ones who fought and conquered the
conceited and unscrupulous Yankee invader, found their way to the front
by the swift birch bark. Company after company of Red Coats were to be
seen plying the trim paddle as the canoe sped on its way. We have it on
good authority that Major General Brock, at the reception of the
intelligence, that the United States had declared war against Great
Britain, set out from Lower Canada in a birch canoe, and with a
companion and their boatman, journeyed all the way to York, followed by
a regiment of soldiers. Incidents of this passage are yet related by the
living. He reached Belleville, or as it was then called Myers’ Creek,
late one night, after having been traveling for some time without rest.
With his companion, he went ashore and sought a place to sleep. They
entered the public house of Captain Mc——, and after examining a room,
decided to sleep there the night. But the host, hearing an unusual
noise, rushed into the room demanding who was there. The General’s
companion, with the quickness, and in language somewhat characteristic
of the army of that time, told him he would kick him to h—ll in a
minute. Captain Mc—— somewhat disconcerted at the threat and tone of
authority walked out, and meeting the boatman, ask him who the parties
were. Upon being informed, he rushed away in a state of great alarm, not
daring to shew himself again to the General. The house is still
standing.

The following notice is from the Kingston _Gazette_.

                                               “YORK, April 29, 1815.”

  “On Sunday evening last arrived in this town from Burlington, in a
  birch canoe, Lieutenant General Sir George Murray Knight,” &c., &c.


                BATTEAUX—SCHENECTADY BOATS—DURHAM BOATS.

Gourley, speaking of Lachine, says that “from Lachine the canoes
employed by the North West Company in the fur trade take their
departure. Of all the numerous contrivances for transporting heavy
burthens by water, these vessels are perhaps the most extraordinary:
scarcely anything can be conceived so inadequate from the slightness of
their construction, to the purpose they are applied to, and to contend
against the impetuous torrent of the many rapids that must be passed
through in the course of a voyage. They seldom exceed thirty feet in
length, and six in breadth, diminishing to a sharp point at each end,
without distinction of head or stern; the frame is composed of small
pieces of some very light wood; it is then covered with the bark of the
birch tree, cut into convenient slips, that are rarely more than the
eighth of an inch in thickness; these are sewed together with threads
made from the twisted fibres of the roots of a particular tree, and
strengthened where necessary by narrow strips of the same materials
applied on the inside; the joints in the fragile planking are made
water-tight, by being covered with a species of gum that adheres very
firmly, and becomes perfectly hard. No ironwork of any description, not
even nails, are employed in building these slender vessels, which, when
complete, weigh only about five hundred weight each. On being prepared
for the voyage, they receive their lading, that for the convenience of
carrying across the portages is made up in packages of about
three-quarters of a hundred weight each, and amounts altogether to five
tons, or a little more, including provisions, and other necessaries for
the men, of whom from eight to ten are employed to each canoe; they
usually set out in brigades like the batteaux, and in the course of a
summer, upwards of fifty of these vessels are thus dispatched. They
proceed up the Grand, or Ottawa River, so far as the south-west branch,
by which, and a chain of small lakes, they reach Lake Nippissing;
through it, and down the French River into Lake Huron; along its
northern coast, up the narrows of St. Mary, into Lake Superior, and
then, by its northern side, to the Grand Portage, a distance of about
1,100 miles from the place of departure. The difficulties encountered in
this voyage are not easily conceived; the great number of rapids in the
rivers, the different portages from lake to lake, which vary from a few
yards to three miles or more in length, where the canoes must be
unladen, and with their contents carried to the next water, occasion a
succession of labors and fatigues of which but a poor estimation can be
formed by judging it from the ordinary occupations of other laboring
classes. From the Grand Portage, that is nine miles across, a
continuation of the same toils takes place in bark canoes of an inferior
size, through the chain of lakes and streams that run from the height of
land westward to the Lake of the Woods, Lake Winnipeg, and onwards to
more distant establishments of the company in the remote regions of the
north-west country. The men are robust, hardy, and resolute, capable of
enduring great extremes of fatigues and privation for a long time, with
a patience almost inexhaustible. In the large lakes they are frequently
daring enough to cross the deep bays, often a distance of several
leagues, in their canoes, to avoid lengthening the route by coasting
them; yet, notwithstanding all the risks and hardships attending their
employment, they prefer it to every other, and are very seldom induced
to relinquish it in favor of any more settled occupation. The few
dollars they receive as the compensation for so many privations and
dangers, are in general, dissipated with a most careless indifference to
future wants, and when at an end, they very contentedly renew the same
series of toils to obtain a fresh supply.”

“The batteaux,” says Ex-Sheriff Sherwood, “by which the refugees
emigrated, were principally built at Lachine, nine miles from Montreal.
They were calculated to carry four or five families, with about two tons
weight. Twelve boats constituted a brigade, and each brigade had a
conductor, with five men in each boat, one of which steered. The duty of
the conductor was to give directions for the safe management of the
boats, to keep them together; and when they came to a rapid they left a
portion of the boats with one man in charge. The boats ascending were
doubly manned, and drawn by a rope fastened at the bow of the boat,
leaving four men in the boat with setting poles, thus the men walked
along the side of the river, sometimes in the water, or on the edge of
the bank, as circumstances occurred. If the tops of trees or brush were
in the way they would have to stop and cut them away. Having reached the
head of the rapid the boats were left with a man, and the others went
back for others,” and so they continued until all the rapids were
mounted. Lachine was the starting place, a place of some twenty dwelling
houses. Here Mr. Grant had a dry dock for batteaux.

It was by these batteaux, that the refugees, and their families, as well
as the soldiers and their families passed from the shores of Lake
Champlain, from Sorel, and the St. Lawrence, where they had temporally
lived, to the Upper Province. It was also by these, or the Skenectady,
or the Durham boat, that the pioneers made their transit from Oswego.

Thus it will be seen that to gain the northern shore of the St. Lawrence
and Lake Ontario, was a task of no easy nature, and the steps by which
they came were taken literally inch by inch, and were attended with
labor hard and venturesome. Records are not wanting of the severe
hardships endured by families on their way to their wooded lands.
Supplied with limited comforts, perhaps only the actual necessaries of
life, they advanced slowly by day along dangerous rapids, and at night
rested under the blue sky. But our fathers and mothers were made of
stern stuff, and all was borne with a noble heroism.

This toilsome mode of traveling continued for many a year. John
Ferguson, writing in 1788, from Fredericksburgh to a friend in Lower
Canada, Lachine, says of his journey, “after a most tedious and
fatiguing journey I arrived here—nineteen days on the way—horrid roads—
sometimes for whole days up to the waist in water or mire.” But the
average time required to ascend the rapids with a brigade was from ten
to twelve days, and three or four to descend.

One can hardly conceive of the toilsome hours formerly spent in passing
from Kingston, or the seventh and eighth townships of the bay to
Montreal, and back. Before setting out, the traveler would make
elaborate preparations for a journey of several weeks. There was no
regular traffic, and only an occasional batteaux, laden with simple
articles of merchandise, would start for the head waters of the bay.
Individuals would often wait, sometimes a long time, for these
opportunities, and then would work their passage, by taking a hand at
the oars. Even up to the present century, it was the custom.

The following is a most interesting instance of batteaux traveling which
has been placed in our hands by the Rev. Mr. Miles. It gives one an
excellent idea of traveling at the beginning of the present century. “I
left Kingston on the 6th of April, 1811, but as the traveling _then_ was
not as it is _now_, I did not arrive in Montreal till the 15th. I will
just copy verbatim, the journal I kept on my passage. Durham boats were
scarce on the Canada side at that time, but it was thought if I could
get to the American shore, I would find one on its way to Montreal.
Well, I found a man in Kingston, just from Grindstone Island, who had
brought up some shingles and tar to sell, and he told me if I could get
to Briton’s Point, several miles down the river from Cape Vincent, and
to which place he would take me, that he thought I would find a Durham
boat there, and the following is my journal on that route.

“Grindstone Island, April 11th, 1811.—Left Kingston yesterday, April
6th, at 3 p.m., in an open skiff, with R. Watson, a clerk in Dr. Jonas
Abbott’s store, and two hands belonging to the skiff—head wind—rowed
hard till about eight in the evening, when having blistered both hands,
and being very much fatigued, we drew our skiff on shore, and camped on
the shore of Long Island, about five miles above Grindstone Island—wind
strong from the north—very cold and without victuals or fire—feet wet—
slept some, walked some, and by daybreak was somewhat chilled. Strong
head wind. Stuck close to our dear lodgings till about eight, when the
wind abated, and we stuck to our oars till about eleven o’clock, when we
made Grindstone Island, weary, and very hungry—eat a hearty dish of
“sapon” and milk—rested about an hour—set off for Briton’s tavern on the
American shore, where we arrived about 4 p.m., the water being entirely
calm. Had not been on shore ten minutes, as good luck would have it,
before we engaged a passage for Cornwall in a Durham boat, and a breeze
coming up directly from the south, our American boats immediately
hoisted sail and proceeded about thirty miles, when the wind changed,
and we put into a bay on Grenadier Island, about nine in the evening—eat
some supper at a house owned by Mr. Baxter—spread a sail upon the floor,
and seven boatmen and four passengers camped down before the fire. In
the morning I felt my bones as though they had been lying on the soft
side of a hard rough floor. April 8, head wind still. Wished myself
either at Kingston or Montreal. April 9, still a head wind. Must take it
as it comes. Reading and writing the order of the day. At 7 p.m.,
hoisted sail. At one a.m., arrived at a house on the Canada shore, and
slept on the floor till daylight. April 10, left for Ogdensburg, where
we arrived at 3 p.m. Found an old acquaintance and passed the afternoon
quite agreeably. April 11, had a good night’s rest. Still a head wind.
Found the printing office and composed types the greater part of the
day. April 12, still a head wind. April 13, left Ogdensburg and arrived
at Cornwall. April 14, left Cornwall and arrived at M’Gee’s, Lake St.
Francis. April 15, left M’Gee’s and arrived at Montreal about 8 p.m.
Traveling expenses from Kingston to Montreal $9.75.”

With the later coming refugees was introduced another kind of flat
bottomed boat. It was generally small and rigged with an ungainly sail.
It was generally built at the Town of Schenectady, and hence the name.
Schenectady is a German word, and means _pine barren_. Families about to
come to Canada would build one or more to meet their requirements. There
was never a large number of this particular kind of boat. Those that
were to be seen, were upon the bay.

With the opening up of trade between Albany and Upper Canada, was
introduced still another kind of vessel, which was adapted to the use of
merchants, engaged in the carrying trade. One of the earliest
traffickers from the Mohawk River to the lakes by the Durham boats was
Duncan, of Augusta, who was, as will be seen, one of the first
Legislative Councillors of Upper Canada. He finally removed to
Schenectady. It is said that he introduced the trade between the Mohawk
and Buffalo which led to the construction of the Erie Canal.

A writer, speaking of the boats used by the Canadians, says, the largest
boats used by the Canadian boatmen is called the Durham boat, “used here
and in the rapids of the Mohawk. It is long, shallow, and nearly flat
bottomed. The chief instrument of steerage is a pole ten feet long, shod
with iron, and crossed at short intervals with small bars of wood like
the feet of a ladder; the men place themselves at the bow, two on each
side, thrust their poles into the channel, and grasping successively the
wooden bars, work their way toward the stern, thus pushing on the vessel
in that direction.” (Murray).

Mr. Finkle remarks that “the first mode of conveyance for travelers from
Montreal to Kingston, after the settlement of Upper Canada, was by
Canadian batteaux laden with merchandize (at this time there was no
separate conveyance).” The return cargo consisted of barrels of flour,
peas, potash, north-west packs of furs, &c.; the men and conductors
employed in this business were Lower Canadians. This mode of conveyance
continued without interruption until 1809, when the Durham boats came
from the Mohawk River and embarked in the carrying trade only between
Montreal and Kingston. Being of commodious size, far above the batteaux,
they materially interfered with them and lessened the trade by the
batteaux. The men who managed the Durham boats came with them from the
Mohawk River, these boats were entirely manned by men from that country.

The flat bottomed boat continued in use until some time after the war of
1812. Until the canal along the St. Lawrence was constructed it was the
only way by which merchandize could be transported to the Upper Province
through the rapids of the St. Lawrence. After the establishment of York
as the capital of Upper Canada, there sprung up naturally, a trade
between Kingston and the “muddy” capital, and regular batteaux
communication was, after a little, established. Once a week the solitary
boat left Kingston, and slowly made its way by oars, up the bay to the
Carrying Place over which it was hauled by Asa Weller, a tavern keeper,
upon low wheels or trucks drawn by oxen, and then continued its way
along the shore of Ontario, to its destination. These boats carried not
only merchandize but passengers. Beside the regular batteaux there were
occasionally others, owned by small merchants and pedlars. It was by the
flat bottomed boat and canoe that many of the troops ascended to the
head of the lake in 1812, and by which many of the 1000 prisoners taken
at Detroit were conveyed to Quebec. The rate of speed of the batteaux or
Durham boat, as well as the Skenectady boat, can be approximated from
the statement of “A traveller,” writing in 1835. He says, “the line of
boats which start from Albany to Skenectady, on their way to Upper
Canada, go two-and-a-half miles an hour, taking in stoppages—charging
one-and-a-half cents per mile, including board.” This mode of traveling
is preferred by large families and prudent settlers.

The conveniences of traveling then, as well as the time required, are so
widely different from what we are accustomed to in this day, that we
have to pause and wonder at the change which even fifty and sixty years
have wrought. Even after Upper Canada had become somewhat settled, it
was a momentous matter for a family to set out from the Hudson for
Cataraqui, or the Bay Quinté, as they generally called the settlement in
those days. For instance, Mr. Lambert, of Sophiasburgh, who came in
1802, was six weeks on the way between Albany and the bay, coming by the
Mohawk and Oswego Rivers, and crossing from “Gravelly Point” to “Isle
Tanti.” We will give another instance:—Nicholas L., came from New Jersey
with seven sons and two daughters. It took a month to come. Having
reached Schenectady they waited to build a batteaux. This completed,
they stored away provisions to last them until Cataraqui was reached.
They also brought with them iron kettles, with which to make maple
sugar, and “a churn full of honey.” Mr. L., being a fanning mill maker,
he brought also a quantity of wire gauze. At Oswego, the fort there
being still held by the British, they were strictly questioned as to the
use intended to be made of the kettles and gauze. Satisfaction being
given on this point, the family continued their tedious journey along
the shore toward Kingston. Barely escaping being wrecked off Stony
Island, they at last reached the north shore. Three days more of weary
rowing up the bay, and Hay Bay was reached, where they settled.

The loyalists not alone came in summer, by batteaux or the Schenectady
boat; but likewise in winter. They generally followed, as near as
possible, some one of the routes taken in summer. To undertake to
traverse a wilderness with no road, and guided only by rivers and
creeks, or blazed trees, was no common thing. Several families would
sometimes join together to form a train of sleighs. They would carry
with them their bedding, clothes, and the necessary provisions. We have
received interesting accounts of winter journeyings from Albany along
the Hudson, across to the Black River country, and to the St. Lawrence.
Sometimes the train would follow the “military road” along by Champlain,
St. George, and as far as Plattsburgh, and then turn north to the St.
Lawrence, by what was then called the Willsbury wilderness, and
“Chataguee” woods. At the beginning of the present century there was but
one tavern through all that vast forest, and this of the poorest
character. Indeed it is said that while provision might be procured for
the horses, none could be had for man. Those who thus entered Canada in
winter found it necessary to stay at Cornwall until spring. Two or more
of the men would walk along the St. Lawrence to the bay Quinté, and, at
the opening of navigation, having borrowed a batteaux descend to
Cornwall for the women, children, and articles brought with them. Often,
indeed generally unacquainted with the use of the boat, the passage up
and down the river was tedious and toilsome. While the families and
sleighs were transported in the batteaux the horses were taken along the
shore by the larger boys, if such there were among them. The “French
train” was occasionally employed in their winter travels. It consisted
of a long rude sleigh with several horses driven tandem style, this
allowed the passage among the trees to be made more easily.

Many very interesting reminiscences are known of traveling along the bay
by the pioneers. A few are adduced.


                    TRAVELING TO YORK AND QUEENSTON.

Travelers from Montreal to the west would come by a batteaux, or Durham
boat, to Kingston. Those who had business further west, says Finkle,
“were conveyed to Henry Finkle’s in Ernest town, where they commonly
stopped a few days. Thence they made their journey on horse back. A
white man conducted them to the River Trent, where resided Colonel
Bleecker who was at the head, and had control of all the Mississauga
Indians, and commanded the entire country from the Trent to Toronto. At
this place the traveler was furnished with a fresh horse and an Indian
guide to conduct him through an unsettled country, the road being little
better than a common Indian path, with all its windings. The road
continued in this state until about the year 1798. Sometimes the
traveler continued his way around the head of the lake on horse back to
Queenston, where resided Judge Hamilton.

During the time the surveyors were laying out the townships of the bay,
batteaux occasionally passed up and down, supplying the staff with their
requirements, or perhaps with some one looking for a good tract of land.

In 1790 a batteaux was owned by Mr. Lambert, of the eighth township, and
Mr. Ferguson, writing from Kingston to Mr. Bell, wished him to borrow
it, to come to Kingston.

Among the first to use batteaux as a mode of traffic, was Captain Myers.
He sailed one up and down the bay to carry, not only his own freight,
but for the accommodation of others. He frequently went to Kingston, and
now and then to Montreal, the mode pursued, was to charge for freight
down, and then give the passenger a free passage back. This was followed
for many years, with great profit. The Captain was accustomed to make
the journey as pleasant as possible to the passengers. He always kept
his grog in his “caboose,” and would deal it out to all. There was no
doubt much of jollity and pleasant yarn-spinning, during the long
passages upon the tranquil waters of the bay. Captain Myers subsequently
owned a schooner.”

A letter written 11th November, 1790, by John Ferguson, to Wm. Bell, of
Sidney, says, “As I suppose Mr. Lounsbury’s boat is idle, I would be
glad that you would endeavour to borrow or hire it and Sherrard’s son
and come down to the third township.”

When persons had gone down the bay, and were expected to return upon a
certain night, there would often be a fire kindled on the shore to guide
them homeward. In dark nights this was really necessary. Many were the
expedients resorted to make short cuts. The feat of swimming horses over
the bay was now and then resorted to by the Wallbridges after they
settled in Ameliasburgh. Wishing to go to Kingston, they would go down
to the point where the bay is narrow, and swim the horses across to Ox
Point, and then ride to Kingston by a bridle path. It would now and then
happen at a late period, that a traveler passing to his place of
settlement would have a lumber waggon. This would be ferried across the
bay by placing it across two log canoes. Referring to swimming the bay
by a horse, a colored man, yet living within the neighbourhood of
Belleville, remembers when a boy, to have been put upon a horse, and
then to have obeyed orders to swim him across the bay. This occurred
near Belleville.

Long after steamboats were started on the bay, the batteaux continued to
ply between Belleville and Montreal. The last to sail these was Fanning
and John Covert. In 1830, Fanning arrived at Montreal from Belleville so
early as to present his bills of laden upon the first of April. The
following business notice cannot fail to be interesting:

“The subscribers having established a line of Durham Boats from this
place, propose forwarding from the different ports of the lake to that
of Montreal, on the following terms, viz.:

“From York, Niagara, Queenston, and the head of the lake, for each
barrel of Flour delivered at the Port of Montreal, 5s. and 6d.

“From Kingston, to the Port of Montreal, for each barrel of Flour, 4s.
and 6d.

“From York, Niagara, Queenston, and the head of the lake, for each
barrel of Potash delivered at the Port of Montreal, 12s. and 6d.

“From Kingston to the Port of Montreal, for each barrel of Potash, 10s.

“From York, Niagara, Queenston, and the head of the lake, for each
barrel of Pork delivered at the Port of Montreal, 8s. and 3d.

“From Kingston to the Port of Montreal, for each barrel of Pork, 6s. and
9d.

“Merchandize will be transported by the same means from Lachine to
Kingston, at the rate of 5s. per cwt.

“An elegant Passage Boat will also leave Kingston every tenth day for
Montreal, which will be fitted up in the most commodious manner and
prevent any delay to passengers leaving the upper part of the lake in
the Steam Boat _Frontenac_, it having been built for the purpose of
leaving this place immediately after her arrival.

“These arrangements will take effect at the opening of the navigation,
and be continued during the season.

                                                     “THOMAS MARKLAND.
                                                     “PETER SMITH.
                                                     “LAWRENCE HERKIMER.
                                                     “JOHN KERBY.
                                                     “WILLIAM MITCHELL.

“Kingston, February, 1819.”

Respecting the Canadian Batteaux, the following is from the Boston
_Weekly Magazine_ of an old date.

“Lines written while at anchor in Kingston Harbour, Lake Ontario, on
hearing from several Canadian boats entering from the St. Lawrence—their
usual songs.

               Hark! o’er the lakes unruffled wave,
                 A distant solemn chant is sped;
               Is it some requiem at the grave?
                 Some last kind honor to the dead?
               ‘Tis silent all—again begin;
                 It is the wearied boatman’s lay,
               That hails alike the rising sun,
                 And his last soft departing ray.

               Forth from yon island’s dusky side,
                 The train of batteaux now appear,
               And onward as they slowly glide,
                 More loud their chorus greets the ear.
               But, ah! the charm that distance gave,
                 When first in solemn sounds their song
               Crept slowly o’er the limpid wave,
                 Is lost in notes full loud and strong.

               Row, brothers row, with songs of joy,
                 For now in view a port appears;
               No rapids here our course annoy,
                 No hidden rocks excite our fears,
               Be this sweet night to slumber given,
                 And when the morning lights the wave
               We’ll give our matin songs to heav’n,
                 Our course to bless, our lives to save.”




                              CHAPTER XIV.

  CONTENTS—The first Vessel—The French—La Salle—The Griffon—Vessels in
    1770—During the Rebellion—Building at Carleton Island—Captain
    Andrews—The Ontario—Col. Burton—Loss of the Ontario—The Sheehans—
    Hills—Givins’—Murney’s Point—Schooner ‘Speedy’—Mohawk—Mississauga—
    Duke of Kent—Capt. Bouchette—Paxton—McKenzie—Richardson—Earle
    Steele—Fortiche—The Governor Simcoe—Sloop ‘Elizabeth’—First vessel
    built at York—Collins’ Report upon Navigating the Lakes—Navy in
    Upper Canada, 1795—Rochfoucault—Capt. Bouchette—Officers’ Pay—
    York, the centre of the Naval Force—Gun Boats—The Loss of the
    “Speedy”—Reckoner—Dr. Strachan—Solicitor-Gen. Gray—Canada took the
    lead in building Vessels—First Canadian Merchant Vessel—The York—A
    Schooner on runners around the Falls—Sending Coals to Newcastle—
    Upon Bay Quinté—The Outskirts of Civilization—“The Prince Edward”
    built of Red Cedar—in 1812—Schooner “Mary Ann”—1817—Capt.
    Matthews.


                       THE FIRST SAILING VESSELS.

The first vessels, with sails, which navigated the waters of the lakes,
were built by the French, to pursue their discoveries, and to carry on
the fur trade. The first sailing vessel launched upon the Lakes, was
built by LaSalle. He, with Father Hennepin and Chevalier de Tonti, set
sail from Cataraqui, on the 18th November, 1678, for the mouth of the
Niagara river, having on board his bark goods, and material for building
a brigantine on Lake Erie. During the winter the vessel was commenced,
six miles above the Falls, and was launched by the middle of summer,
amid great display and ceremony. The vessel was named “Griffon,”
according to Garneau; but Father Hennepin says “Cataraqui.” “She was a
kind of brigantine, not unlike a Dutch galliot, with a broad elevated
bow and stern, very flat in the bottom; she looked much larger than she
really was. She was of sixty tons burden. With the aid of tow-lines and
sails the Niagara river was, with difficulty, ascended; and on the 7th
August, 1679, the first vessel that ever sat upon the lakes, entered
Lake Erie.” The end of this vessel was a sad one. (See Introduction).

We are indebted to the _Detroit Tribune_ for the following interesting
statements:

“In 1766 four vessels plied upon Lake Erie. These were the “Gladwin,”
“Lady Charlotte,” “Victory,” and “Boston.”

“The two latter laid up in the fall near Navy Island, above Niagara
Falls, and one of them was burned accidentally, November 30, of the same
year. A vessel called the “Brunswick,” owned and commanded by Captain
Alexander Grant, made her appearance on the lakes during the year 1767,
and was lost some time during the season following. Captain Grant was
the Commodore of the lakes for two or three years. In 1769 Sterling and
Porteous built a vessel at Detroit, called the “Enterprise,” Richard
Cornwall, of New York, being the carpenter. The boatmen, who went from
Schenectady with the rigging and stores for this vessel to Detroit, were
to have each £20, and ten gallons of rum. They were seventy days on Lake
Erie, and two of the number perished from hunger, and their bodies were
kept to decoy eagles and ravens. They returned to New York in February,
1760, by way of Pittsburgh, then called Fort Pitt.

“In May, 1770, a vessel of seventy tons burthen was launched at Niagara,
called the “Charity.” The same year the Duke of Gloucester, Secretary
Townsend, Samuel Tutchet, Henry Baxter, and four others, formed a
company for mining copper on Lake Superior. In December they built at
Point Aux Pins, a barge, and laid the keel for a sloop of forty tons
burthen. Of the success of this enterprise we are not informed.
Subsequent to the above period very little was accomplished in the
construction of craft for lake navigation, and the few that came into
commission were used solely as traders, as were in fact, all those
previously named. A short time after, 1770, batteaux from Montreal and
Quebec, employed by the Hudson’s Bay Fur Company, made their annual
tours westward, gathering large quantities of furs, and returning
homeward in the fall. It has been stated that the first vessel built on
Lake Ontario was in 1749, but this, we have reason to believe, is not
correct.”

During the Revolutionary War, the British Government built at Carleton
Island, a few vessels to carry troops and provisions from place to place
along the Lake, from Carleton Island to Niagara. The first Commissioner
at the Dock Yard was Commodore James Andrews, Lieutenant in the Royal
Navy. The “Ontario,” a war vessel of considerable importance, carrying
22 guns, was built at Carleton Island. This vessel was commanded by
Capt. Andrews. Some time between 1780 and 1783, as the “Ontario” was
proceeding from Niagara to Oswego with a detachment of the King’s Own
regiment, commanded by Colonel Burton, with other officers, a storm
arose at night, and the vessel was lost with all on board. Col. John
Clark, in his memoirs, whose father belonged to the 8th regiment, says
this event happened in 1780 or ‘81, in which belief he is supported by
Mr. Sheehan, a descendant of Capt. Andrews: but other authority has it
that the event took place in 1783. At all events, the occurrence
produced a melancholy effect, which long remained in the minds of those
acquainted with the circumstances. Captain Andrews left a widow, a son,
and two daughters. The son returned to Scotland, the daughters married
and settled in Canada. The Sheehans, Hills, and Givins are descendants
of Captain Andrews’ daughters, whose husbands had been in the army.

After the settlement of Kingston, the Government built vessels at
Murney’s Point, and at Navy Point. Among the first built here was the
Schooner “Speedy,” and also the “Mohawk” and “Mississauga,” and “Duke of
Kent.” Among the first commanders of vessels, most of whom were of the
Royal Navy, were Capt. Bouchette, Capt. Paxton, Capt. McKenzie, Capt.
Richardson, Capt. Earle, Capt. Steele and Capt. Fortiche.

“The first vessel built for trade upon Lake Ontario,” that is after
Upper Canada was settled, “may have been the ‘Governor Simcoe,’ for the
North West Company; after she was worn out and laid up, Judge
Cartwright, who was agent for the Company at Kingston, built another for
that Company, and one for himself, both built at the same time, side by
side, on Mississauga Point, at the mouth of Cataraqui Creek. Both were
launched on the same day; the one for the Company named “Governor
Simcoe,” and the other “Sloop Elizabeth.” These were built during my
stay with Judge Cartwright, in 1808.

“The first, and only vessel for many years, built at York, was a small
schooner about forty-five tons. Built by two brothers named Kendrick.”—
(_Finkle._)

The survey made by Deputy Surveyor-General Collins, at the request of
Lord Dorchester, in 1788, included an examination of the lakes and
harbors from Kingston to Michilmicinac. In reference to the lakes and
vessels, the Surveyor says:—“Vessels sailing on these waters being
seldom for any length of time out of sight of land, the navigation must
be considered chiefly as pilotage, to which the use of good natural
charts is essential and therefore much wanted. Gales of wind, or
squalls, rise suddenly upon the lakes, and from the confined state of
the waters, or want of sea-room, (as it is called), vessels may in some
degree be considered as upon a lee shore, and this seems to point out
the necessity for their being built on such a construction as will best
enable them to work to windward. Schooners should, perhaps, have the
preference, as being rather safer than sloops, they should be from 80 to
100 tons burthen on Lake Ontario, and 50 tons burthen on Lakes Erie and
Huron; but if not intended to communicate between these two lakes, they
may then be the same size as on Lake Ontario; and if this system is
approved there can be no necessity to deviate from it unless an enemy
should build vessels of greater magnitude or force; but as the intent of
bringing any such forward, at least the building of them can never
remain a secret, there may be always time to counteract such a design by
preparing to meet them at least on equal terms. It does not seem
advisable, nor do I know any reason to continue the practice of building
vessels flat bottomed, or to have very little draft of water, they are
always unsafe, and many of the accidents which have happened on the
lakes, have perhaps, in some degree been owing to that construction. On
the contrary, if they are built on proper principles for burthen as well
as sailing they will be safer, and will find sufficient depth of water
proportioned to any tonnage which can be requisite for them upon these
lakes.”

Respecting the navy in Upper Canada, Rochfoucault writes in 1795: “The
Royal Navy is not very formidable in this place; six vessels compose the
whole naval force, two of which are small gun-boats, which we saw at
Niagara, and which are stationed at York.” Two small schooners of twelve
guns, viz., the “Onondaga,” in which we took our passage, and the
“Mohawk,” which is just finished; a small yacht of eighty tons, mounting
six guns as the two schooners, which has lately been taken into dock to
be repaired, form the rest of it. All these vessels are built of timber
fresh cut down, and not seasoned, and for this reason last never longer
than six or eight years. To preserve them, even to this time, requires a
thorough repair; they must be heaved down and caulked, which costs at
least from one thousand, to one thousand two hundred guineas. This is an
enormous price, and yet it is not so high as on Lake Erie, whither all
sorts of naval stores must be sent from Kingston, and where the price of
labor is still higher. The timbers of the Mississauga, which was built
three years ago, are almost all rotten. It is so easy to make provision
for ship-timber for many years to come, as this would require merely the
felling of it, and that too at no great distance from the place where it
is to be used, that it is difficult to account for this precaution not
having been adopted. Two gun-boats, which are destined by Governor
Simcoe to serve only in time of war, are at present on the stocks; but
the carpenters who work at them are but eight in number. The extent of
the dilapidations and embezzlements, committed at so great a distance
from the mother country, may be easily conceived. In the course of last
winter a judicial enquiry into a charge of this nature was instituted at
Kingston. The Commissioner of the navy and the principal ship-wright, it
was asserted, had clearly colluded against the King’s interest; but
interest and protection are as powerful in the new world as in the old:
for both the Commissioner and ship-wright continue in their places.

“Captain Bouchette commands the naval force on Lake Ontario, and is at
the head of all the marine establishments, yet without the least power
in money matters. This gentleman possesses the confidence both of Lord
Dorchester and Governor Simcoe; he is a Canadian by birth, but entered
the British service when Canada fell into the power of England.

“While Arnold and Montgomery were besieging Quebec, Lord Dorchester,
disguised as a Canadian, stole on board his ship into that city, on
which occasion he displayed much activity, intrepidity, and courage. It
is not at all a matter of surprise that Lord Dorchester should bear in
mind this eminent service. By all accounts he is altogether
incorruptible, and an officer who treats his inferiors with great
mildness and justice.

“In regard to the pay of the Royal Marine force on Lake Ontario, a
captain has ten shillings a day, a lieutenant six, and a second
lieutenant three shillings and sixpence. The seamen’s wages are eight
dollars per month. The masters of merchantmen have twenty-five dollars,
and the sailors from nine to ten dollars a month.

“Commander Bouchette is among those, who most strenuously oppose the
project of moving to York, the central point of the force on the lake;
but his family reside at Kingston, and his lands are situated near that
place. Such reasons are frequently of sufficient weight to determine
political opinions.”

Again, says the same writer, “Governor Simcoe intends to make York the
centre of the naval force on Lake Ontario. Only four gunboats are at
present on this lake, two of which are constantly employed in
transporting merchandise; the other two, which alone are fit to carry
troops and guns, and have oars and sails, are lying under shelter until
an occasion occurs to convert them to their intended purpose. It is the
Governor’s intention to build ten smaller gunboats on Lake Ontario, and
ten on Lake Erie. The ship carpenters, who construct them, reside in the
United States, and return home every winter.”

“On the 7th October, 1807, Mr. Justice Cochrane, Mr. Gray, the Solicitor
General, and Mr. Agnus McDonald, embarked at York, with several other
passengers in the _Speedy_, a government schooner, commanded by Captain
Paxton, for the purpose of going to Newcastle where the Assizes were to
be held on the 10th. The vessel was seen a few miles from her destined
port on the evening of the 8th. The wind commenced to blow, and the
schooner was never heard of more. There were pieces picked up on the
opposite shore. Mr. Cochrane was young in years, but not in piety.” The
above is extracted from the Kingston _Gazette_, written by “Reckoner,”
which was the name under which Dr. Strachan contributed to that paper.
Colonel Clark, of Dalhousie, says “I recollect the loss of the
_Speedy_,” and he remarks of Solicitor General Gray, that he was “a
noble character, noted for his sympathy on behalf of abolishing
slavery.” He says that there were upwards of twenty passengers; among
them he mentions Jacob Herkimer, a merchant of York.

It will be seen that Canada took the lead in building the early vessels
upon the lakes. The first American ship that navigated Lake Erie, was
purchased from the British in 1796. She was called the _Detroit_. The
first vessel built by the Americans, for the lakes, was constructed in
1797. The first Canadian merchant vessel built upon Lake Ontario, was by
Francis Crooks, brother of the Hon. James Crooks. It was built to the
east of the present United States fort, at the mouth of the Niagara
river, in 1792, and was called the “York.” She was wrecked at Genesee
river. In 1800 a schooner of about 75 or 100 tons, was brought to
Clifton, and during the winter of 1801 she crossed by the portage road
on immense runners to Queenston, where she again found her native
element in the Niagara river. She was, in 1804, lost in bringing a cargo
to Niagara, with all on board.—(_Clark._)

It is a curious fact that in the American war of 1812, the British
“Admiralty sent out the frame work, blocks, &c., of the Psyche frigate,
which could have been procured on the spot in the tenth of the time and
a twentieth part of the expense. At the same time there was furnished to
each ship of war on Lake Ontario, a full supply of water casks, with an
apparatus for distilling sea water,” forgetting the fact that the waters
of the lake were of the purest quality.

Directing our attention to the waters of the bay Quinté, it is found
that until after 1812, but few sailing vessels entered the upper waters,
although found east of Picton Bay. Strange as it may appear at the
present day, there was a time when the head of Picton Bay, or Hay Bay,
was regarded as the head of the bay, and the very outskirts of
civilization, while going up the Long Reach, to the Mohawk tract was
looked upon like going to the Red River at the present day. The settlers
above were too few, and their requirements too limited for a sailing
vessel to ascend, unless occasionally to the Napanee mills. But as time
passed, sloops and schooners, as well as batteaux found employment along
the western townships.

In the first year of the present century, there was built in the
township of Marysburgh, a short distance west of the Stone mills, a
schooner of some celebrity. It was built by Captain Murney, father of
the late Hon. Edward Murney, of Belleville. Captain Murney came to
Kingston in 1797, at the solicitation of Mr. Joseph Forsyth. It was
constructed for himself, and was made altogether of red cedar, a kind of
wood formerly very plentiful along the bay, and which possesses a most
agreeable odor, and is extremely durable. The vessel was named the
_Prince Edward_. John Clark, of Dalhousie, says of this vessel, that he
was on board the following year of her building, and that she was a
“staunch good ship, with an able captain.” Her size was sufficient to
allow 700 barrels of flour to be stowed beneath her hatches. She ran
upon Lake Ontario for many years, and made for her owner a small
fortune. She was in good condition in 1812, and was employed by
government as an armed vessel. A schooner called _Prince Edward_,
probably the same, Captain Young, was the first vessel to land at the
pier when erected at Wellington.

The Kingston _Gazette_, April 12, 1817, says: “On Thursday, 20th inst.
at three o’clock p.m., arrived at Ernesttown, in the Bay of Quinté, the
schooner _Mary Ann_, Captain J. Mosier, in twenty hours from York, and
at this port yesterday afternoon with fourteen passengers, of whom
eleven were members of the Provincial Parliament. This is the seventh
voyage this vessel has made this season, to the great credit of her
master. The _Mary Ann_ sailed again in about half an hour for the Bay
Quinté.”

One of the early vessels upon the bay was commanded by Matthews, father
of the rebel of 1836, who was executed.




                             DIVISION III.
             THE LOYALISTS AS PIONEERS—THE ORIGINAL SURVEY.




                              CHAPTER XV.

  CONTENTS—Major Gen. Holland—Surveying on Atlantic Coast—An adherent
    of the Crown—Removal to Montreal—Death—Major Holland—Information
    from “Maple Leaves”—Holland Farm—Taché—First Canadian Poem—Head
    Quarters of Gen. Montgomery—Hospitality—Duke of Kent—Spencer
    Grange—Holland Tree—Graves—Epitaphs—Surveyor Washington—County
    Surveyor—Surveyors after the War—First Survey in Upper Canada—
    Commenced in 1781—The Mode pursued—Information in Crown Lands
    Department—The Nine Townships upon the St. Lawrence—At the close
    of the War—Non-Professional Surveyors—Thomas Sherwood—Assisting to
    Settle—Surveying around the Bay Quinté—Bongard—Deputy-Surveyor
    Collins—First Survey at Frontenac—Town Reserve—Size of Township—
    Mistakes—Kotte—Tuffy—Capt. Grass—Capt. Murney—Surveying in Winter—
    Planting Posts—Result—Litigation—Losing Land—A Newspaper Letter—
    Magistrates—Landholders—Their Sons’ Lawyers—Alleged Filching—
    Speculators at Seat of Government—Grave Charges—Width of Lots—Mode
    of Surveying—Number of Concessions—Cross Roads—Surveyors Orders—
    Numbering the Lots—Surveying around the Bay—The ten Townships—
    Their Lands—The Surveying Party—A Singer—Statement of Gourlay.


                   THE FIRST SURVEYS IN UPPER CANADA.

Among those who distinguished themselves at Louisburg and on the Plains
of Abraham under General Wolfe, was Major Samuel Holland. Sabine says,
he was “Surveyor-General of the Colonies north of Virginia.” In 1773 he
announced his intention to make Perth Amboy, near Jersey, his
head-quarters, and wrote to a gentleman there to inquire for houses to
accommodate himself and his assistants. He then completed the surveys as
far west as Boston. Proposed in 1774 to get round Cape Cod, and to New
London, and said it would be at best six years before he should be able
to finish his labors. In 1775, he wrote Lord Dartmouth that he was ready
to run the line between Massachusetts and New York. By a communication
laid before the Provincial Congress of Massachusetts in July, 1775, it
appears that he had loaned to Alex. Shepard, Jun., who was also a
surveyor, a plan or survey of Maine, which Shepard disliked to return,
fearing that it might be used in a manner prejudicial to the Whig cause,
as Holland was an adherent of the Crown, and then in New Jersey.
Congress recommended to Shepard to retain Holland’s plan. Major Holland
went to Lower Canada, where he resumed his duties of Surveyor-General,
in which capacity he served nearly fifty years. He died in 1801, and at
the time of his decease he was a member of the Executive and Legislative
Councils.

It was under Surveyor Holland that the first surveys were made upon the
banks of the St. Lawrence and the Bay of Quinté. Major Holland was a
gentleman of education, and known for his social and amiable qualities.
We are indebted to the author of “Maple Leaves,” J. M. LeMoine, Esq.,
for information respecting Surveyor Holland. Extending from the brow of
St. Foy heights along St. Louis Road at Quebec, was a piece of land of
200 acres which was known as the Holland Farm. This farm had belonged to
a rich merchant of Quebec, Mon. Jean Taché, who wrote the first Canadian
Poem, “Tableau de la Mer.” He was the ancestor of the late Sir E. Taché.
About the year 1740 he built upon an eminence a high peaked structure,
which, during the seige of Quebec, was the head quarters of Gen.
Montgomery. This place was bought by Gen. Holland in 1780, who lived
there in affluence for many years, subsequent to the close of the war,
1783. The _elite_ of Quebec were wont to resort here to enjoy his
hospitality, and in 1791, he entertained Edward, afterward Duke of Kent,
the father of our Queen. This place is now known as Spencer Grange; but
the old building has long since been removed to be replaced by the
present well-known mansion. From the St. Foy Road may be seen a fir tree
known as the Holland Tree. Under that tree are several graves, which
some years ago were inclosed with a substantial stone wall, with an iron
gate. But now only the foundation remains. Two of the graves had neat
marble slabs, with the names of Samuel Holland senior, and Samuel
Holland, junior. “Here rest Major Surveyor Holland, and his son, who was
killed in a duel at Montreal, by Major Ward of the 60th Regiment,” by a
shot from one of a brace of pistols presented to Major Holland by Gen.
Wolfe. This farm is now in possession of the military authorities.

At the time of the rebellion the land of the thirteen Colonies was, in
many cases, still unsurveyed, or so imperfectly laid out that frequent
demands were made for the professional surveyor. In the very nature of
things pertaining to the settlement of America, there was a general
demand for surveyors. The country was constantly being opened up. Some
of the most prominent men of the day had been surveyors. Gen. Washington
commenced life as a country surveyor. In the war, both on the rebel and
British sides, were to be found professional surveyors engaged in
fighting. Consequently when the war terminated, there was no lack of
surveyors to carry on the work of surveying the wilderness of Upper
Canada. We have seen that Major Holland held the position of
Surveyor-General, and there was duly appointed a certain number of
deputies and assistants.

Even while the war was in progress, steps seem to have been taken to
furnish the refugee Loyalists with new homes, upon the land still lying
in a state of nature. The land in Lower Canada being in the main held by
the French Canadians, it was deemed expedient to lay out along the
shores of the upper waters a range of lots for their use. In pursuance
of this, the first survey of land was made by order of Gen. Clarke,
Acting Governor, or Military Commander, in 1781. Naturally the survey
would commence at the extreme western point of French settlement. This
was on the north bank of Lake St. Francis, at the cove west of Pointe au
Bodet, in the limit between the Township of Lancaster, and the seigniory
of New Longueil.

We have reason to believe that the surveyor at first laid out only a
single range of lots fronting upon the river. In the first place a front
line was established. This seems to have been done along the breadth of
several proposed townships. In doing this it was desirable to have as
little broken front as possible, while at the same time the frontage of
each lot remained unbroken by coves of the river or bay. We are informed
by the Crown Land Department that in some townships there could, in
recent days, be found no posts to indicate the front line, while the
side lines in the second concession were sufficiently marked.

The original surveyor along the St. Lawrence evidently did not extend
his operations above Elizabethtown, which was called the ninth township,
being the ninth laid out from New Longueil. This is apparent from the
fact that while Elizabethtown was settled in 1781, the next township
above, that of Yonge, was not settled until two years later. The quality
of the land thence to Kingston was not such as would prove useful to the
poor settler, and therefore was allowed for a time to remain unsurveyed.
Hence it came that Cataraqui was the commencement of a second series of
townships distinguished by numbers only. These two distinct ranges of
townships, one upon the St. Lawrence numbering nine, and one upon the
Bay numbering ten, were, when necessary, distinguished apart by the
designation, the “first,” “second,” or “third” Township “upon the St.
Lawrence,” or “upon the Bay of Quinté,” as the case might be.

It is impossible to say how far the work of surveying had progressed
from Lake St. Francis westward, before the close of the war; it is very
probable, however, that only a base line had been run, and some
temporary mark placed to indicate the corners of each township. Such,
indeed, is shown to be the case by the statement of Sheriff Sherwood,
who says that his father Thomas Sherwood, who had been a subaltern in
the 84th Reg., and who actually located on the first lot in the first
concession of Elizabethtown, “was often called upon to run the side
lines of the lots” for the settlers as they came one after another, and
“to shew them their land.” Mr. Sherwood was not a professional surveyor,
but “he had the instruments and practically knew well how to use them,
and he was ever ready to give his assistance and instructions to the new
comers.”


                      SURVEYING AROUND BAY QUINTÉ.

In the year 1783, Major Holland, Surveyor-General of Canada, received
instructions from Sir Frederick Haldimand, Governor of the Province of
Quebec, to proceed on duty to Western Canada. Prior to this, we have
observed, there had been commenced a range of lots laid out at the
easternmost limits of what now forms Canada West, to the extent of nine
townships. Yet evidence is wanting that this range had been completed at
the period stated. Holland set out with a sufficient staff of assistants
and attachés, to simultaneously lay out several of the proposed
townships along the St. Lawrence, and the Bay of Quinté. The party
passed up the St. Lawrence, ascending the rapids in a brigade of
batteaux manned by French boatmen. Surveyor Holland had, as his personal
attendant, —— Bongard, who had been in the artillery under General
Reidezel, of the Foreign Legion. From the son of this person, now living
in Marysburgh, valuable information has been obtained, much of which has
been substantiated by legal documents, published in connection with the
law report of the trial respecting the Murney estate and the town of
Kingston. Mr. Bongard says that Holland, as he passed up, detailed a
deputy to each of the townships, stopping first at Oswegotchie, opposite
Prescott, and that he passed up as far as the fourth township upon Bay
Quinté, where he pitched his tent, and where he continued to hold his
head-quarters, receiving the reports of the various Deputy-Surveyors as
they were from time to time brought in. While it seems most probable
that Holland came to the Upper Province in 1783, it is possible that he
remained in Lower Canada until the spring of 1784, having deputed
Surveyor Collins to commence a survey westward from the fort at
Frontenac; or perhaps he visited that place with Collins whom he left to
carry on the work during this first year.

Whether Surveyor-General Holland visited Fort Frontenac in the year
1783, or not, it was Deputy-Surveyor John Collins who made the first
survey of the first township, and of the original town plot of Kingston.
According to the sworn testimony of Gilbert Orser, who assisted Collins,
in the year 1783, as well as others, the township was surveyed first,
and the town plot afterward; although it appears that Holland’s
instructions were, first “to lay out proper reservations for the town
and fort, and then to proceed and lay out the township, six miles
square.” The lots were to contain each 200 acres, to be 25 in number,
each range. Mr. Collins placed a monument, it is averred, “at the
south-east angle of lot 25, from which a line was run northerly the
whole depth of the Township, six miles, where another stone monument was
placed, making a line of blazed trees throughout.” From this, it would
seem, he continued to survey the township, leaving the land for the
town, which he, no doubt, thought extensive enough, to be laid out into
town lots, and leaving 40 feet of land, which was to form a road between
the town and township. Respecting this line and lot 25, there has been a
great deal of litigation. As nearly as the facts can be gathered, the
following statement may be regarded as correct:

After Collins had completed the survey of the township, and had even
made his returns, to the effect that it contained 25 lots, of 200 acres,
he was importuned, or ‘induced by the Commanding Officer at Fort
Frontenac,’ to make lot 25 contain only 100 acres, that more ground
might thereby be had for the proposed town. More than this, it seems
that there was some mistake in the said eastern side line, so as to
subsequently limit lot 25 to even less than 100 acres. And, Capt.
Michael Grass, when he took possession of this lot, in 1784, found that
this line was inaccurately run. Deputy-Surveyor Kotte was requested to
examine it; and finding there was an error, made representations to
Government, who sent persons to correct it. One Deputy-Surveyor Tuffy
was directed to re-survey the line, and he gave more land to lot 25.
However, there was yet some error, which was a source of great trouble.
Capt. Michael Grass sold this lot to Capt. Murney, who, subsequently
finding it did not contain the amount of land which the patent assumed,
applied legally for his rights.

The surveying party, among whom were some of those who subsequently
settled in the township, and who must have belonged to Capt. Grass’
company of refugees, returned to Sorel, where they spent the winter. At
least this is the testimony of one of the grand-children of Capt. Grass.
But if the surveying party did, this winter of 1783–4, retire from their
work to Lower Canada, it appears unlikely they did the following winter.
Indeed there are indications that surveying went on during the winter.
In laying out the Townships, special attention was given to make the
lots front squarely upon the Bay. In the winter the base line could be
more closely run by the water edge upon the ice, than in summer, through
the woods. We are informed, at the Crown Lands Department, that in some
townships no posts or other marks had at first been found in the
re-survey, although such were to be found in the 2nd concession. The
inference was, that the posts planted in winter by the water, had, in
the spring or summer been washed away, in the course of time. This, as
may be supposed, led in time to great confusion, and no little
litigation. For many years there was much trouble to establish the land
marks all along the front; and cases are not wanting where it has been
charged that fraudulent removals of posts were made. The straightforward
settler, while engaged in his daily and yearly round of toil, thought
not of the side lines of his farm, fully believing that a survey had
been definitely fixed by marks that could not be altered, and too often
when plenty and comfort had come, he was startled to find some one
claiming some of his cleared or uncleared land. Although conscious that
such and such were the boundaries of the land granted to him, it was not
so easy to prove that such was the case. The annoyances of these direct
and indirect attempts to disinherit, may easily be imagined. In this
connection, the following letter may be given as exemplifying the
feelings, if not the facts—perhaps both—which belonged to those days. It
appeared in the Kingston _Gazette_ in 1816, over the signature “A.”

“SIR,—The situation of the old settlers in the Province of Upper Canada,
is truly deplorable. These people settled in the wilds of Canada, then
the Province of Quebec, under the surveys made by the acting
Surveyor-General. Landmarks being established for the guidance of their
improvements: no deeds were given them until the Parliament of Great
Britain altered the Quebec bill, arranged a new constitution, similar to
that they had lost during the rebellion, in the Province of New York,
from whence they chiefly came to settle at Frontenac, now Kingston.
After cultivating the country agreeably to those surveys for twenty
years or more, deeds are issued to cover those lots, drawn and
cultivated as above mentioned. The Surveyor-General, David William
Smith, Speaker of the House of Assembly, knowing that these deeds were
filled up by guess, the survey never having been made complete, wisely
provided an Act of the Legislature to prevent the deeds from moving the
old land-marks. This Act provides that when thirty freeholders apply to
the Magistrates in session they shall make an assessment and collect the
money to enable the Surveyor-General to erect monuments, in order to
preserve their ancient land-marks and boundaries. What is the reason
that this Act has not been complied with? Are the Magistrates all
landholders and their sons Lawyers?

“An order from the Governor has lain in the Surveyor-General’s office
ever since the year 1801 for monuments to be erected in the Township of
Kingston, agreeable to the intention of that Act. Why will not the
Magistrates do their duty? The consequence is, that the licensed
Surveyor, John Ryder, is running new lines every day, and moving the
land-marks of the old settlers. People who have come into the country
from the States, marry into a family, and obtain a lot of wild land, get
John Ryder to move the land-marks, and instead of a wild lot, take by
force a fine house and barn and orchard, and a well cultured farm, and
turn the old Tory, (as he is called) out of his house, and all his labor
for thirty years.

“These old settlers have suffered all that men could suffer; first in a
seven years’ rebellion in the revolutionized colonies; then came to a
remote wilderness, some hundred miles from any inhabitant—not a road,
not a cow, or an ox, or a horse to assist them; no bread during the
winter, they wintered first at Cataraqui. A little pease and pork was
all they could get until the ice gave way in the spring of 1785.

“The King, as an acknowledgment and mark of his approbation for the
loyalty and sufferings of his faithful subjects, ordered lands to be
granted them free from expense, and marked each man’s name with the
letters U. E., with a grant annexed to each child as it became of age,
of two hundred acres of the waste lands of the crown.

“Now these children cannot get these lands agreeably to the intention of
Government. They must sell their right to a set of speculators that
hover round the seat of Government, or never get located. Or if they
should have the fortune to get a location ticket, it is situated on
rocks, and lakes, and barren lands, where they are worth nothing at all;
the good lots being marked by the Surveyors, and located by those U. E.
rights they have so purchased.

“Now, Sir, _was_ I a scholar, I might draw you a much better description
of this wickedness. But I have lived to see thirteen colonies, now
States of America, severed from the British empire by the
mal-administration of justice in the civil government of those colonies;
the people’s minds were soured to that degree that a few designing men
overthrew the Government.”

“After the conquest of Canada, the king ordered a thousand acres of land
to be granted to each man. The land was granted; but the people to whom
it was granted were deprived by a set of speculators, from ever getting
a foot, unless they became tenants to those who, in a manner, had robbed
them of their rights.”

While the lots were generally made twenty chains in width, a few of the
first townships were but nineteen, and consequently of greater depth to
make the 200 acres, and the concessions were proportionally wider.

The base line being established, a second one, parallel thereto, was
made at a distance generally of a mile and a quarter, allowance being
made in addition, for a road. It is more than likely that in many
townships the second line, or concession, was not immediately run out.
The settlers could not easily traverse even a mile of woods, and for a
time accommodation was made only at the front. But within a year, in
most townships, the second row of lots had been surveyed and partially
occupied. At the front line was always an allowance for a road of sixty
feet, as well as at the second line for one of forty feet. The range of
lots between the front and the second lines as well as between the
second and third, and so on, was called a Concession, a term derived
from the French, having reference to their mode of conferring land in
the Lower Province, and peculiar to this country. Each concession was
divided into lots of 200 acres each, the dividing lines being at right
angles with the concession lines, and a quarter of a mile distant from
each other. At intervals of two or three miles, a strip of forty feet
between two lots was left, for a cross road. In Ameliasburgh it seems
that this was neglected. The number of concessions depended on
circumstances. Along the St. Lawrence, they numbered to even fifteen or
sixteen. Along the bay they were seven and eight. Adolphustown has only
four. The irregular course of the Bay Quinté, and the fronting of the
townships upon its waters, gave rise to great irregularity in the
interior lots, and produced a large number of Gores. This may be noticed
more especially in Sophiasburgh, and indeed throughout all of Prince
Edward district.

Respecting the provision made for cross roads, Alex. Aitkins, who was
Deputy Surveyor of Midland district for many years, says under date,
1797, in respect to the township of Sophiasburgh, “Mr. Kotte’s orders
1785, were from Deputy Surveyor General, Mr. Collins, who was then at
Kingston, to lay off cross roads between every six lots as he had done
in the eastern part of the province, from township number one, now
Charlotteburgh, to township number eight Elizabethtown, and, of no
doubt, they would be found at the waters’ edge on the Bay Quinté.”

By looking at the township maps of the bay, it will be seen that the
lots of the first three townships, are numbered from west to east, while
as we have seen, the townships were numbered from east to west. It is
inferred from this fact that the surveyor conducted his survey along the
front, planting posts to mark the division of lots, and leaving
allowance for roads, but did not complete the concessions until the
breadth of the townships had been determined, when it was done from west
to east, the lots being numbered accordingly.

The surveyor continued to chain the front, upon the north shore of the
bay, until he reached the turn in the bay at the western point of
Adolphustown. This portion of territory was divided into four townships.

The surveyor then crossed the bay and proceeded from the Upper Gap, to
lay out lots in an irregular manner upon the water, along the bay and
the lake to, and around Smith’s Bay, and along Black Creek; also upon
the east shore of Picton Bay. This constituted the fifth township.
Following the bay shore of Prince Edward peninsula from Picton Bay,
along the High Shore and around Green Point, another, the sixth
township, was laid out; the lots always fronting on the bay. Still
following the bay, the seventh township was created, the western
boundary of which brought the surveyor to the head of the bay, or
Carrying Place.

Turning eastward along the north shore of the bay, the eighth township
was laid out. Likewise, the ninth township, which brought the surveyor
to a tract of land which had been reserved for, and given to the
faithful Mohawk Indians. Passing by the present township of Tyendinaga,
still another township was laid out fronting upon the Mohawk Bay, and
Napanee River. This constituted the tenth township, Richmond. Thus the
surveyors had made a complete circuit of the bay. These townships were,
for many a day, designated by the numeral prefix; even yet may be found
gray haired individuals who speak of them in no other way. Subsequently,
however, these townships had given to them respectively, the royal names
of Kingston, Ernest town, Fredericksburgh, Adolphustown, Marysburgh,
Ameliasburgh, Sophiasburgh; and the noble ones of Sidney, Thurlow, and
Richmond.

There would at the present time, be nothing so interesting to the
settlers of the bay, than to read a diary of the events connected with
the original survey. Surveying the wilderness is weary work at any time;
but when the persons who take part in striking the lines and fixing the
boundaries, have constantly in mind that when their survey is completed,
they cannot return to civilization and the comforts of a home, but that
they have to remain to become citizens of the forest, they must
experience many a heart pang. Yet there seems to have been a
lightheartedness with most of them. The camp fire at night witnessed
many pleasant hours of jovial pass-time. Singing, storytelling, wiled
away agreeably many an hour. Accompanying Collins’ surveying party, was
one Purdy, who gained no little renown as a capital singer.

We will close our remarks upon the original survey by giving the
statement of Gourlay. He says that “such was the haste to get land
surveyed and given away, that ignorant and careless men were employed to
measure it out, and such a mess did they make of their land measuring,
that one of the present surveyors informed me that in running new lines
over a great extent of the province, he found spare room for a whole
township in the midst of those laid out at an early period. It may
readily be conceived, upon consideration of this fact, what blundering
has been committed, and what mistakes stand for correction.”




                              CHAPTER XVI.

  CONTENTS—The term Concession—First Concession of Land in Canada—The
    Carignan Regiment—Seigniories—Disproportion of the sexes—Females
    sent from France—Their appearance—Settling them—Marriage
    allowance—The last seigniory—New Longeuil—Seigniory at Frontenac—
    Grants to Refugees—Officers and men—Scale of granting—Free of
    expense—Squatting—Disbanded soldiers—Remote regions—A wise and
    beneficent policy—Impostors—Very young officers—Wholesale granting
    of land—Republicans coming over—Covetous—False pretensions—
    Government had to discriminate—Rules and regulations—Family lands—
    Bounty—Certificates—Selling claims—Rear concessions—Transfer of
    location ticket—Land board—Tardiness in obtaining titles to real
    estate—Transfer by bond—Jobbing—Sir Wm. Pullency—Washington—Giving
    lands to favorites—Reserves—Evil results—The Family Compact—
    Extract from Playter—Extract from Lord Durham—From Gourlay—
    Recompense to Loyalists—Rations—Mode of drawing land—Land Agent—
    Broken front—Traitor Arnold—Tyendinaga.


                   CONCESSION OF LANDS TO THE FRENCH.

It has been stated that the term concession, as well as the system of
granting land to disbanded soldiers, was derived from the French. The
first concession of lands to soldiers took place in 1665, to the
Carignan Regiment, a name derived from a Prince of the house of Savoy,
which came to New France with the first Viceroy. It was a distinguished
corps in the French Infantry, having won renown on many a bloody field,
and carried death to many an Iroquois Indian. The Indians having sought
peace from the French, leave was granted to this regiment to permanently
settle in the New World. Titles to land was conferred according to rank,
and as well, sums of money to assist in the clearing of land. “The
officers, who were mostly noblesse obtained seigniories with their late
soldiers for vassals.” The settlement of this body of men increased the
disproportion between the males and females in Canada. The home
government considerately took steps to remedy this abnormal state of
things and despatched “several hundred from old France.” They “consisted
of tall, short, fair, brown, fat and lean.” These females were offered
to such of the men as had means to support a wife. In a few days they
were all disposed of. The Governor-General then distributed to the newly
married ones “oxen, cows, hogs, fowls, salted beef,” as well as money.—
(_Smith._)

The original grants of land by the French Government under the feudal
system, was into seigniories. These were subdivided into parishes,
“whose extents were exactly defined by De Vandreuil and Bigon, September
1721.” For these grants of seignioral tenure, certain acts of fealty
were to be performed, pursuant to the custom of Paris. After the British
supremacy, grants of land were still made by government in Lower Canada.
The last seigniory was conferred by the French in April, 1734, to
Chevalier de Longeuil, and is known as New Longeuil. It constitutes the
western boundary of the Lower Province.


                 CONCESSION OF LANDS TO THE LOYALISTS.

We have elsewhere seen that the first person, other than the natives, to
possess land in Upper Canada, was De la Salle, the discoverer of the
Mississippi River, to whom was granted a seigniory at Cataraqui, of four
leagues, including the fort, and the islands in front of the four
leagues of territory. Wolfe, Gage and Amherst Islands.

At the close of the war in 1783, it was determined by government to
confer grants of land to the refugee loyalists in Canada, on the same
scale to officers and men as had been done after the conquest of Canada,
1763, with the exception that all loyalists under the rank of subaltern
were to receive 200 acres. The grants to the disbanded soldiers and
loyalists, were to be made free of every expense.

In some of the townships, the settlers were squatting along the St.
Lawrence and Bay Quinté, until late in the summer and fall of 1784,
waiting to know the location of their lots. This might easily be, as
although the forest had been surveyed, the lots had not been numbered.
So, although the refugee soldier had his location ticket for a certain
lot, it was often a long tedious time before he could know its precise
situation.

The front part of the first, second, third, fourth and fifth townships
upon the bay were definitely disposed of to disbanded soldiers and
refugees, formed into companies. But the lands, then considered more
remote, as along the north shore of Hay Bay, in the third and fourth
towns; in some parts of the fifth; and more particularly along the
shores of the western extremity of the bay, were at the service of any
one who might venture to settle. It was considered quite in the remote
part of the earth. Even the head of Picton Bay was considered a place
which would hardly be settled. The result was, that many of the choice
lots were taken up in the eighth and ninth towns, before they were
surveyed.

The policy pursued by the British Government, in recognizing the
services of those who served in the British army against the rebels, and
in recompensing the losses sustained by those who adhered to the British
Crown in America, was most wise and beneficent. There were a few
deserving ones in suffering circumstances, who failed to get the bounty
so wisely granted. This sometimes was the result of the individual’s own
neglect, in not advancing his claims; sometimes the fault of an agent
who, too intent in getting for himself, forget those entrusted to his
care. While a small number thus remained without justice, there were on
the other hand, a large number who succeeded unworthily in obtaining
grants. It is no cause for wonder, that out of the large number who
composed the U. E. Loyalists, there would be found a certain number who
would not hesitate to so represent, or misrepresent their case, that an
undue reward would be accorded. Finding the government on the giving
hand, they scrupled not to take advantage of its parental kindness. In
later days we have seen the United States, when in the throes of a great
civil war, bleeding at every point of the body politic, by the
unprincipled contractors and others, who the most loudly proclaimed
their patriotism. In 1783, when a rebellion had proved successful, and
so had become a revolution, and the nation, from which a branch had been
struck off, was most anxious to repay those who had preferred loyalty to
personal aggrandizement, we may not wonder that there were some willing
to take all they could get.

It is also related that certain officers of the regiments were in the
habit of putting each of their children, however young, upon the
strength of the regiment, with the view of securing him land, and hence
arose an expression the “Major won’t take his pap,” and “half pay
officers never die,” as the officer placed on half pay when a year old,
would long enjoy it. But it will be often found that this mode was
adopted by those in authority, as the most convenient to confer favors
upon the chief officers, although a very ridiculous one.

For many a year no strict rules for discrimination, were observed in the
granting of lands in Canada, and the petitions which literally crowded
upon the government, were, in the main, promptly complied with. The time
came, however, when more care had to be observed, for not a few of those
who had actually rebelled, or had sympathized with the rebels, finding
less advantages from republicanism than had been promised, and with
chagrin, learning that those, whose homesteads and lands they had
assisted to confiscate, had wrought out new homes upon land, conferred
by a government more liberal, and of a nobler mind than the _parvenu_
government, which had erected a new flag upon American soil, looked now
with longing, covetous eyes toward the northern country, which those
they had persecuted, had converted from a wilderness to comfortable
homes. The trials of the first settlement had been overcome. The
occasional visit of a Canadian pioneer to his old home in the States,
where he told the pleasing tale of success, notwithstanding their
cruelty, caused some to envy their hard earned comforts, and even led
some who had been the worst of rebels, to set out for Canada with a view
of asserting their loyalty and, thereby of procuring lands. Not a few of
such unworthy ones succeeded for a time in procuring lands. It therefore
became necessary, on the part of the government, to exact the most
searching examination of parties petitioning for land. No reference is
here made to those who came into the province in response to the
invitation proclaimed by Governor Simcoe; but to those who entered under
false colors, prior to the time of Upper Canada being set apart from
Lower Canada.

  _Extracts from the Rules and Regulations for the conduct of the Land
    Office Department, dated Council Chamber, 17th February, 1789, for
    the guidance of the Land Boards._

“4th. The safety and propriety of admitting the petitioner to become an
inhabitant of this Province being well ascertained to the satisfaction
of the Board, they shall administer to every such person the oaths of
fidelity and allegiance directed by law; after which the Board shall
give every such petitioner a certificate to the Surveyor General or any
person authorized to act as an Agent or Deputy Surveyor for the district
within the trust of that Board, expressing the ground of the
petitioner’s admission, and such Agent or Deputy Surveyor shall, within
two days after the presentment of the certificate, assign the petitioner
a single lot of about two hundred acres, describing the same with due
certainty and accuracy under his signature. But the said certificate
shall, nevertheless, have no effect if the petitioner shall not enter
upon the location, and begin the improvement and cultivation thereof
within one year from the date of such assignment, or if the petitioner
shall have had lands assigned to him before that time in any other part
of the Province.

“7th. The respective Boards shall, on petition from the Loyalists
already settled in the Upper Districts for the allotment of lands under
the instructions to the Deputy Surveyor General of the 2nd of June,
1787, or under prior or other orders for assigning portions to their
families, examine into the grounds of such requests and claims, and
being well satisfied of the justice thereof, they shall grant
certificates for such further qualities of lands as the said
instructions and orders may warrant to the acting Surveyors of their
Districts respectively, to be by them made effectual in the manner
before mentioned, but to be void, nevertheless, if prior to the passing
the grant in form, it shall appear to the Government that such
additional locations have been obtained by fraud, and that of these the
Boards transmit to the office of the Governor’s Secretary, and to each
others, like reports and lists as hereinbefore, as to the other
locations directed.

“8th. And to prevent individuals from monopolizing such spots as contain
mines, minerals, fossils, and conveniences for mills, and other similar
advantages of a common and public nature, to the prejudice of the
general interest of the settler, the Surveyor-General and his Agents or
Deputy Surveyors in the different districts, shall confine themselves in
the location to be made by them upon certificates of the respective
Boards, to such lands only as are fit for the common purpose of
husbandry; and they shall reserve all other spots aforementioned,
together with all such as may be fit and useful for ports and harbours,
or works of defence, or such as contain valuable timber for ships,
building or other purposes, conveniently situated for water carriage, in
the hands of the Crown, and they shall, without delay, give all
particular information to the Governor or Commander-in-Chief for the
time being, of all such spots as are hereinbefore directed to be
reserved to the Crown, that order may be taken respecting the same. And
the more effectually to prevent abuses and to put individuals on their
guard in this respect, any certificate of location given contrary to the
true intent and meaning of this regulation is hereby declared to be null
and void, and a special order of the Governor and Council made necessary
to pledge the faith of Government for granting of any such spots as are
directed to be reserved.


                  FAMILY LANDS AND ADDITIONAL BOUNTY.

  “Certificate of the Board appointed by His Excellency the Governor,
  for the District of ——, in the Province of Quebec, under the rules
  and regulations for the conduct of the Land Office Department.

  “Dated, Council Chamber, Quebec, 17th February, 1789.

  “The bearer ——, having on the —— day of ——, preferred to the Board a
  Petition addressed to His Excellency the Governor in Council, for a
  grant of —— acres of land in the Township of —— in the District of —
  —. We have examined into his character and pretentions, and find
  that he has received —— acres of land in the Township of ——, in the
  District of ——, and that he settled on and has improved the same,
  and that he is entitled to a further assignment of —— acres, —— in
  conformity to the seventh articles of the rules and regulations
  aforementioned.

  “Given at the Board at this —— day of ——, one thousand seven hundred
  and ——.

  “To ——

  “Acting Surveyor for the District of ——.


                  CERTIFICATE OF THE ACTING SURVEYOR.

  “I assign to the bearer —— the lot No. —— in the Township of ——, in
  the District of ——, containing —— acres, —— chains, which lands he
  is hereby authorized to occupy and improve, and having improved the
  same, he shall receive the same grant thereof, to him and his heirs
  or devisee in due form on such terms as it shall please His Majesty
  to ordain, and all persons are desired to take notice that this
  assignment and all others of a similar nature are not transferable,
  by purchase, donation or otherwise, on any pretence whatever, except
  by an act under the signature of the Board for the District in which
  the lands are situated, which is to be endorsed upon this
  Certificate.

  “Given at ——, this —— day of ——, one thousand seven hundred and ——.

  “To ——

  “Acting Surveyor for the District of ——.”

But there were many a one who drew land, and never even saw it. It was
quickly, thoughtlessly sometimes, sold for little or nothing. Sometimes
for a quart of rum. The right jolly old soldier would take no thought of
the morrow. A few did not retain their lands, because they were of
little value for agricultural purposes; but the majority because they
were situated in that remote region in the 4th or 5th concession of the
third town, or away up in the 2nd concession of sixth town, or a long
way up in the eighth town. Rear concessions of even the first and second
townships were looked upon doubtingly, as to whether the land was worth
having. Often the land would not be looked after. It not unfrequently
was the case that settlers upon the front who had drawn land also in the
rear townships, disposed of the latter, not from any indifference as to
its future value, but to obtain the immediate necessaries of life, as
articles of clothing, or stock, or perhaps food, or seed grain, and now
and then in later days to pay taxes. The certificates of the children,
entitling them to land when of age, were often disposed of. Even
officers found it convenient, or necessary to sell rear land to new
comers, for ready money.

Thus it came to pass that a good many never took possession of the land
which a prudent Government had granted them. The statement has been made
that persons holding prominent positions at the time, and possessed of
prudent forethought, as to the value which would in the future attach to
certain lots, stood ready not only to accept offers to sell, but to
induce the ignorant and careless to dispose of their claims.
Consequently when patents were issued, several persons became patentees
of large tracts of land, which had been drawn by individual Loyalists,
whose names never appeared in the Crown Land Office. The transfer of a
certificate or “location ticket,” consisted in the seller writing his
name upon the back of the ticket. Occasionally a ticket would exchange
hands several times, so that at last when it was presented to obtain the
deed, it was difficult to determine who was the owner. The power to thus
transfer the certificates, was allowed for several years. But in time
Government discovered the abuses which had arisen out of it, and decided
that all patents should, thenceforward, be in the name of the person who
originally drew the land. Not unfrequently these certificates were lost.
The losers, upon claiming land, could not establish their rights; but
Government, to meet this misfortune, created a Land Board for each
Township, whose duty it was to examine and determine the claims of all
who presented them.

The following extract of a letter will explain itself:

  “_For the Kingston Gazette, June 1st, 1816._”

  “It has long been a subject of deep regret in the minds of judicious
  persons, that the inhabitants of this Province should be so
  neglectful as they are in securing their titles of real estate. When
  the country was first settled, the grants of land from the crown, on
  account of the existing state of the Province, could not be
  immediately issued. The settlers, however, drew their lots and went
  into possession of them, receiving only tickets, or certificates, as
  the evidence of their right to them. In the meantime, exchanges and
  sales were made by transfers of the possession with bonds for
  conveyances when the deeds should be obtained from the Crown Office.

  “This practice of transferring land by way of bond, being thus
  introduced, was continued by force of usage, after the cause of its
  introduction was removed. In too many instances it is still
  continued, although, by the death of the parties, and the consequent
  descent of estates to heirs under age, and other intervening
  privations, many disappointments, failures, and defects of title,
  are already experienced; and the evil consequences are becoming
  still more serious, as lands rise in value, become more settled and
  divided among assignees, devisees, &c. In a few years this custom,
  more prevalent perhaps in this Province, than elsewhere, will prove
  a fruitful source of litigation, unless the practice should be
  discontinued.”

In connection with free grants of land, and a certain degree of
indifference as to the value, there must necessarily arise more or less
speculation or land-jobbing.

Sir William Pullency has been called the first land-jobber in Canada. In
1791, he bought up 1,500,000, at one shilling per acre, and soon after
sold 700,000 at an average of eight shillings per acre. But land-jobbing
is not peculiar to Canada, nor has its practice militated against the
public character of eminent men, either here or abroad. General
Washington was not only a Surveyor, but an extensive land-jobber, and
thereby increased immensely his private fortune.

We have seen elsewhere, that a few private individuals were wont to buy
the location tickets of all who desired to part with them, or whom they
could induce to sell. In this way a few individuals came to own large
quantities of land, even from the first. Afterward, there was often
conferred by the authorities, quantities of land upon those connected
with influential persons, or upon favorites. Subsequently the mode of
reserving Crown and Clergy lands increased the evil. And it was an evil,
a serious drawback; not alone that, but favorites procured land without
any particular claim or right. The land thus held in reserve, being
distributed among the settled lots in the several townships, was waste
land, and a barrier to advancement. Each settler had to clear a road
across his lot; but the Government lots, and those held by
non-residents, remained without any road across them, except such paths
as the absolute requirements of the settlers had caused them to make. In
this way, the interests of the inhabitants were much retarded, and the
welfare of the Province seriously damaged. The existence of the Family
Compact prevented the removal of this evil, for many a year, while
favorites enjoyed choice advantages. In 1817, “The House of Assembly in
Upper Canada took into consideration the state of the Province, and
among other topics, the injury arising from the reserve lands of the
Crown and the Clergy.” In laying out the townships in later years, “The
Government reserved in the first concession, the 5th, 15th, and 20th
lots; and the Clergy the 3rd, 10th, 17th, and 22nd. In the second
concession, the Crown reserved the 4th, 11th, 21st, and 23rd; and the
Clergy, the 2nd, 9th, and 16th. And thus in every two concessions, the
Crown would have three lots in one, and four in the other, or seven in
all; and the Clergy the same; or 14 lots reserved in every 48, or nearly
one-third of the land in each concession, and in each township. The
object of the reservation was to increase the value of such land by the
improvements of the settlers around it. The object was selfish, as the
reserve lands injured all those who did them good. It was difficulty
enough to clear up the forests; but to leave so many lots in this forest
state, was a difficulty added by the Crown. To have one-third of a
concession uncleared and uncultivated, was an injury to the two-thirds
cleared and cultivated. Large patches of forest, interspersed with
cultivated land, obstructs the water courses, the air, and the light;
nurtured wild animals and vermin destructive to crops and domestic
creatures around a farm house; and especially, are injurious to roads
running through them, by preventing the wind and the sun from drying the
moisture. Besides, no taxes were paid by these wild lots for any public
improvements; only from cultivated lands. The Assembly, however, were
cut short in their work of complaint, by being suddenly prorogued by the
Governor, whose Council was entirely against such an investigation. Here
was the beginning of the Clergy Reserve agitation in the Provincial
Parliament, which continued for many years.”—(_Playter._)

In this connection, the following extract from a report of Lord Durham,
will be found interesting:

“By official returns which accompany this report, it appears that, out
of about 17,000,000 acres comprised within the surveyed districts of
Upper Canada, less than 1,600,000 acres are yet unappropriated, and this
amount includes 450,000 acres the reserve for roads, leaving less than
1,200,000 acres open to grant, and of this remnant 500,000 acres are
required to satisfy claims for grants founded on pledges by the
Government. In the opinion of Mr. Radenhurst, the really acting
Surveyor-General, the remaining 700,000 consist for the most, part of
land inferior in position or quality. It may almost be said, therefore,
that the whole of the public lands in Upper Canada have been alienated
by the Government. In Lower Canada, out of 6,169,963 acres in the
surveyed townships, nearly 4,000,000 acres have been granted or sold;
and there are unsatisfied but indisputable claims for grants to the
amount of about 500,000. In Nova Scotia nearly 6,000,000 acres of land
have been granted, and in the opinion of the Surveyor-General, only
about one-eighth of the land which remains to the Crown, or 300,000
acres is available for the purposes of settlement. The whole of Prince
Edward’s Island, about 1,400,000 acres, was alienated in one day. In New
Brunswick 4,400,000 acres have been granted or sold, leaving to the
Crown about 11,000,000, of which 5,500,000 are considered fit for
immediate settlement.

“Of the lands granted in Upper and Lower Canada, upwards of 3,000,000
acres consist of ‘Clergy Reserves,’ being for the most part lots of 200
acres each, scattered at regular intervals over the whole face of the
townships, and remaining, with few exceptions, entirely wild to this
day. The evils produced by the system of reserving land for the Clergy
have become notorious, even in this country; and a common opinion I
believe prevails here, not only that the system has been abandoned, but
that measures of remedy have been adopted. This opinion is incorrect in
both points. In respect of every new township in both Provinces reserves
are still made for the Clergy, just as before; and the Act of the
Imperial Parliament which permits the sale of the Clergy Reserves,
applies to only one-fourth of the quantity The select committee of the
House of Commons on the civil government of Canada reported in 1828,
that “these reserved lands, as they are at present distributed over the
country, retard more than any other circumstance the growth of the
colony, lying as they do in detached portions of each township, and
intervening between the occupations of actual settlers, who have no
means of cutting roads through the woods and morasses, which thus
separate them from their neighbours. This description is perfectly
applicable to the present state of things. In no perceptible degree has
the evil been remedied.

“The system of Clergy Reserves was established by the act of 1791,
commonly called the Constitutional Act, which directed that, in respect
of all grants made by the Crown, a quantity equal to one-seventh of the
land so granted should be reserved for the clergy. A quantity equal to
one-seventh of all grants would be one-eighth of each township, or of
all the public land. Instead of this proportion, the practice has been,
ever since the act passed, and in the clearest violation of its
provisions, to set apart for the clergy in Upper Canada a seventh of all
the land, which is a quantity equal to a sixth of the land granted.
There have been appropriated for this purpose 300,000 acres, which
legally, it is manifest, belong to the public. And of the amount for
which Clergy Reserves have been sold in that Province, namely, £317,000
(of which about £100,000 have been already received and invested in the
English funds,) the sum of about £45,000 should belong to the public.

“In Lower Canada, the same violation of the law has taken place, with
this difference—that upon every sale of Crown and Clergy Reserves, a
fresh reserve for the Clergy has been made, equal to one-fifth of such
reserves. The result has been the appropriation for the clergy of
673,567 acres, instead of 446,000, being an excess of 227,559 acres, or
half as much again as they ought to have received. The Lower Canada fund
already produced by sales amounts to £50,000, of which, therefore, a
third, or about £16,000, belong to the public. If, without any reform of
this abuse, the whole of the unsold Clergy Reserves in both Provinces
should fetch the average price at which such lands have hitherto sold,
the public would be wronged to the amount of about £280,000; and the
reform of this abuse will produce a certain and almost immediate gain to
the public of £60,000. In referring, for further explanation of this
subject, to a paper in the appendix which has been drawn up by Mr.
Hanson, a member of the commission of inquiry which I appointed for the
colonies. I am desirous of stating my own conviction that the clergy
have had no part in this great misappropriation of the public property,
but that it has arisen entirely from heedless misconception, or some
other error, of the civil government of both Provinces.”

“The great objection to reserves for the clergy is, that those for whom
the land is set apart never have attempted, and never could successfully
attempt, to cultivate or settle the property, and that, by special
appropriation, so much land is withheld from settlers, and kept in a
state of waste, to the serious injury of all settlers in its
neighborhood. But it would be a great mistake to suppose that this is
the only practice by which such injury has been, and still is, inflicted
on actual settlers. In the two Canadas, especially, the practice of
rewarding, or attempting to reward, public services by grants of public
land, has produced, and is still producing, a degree of injury to actual
settlers which it is difficult to conceive without having witnessed it.
The very principle of such grants is bad, inasmuch as, under any
circumstances, they must lead to an amount of appropriation beyond the
wants of the community, and greatly beyond the proprietor’s means of
cultivation and settlement. In both the Canadas, not only has this
principle been pursued with reckless profusion, but the local executive
governments have managed, by violating or evading the instructions which
they received from the Secretary of State, to add incalculably to the
mischiefs that would have arisen at all events.

“In Upper Canada, 3,200,000 acres have been granted to “U. E.
Loyalists,” being refugees from the United States, who settled in the
province before 1787, and their children; 730,000 acres to Militia men;
450,000 acres to discharged Soldiers and Sailors; 225,000 acres to
Magistrates and Barristers; 136,000 acres to Executive Councillors, and
their families; 50,000 acres to five Legislative Councillors, and their
families; 36,900 acres to Clergymen, as private property; 264,000 to
persons contracting to make surveys; 92,526 acres to officers of the
Army and Navy; 500,000 acres for the endowment of schools; 48,520 acres
to Colonel Talbot; 12,000 acres to heirs of General Brock, and 12,000
acres to Dr. Mountain, a former Bishop of Quebec; making altogether,
with the Clergy Reserves, nearly half of all the surveyed land in the
province. In Lower Canada, exclusively of grants to refugee loyalists,
as to the amount of which the Crown Lands’ Department could furnish me
with no information, 450,000 acres having been granted to Militiamen, to
Executive Councillors 72,000 acres, to Governor Milne, about 48,000
acres, to Mr. Cushing and another, upwards of 100,000 acres (as a reward
for giving information in a case of high treason), to officers and
soldiers 200,000 acres, and to “leaders of townships” 1,457,209 acres,
making altogether, with the Clergy Reserves, rather more than half of
the surveyed lands originally at the disposal of the Crown.

“In Upper Canada, a very small proportion (perhaps less than a tenth) of
all the land thus granted, has been even occupied by settlers, much less
reclaimed and cultivated. In Lower Canada, with the exception of a few
townships bordering on the American frontier, which have been
comparatively well settled, in despite of the proprietors, by American
squatters, it may be said that nineteen-twentieths of these grants are
still unsettled, and in a perfectly wild state.

“No other result could have been expected in the case of those classes
of grantees whose station would preclude them from settling in the
wilderness, and whose means would enable them to avoid exertion for
giving immediate value to their grants; and unfortunately, the land
which was intended for persons of a poorer order, who might be expected
to improve it by their labor, has, for the most part, fallen into the
hands of land-jobbers of the class just mentioned, who have never
thought of settling in person, and who retain the land in its present
wild state, speculating upon its acquiring a value at some distant day,
when the demand for land shall have increased through the increase of
population.

“In Upper Canada,” says Mr. Bolton, himself a great speculator and
holder of wild land, “the plan of granting large tracts of land to
gentlemen who have neither the muscular strength to go into the
wilderness, nor perhaps, the pecuniary means to improve their grants,
has been the means of a large part of the country remaining in a state
of wilderness. The system of granting land to the children of U. E.
Loyalists has not been productive of the benefits expected from it. A
very small proportion of the land granted to them has been occupied or
improved. A great proportion of such grants were to unmarried females,
who very readily disposed of them for a small consideration, frequently
from £2 to £5 for a grant of 200 acres. The grants made to young men
were also frequently sold for a very small consideration; they generally
had parents with whom they lived, and were therefore not disposed to
move to their grants of lands, but preferred remaining with their
families. I do not think one-tenth of the lands granted to U. E.
Loyalists has been occupied by the persons to whom they were granted,
and in a great proportion of cases not occupied at all.” Mr. Randenhurst
says, “the general price of these grants was from a gallon of rum up to
perhaps £6, so that while millions of acres were granted in this way,
the settlement of the Province was not advanced, nor the advantage of
the grantee secured in the manner that we may suppose to have been
contemplated by government.” He also mentions amongst extensive
purchasers of these grants, Mr. Hamilton, a member of the Legislative
Council, who bought about 100,000 acres. Chief Justices Emslie and
Powell, and Solicitor General Gray, who purchased from 20,800 to 50,000
acres; and states that several members of the Executive and Legislative
Councils, as well as of the House of Assembly, were “very large
purchasers.”

“In Lower Canada, the grants to “Leaders and Associates” were made by an
evasion of instructions which deserve a particular description.

“By instructions to the Local Executive immediately after the passing of
the Constitutional Act, it was directed that “because great
inconveniences had theretofore arisen in many of the colonies in
America, from the granting excessive quantities of land to particular
persons who have never cultivated or settled the same, and have thereby
prevented others more industrious, from improving such lands; in order,
therefore, to prevent the like inconveniences in future, no farm-lot
should be granted to any person being master or mistress of a family in
any township to be laid out which should contain more than 200 acres.”
The instructions then invest the governor with a discretionary power to
grant additional quantities in certain cases, not exceeding 1,000 acres.
According to these instructions 200 acres should have been the general
amount, 1,200 the maximum, in special cases to be granted to any
individual. The greater part, however, of the land (1,457,200 acres) was
granted, in fact, to individuals at the rate of from 10,000 to 50,000 to
each person. The evasion of the regulations was managed as follows: A
petition, signed by from 10 to 40 or 50 persons, was presented to the
Executive Council, praying for a grant of 1,200 acres to each person,
and promising to settle the land so applied for. Such petitions were, I
am informed, always granted, the Council being perfectly aware that,
under a previous agreement between the applicants (of which the form was
prepared by the then Attorney General, and sold publicly by the law
stationers of Quebec), five-sixths of the land was to be conveyed to one
of them, termed leader, by whose means the grant was obtained. In most
cases the leader obtained the most of the land which had been nominally
applied for by fifty persons.”

Upon this subject we further give as worthy of attention, although we
will not endorse all that is said, the remarks made by Mr. Robert
Gourlay in his “Statistical Account.” He says, “when we look back into
the history of old countries, and observe how landed property was first
established; how it was seized upon, pulled about, given away, and
divided in all sorts of ways, shapes, and quantities; how it was
bequeathed, burdened, entailed, and leased in a hundred forms; when we
consider how dark were the days of antiquity,—how grossly ignorant and
savage were our remote forefathers, we cannot be so much surprised at
finding ourselves heirs to confusion; and, that, in these old countries,
entanglement continues to be the order of the day. But when civilized
men were quietly and peaceably to enter into the occupancy of a new
region, where all could be adjusted by the square and compass; and when
order, from the beginning, could have prevented for ever all possibility
of doubt, and dispute, and disturbance; how deplorable is it to know,
that in less than a life-time, even the simplest affairs should get into
confusion! and so it is already in Upper Canada, to a lamentable degree.
Boundaries of land are doubtful and disputed: deeds have been mislaid,
lost, unfounded, forged: they have been passed again and again in review
before commissioners: they have been blotted and blurred: they have got
into the repositories of attornies and pettifogging lawyers; while
courts of justice are every day adding doubt to doubt, delay to delay,
and confusion to confusion; with costs, charges, cheating.

“Things are not yet beyond the reach of amendment, even in the old
settlements. In the new, what a glorious task it is to devise plans for
lasting peace and prosperity!—to arrange in such a way, as to bar out a
world of turmoil in times to come!

“The present very unprofitable and comfortless condition of Upper Canada
must be traced back to the first operations of Simcoe. With all his
honesty, and energy, and zeal for settling the Province, he had really
no sound views on the subject, and he was infinitely too lavish in
disposing of the land—infinitely too much hurried in all his
proceedings. In giving away land to individuals, no doubt, he thought he
would give these individuals an interest in the improvement of the
country,—an inducement to settle in it, and draw to it settlers; but he
did not consider the character and condition of most of his favorites;
many of them officers in the army, whose habits did not accord with
business, and less still with solitude and the wilderness; whose hearts
were in England, and whose wishes were intent on retirement thither.
Most of them did retire from Upper Canada, and considering, as was
really the case, their land grants of little value, forgot and neglected
them. This was attended with many bad consequences. Their lands became
bars to improvement; as owners they were not known; could not be heard
of; could not be applied to, or consulted with, about any measure for
public advantage. Their promises under the Governor’s hand, their land
board certificates, their deeds, were flung about and neglected. But
mischief greater than all this, arose, is, and will be, from the badness
of surveys. Such was the haste to get land given away, that ignorant and
careless men were employed to measure it out, and such a mess did they
make of their land-measuring, that one of the present surveyors informed
me, that in running new lines over a great extent of the Province, he
found spare room for a whole township in the midst of those laid out at
an early period. It may readily be conceived, upon consideration of this
fact, what blundering has been committed, and what mistakes stand for
correction. Boundary lines in the wilderness are marked by blazing, as
it is called, that is, chopping off with an axe, a little bark from such
trees as stand nearest to the line. Careless surveyors can readily be
supposed to depart wide of the truth with this blazing: their measuring
chains cannot run very straight, and their compass needles, where these
are called in aid, may be greatly diverted from the right direction by
ferruginous substances in the neighbourhood, as spoken of. In short,
numerous mistakes and errors of survey have been made and discovered:
much dispute has arisen therefrom; and I have been told infinite
mischief is still in store. It occurred to me, while in Canada, and it
was one of the objects which, had a commission come home, I meant to
have pressed on the notice of government, that a complete new survey and
map of the Province should be executed; and at the same time a book,
after the manner of Doomsday-book, written out and published, setting
forth all the original grants, and describing briefly but surely all
property both public and private. I would yet most seriously recommend
such to be set about. It might be expensive now, but would assuredly
save, in time to come, a pound for every penny of its cost.”

We have seen elsewhere that, in the terms of peace made at Paris when
hostilities ceased, justice was not done to the American Loyalists. But
subsequently, when their claims became known to the British public,
there was uttered no uncertain sound, upon the floor of Parliament,
respecting the duty resting upon England towards the devoted but
distressed loyalists who had laid all upon the altar of patriotism; and
to the honor of England be said, every step was now taken to provide
some recompense for the United Empire Loyalists. It is true, the old
homes with their comforts and associations could not be restored; the
wilderness was to be their home, a quiet conscience their comfort, and
their associations those of the pioneer for many a day. But, what could
be done, was done by the Crown to render their circumstances tolerable.
Extensive grants of land were granted, not alone to the disbanded
soldier according to rank, but to every one who had become a refugee.
Three years supply of rations were allowed to all, as well as clothing;
and certain implements were furnished with which to clear the land and
prepare it for agriculture. The scale of granting lands was, to a field
officer 5000 acres, captain 3000, subaltern 2000, private 200. The
loyalists were ranked, with the disbanded soldiers, according to their
losses, and services rendered, having taken the usual oath of
allegiance; and all obtained their grants free of every expense. In
1798, complaints having been made to the Imperial Government respecting
the profuse manner of granting lands, royal instructions were given to
Gen. Hunter to limit the allowance to a quantity from 200 to 1,200. The
grants of land when large, were not to be in blocks; but few secured
more than 200 acres upon the front townships. The original mode of
granting lands, at least to the soldiers, was by lot. The process was
simple. The number of each lot, to be granted in each concession, was
written on a separate piece of paper, and all were placed in a hat and
well shaken, when each one to receive land, drew a piece of paper from
the hat. The number upon the paper was the number of his lot. He then
received a printed location ticket. In drawing lots, no one felt any
particular anxiety. They were yet unacquainted with the country, they
had not seen the land, and one number was as likely to prove as valuable
as another.

It would seem that the Surveyor acted as Land Agent. Having surveyed the
lots, he prepared the ballot, and arranged the time and place for the
settlers to draw. It was no doubt this original mode of drawing by
lottery, which gave the provincial term _drawing_ land. We have the
testimony of Ex-Sheriff Sherwood, that the Surveyor discharged this
office. He recollects “Esquire Collins;” he was at his father’s house,
and his father assisted in the matter of drawing with those who had
assembled for the purpose. The Surveyor had a plan by him, and as each
drew his lot, his name was written immediately upon the map. Many of the
plans, with names upon them, may be seen in the Crown Land Department.
Some of the settlers upon the front acquired much more land than others
by reason of the “broken front.” It often happened that the base line,
running from one cove of the Bay to another, left between it and the
water a large strip of land. This “broken front” belonged to the
adjacent 200 acres, so that often the fortunate party possessed even 50
or 100 acres extra.

One of the noted individuals to whom land was granted in Upper Canada,
was Arnold the Traitor. 18,000 acres was given him, and £10,000.

The tract of land now constituting the Township of Tyendinaga, having
been purchased from the Mississaugas, was deeded to the Mohawks. The
deed bears the date of 1804. The land is granted to “the chiefs,
warriors, people, women of the Six Nations.” The chief, at the time they
settled, was Capt. John Deserontyon.




                             CHAPTER XVII.

  CONTENTS—Lines—Western Settlement, 1783—Population—Settlement upon
    St. Lawrence and Bay—Number, 1784—Proclamation to Loyalists—
    Society disturbed—Two kinds of Loyalists—St. Lawrence and Bay
    favorable for Settlement—Government Provisions—State of the
    Loyalists—Serving out Rations—Clothes—Utensils for clearing and
    farming—The Axe—Furniture—Attacking a last enemy—Tents—Waiting for
    their Lots—“Bees”—Size of dwellings—Mode of building—Exchanging
    work—Bedsteads—Clearing—Fireing trees—Ignorance of Pioneer Life—
    Disposing of the Wood—No beast of burden—Logging—Determination—All
    Settlers on a common ground—Additional Refugees—Advance—Simcoe’s
    Proclamation, 1792—Conditions of Grants—The Response—Later
    Settlers—Questionable Loyalists—Yankees longing for Canada—Loyalty
    in 1812.


                    THE SETTLEMENT OF UPPER CANADA.


                               “CANADA.”

                        BY ALEXANDER M’LACHLAN.

                Land of mighty lake and forest!
                Where the winter’s locks are hoarest;
                Where the summer’s leaf is greenest;
                And the winter’s bite the keenest;
                Where the autumn’s leaf is searest.
                And her parting smile the dearest;
                Where the tempest rushes forth,
                From his caverns of the north,
                With the lightnings of his wrath.
                Sweeping forests from his path;
                Where the cataract stupendous
                Lifteth up her voice tremendous;
                Where uncultivated nature
                Rears her pines of giant stature;
                Sows her jagged hemlocks o’er,
                Thick as bristles on the boar;
                Plants the stately elm and oak
                Firmly in the iron rock;
                Where the crane her course is steering,
                And the eagle is careering,
                Where the gentle deer are bounding,
                And the woodman’s axe resounding;
                Land of mighty lake and river,
                To our hearts thou’rt dear forever!
                Thou art not a land of story;
                Thou art not a land of glory;
                No tradition, tale, nor song,
                To thine ancient woods belong;
                No long line of bards and sages
                Looking to us down the ages;
                No old heroes sweeping by,
                In their warlike panoply;
                Yet heroic deeds are done,
                Where no battle’s lost or won—
                In the cottage, in the woods,
                In the lonely solitudes—
                Pledges of affection given,
                That will be redeemed in heaven.

In 1783, when a regular survey and settlement of Western Canada
commenced, the inhabitants of the Lower Province extended westward, only
a few miles above Coteau du lac, upon the St. Lawrence, at Lake St.
Francis; but not a house was built within several miles of the division
line of the two Provinces, which is above Montreal, about 40 miles, on
the north shore. On the south side there was the Fort of Oswegotchie.
Besides the squatters around the military posts at Carleton Island,
Oswego, and Niagara, there were a few inhabitants at Detroit and
Sandwich, of French origin, where a settlement had sprung up in 1750.

The entire population of all Canada at this time, has been estimated at
120,000, including both the French and English. Although refugees had
squatted here and there upon the frontier, near to the several military
posts, it was not until 1784 that the land, now surveyed into lots, was
actually bestowed upon the Loyalists; yet it was mainly disbanded
soldiers that received their “location tickets” in the year 1784. The
grants were made to the corps under Jessup, upon the St. Lawrence, and
under Rogers upon the Bay; and to Butler’s Rangers at Niagara, at the
same time, or very nearly. During the same season, a settlement was made
upon the Niagara frontier and at Amherstburgh, by the Loyalists who had
found refuge at the contiguous Forts. It is supposed that the number who
became settlers this year, 1784, in Upper Canada was about 10,000. Thus
the Province of Upper Canada was planted; thus the Refugees and
disbanded soldiers found themselves pioneers in the wilds of Canada. Was
it for this they had adhered to the Crown—had taken up arms—had
sacrificed their all?

At the close of hostilities, a proclamation was issued to the Loyalists,
to rendezvous at Sacket’s Harbour, or Carleton Island, Oswego, Niagara,
and Isle aux Mois, the principal military posts upon the frontier.

The tempest of war which had swept across the American Continent,
severing thirteen Colonies from the parent trunk, had roughly disturbed
the elements of society. It resulted that the cessation of hostilities
left a turbulent ocean, which required time to compose itself. There
were Loyalists who would not live under a flag alien to Britain. There
were those whose circumstances would have induced them to abide the evil
that had overtaken them in the dismemberment of the British Empire; but
the fierce passions of the successful rebels rendered a peaceful or safe
existence of the Loyalists among them impossible. Driven they were, away
from their old homes. There were those who had been double minded, or
without choice, ready to go with the successful party. Such wandered
here and there looking for the best opportunity to secure self
aggrandisement. It is of the first two classes we speak.

Forced by cruel circumstances, to become pioneers in a wilderness, there
could not be found in America, a more favourable place whereupon to
settle than along the banks of the St. Lawrence, and around the
irregular shores of Bay Quinté, with its many indentations. They had to
convert the wood-covered land into homes. The trees had to be felled,
and the land prepared for grain, and the fruit of the soil to be
obtained for sustenance within three years, when Government provisions
would be discontinued. It can readily be understood that a water
communication to and from the central points of settlement, as well as
access to fishing waters, was most desirable. The smooth waters of the
upper St. Lawrence and the Bay Quinté constituted a highway of the most
valuable kind, for the only mode of travel was by the canoe, or
flat-bottomed batteau, which was supplied by the Government in limited
numbers; and in winter by rudely constructed hand-sleighs, along the icy
shores.


                          THE FIRST SETTLERS.

The settlers of Upper Canada, up to 1790, may be divided into those who
were forced away from the States by persecution, during and after the
war; the disbanded troops; and a nobler class, who left the States,
being unwilling to live under other than British rule.

To what extent were these pioneers fitted and prepared to enter upon the
truly formidable work of creating homes, and to secure the necessaries
of life for their families. But few of them possessed ought of worldly
goods, nearly all were depending upon the bounty of Government. In the
first place, they were supplied with rations; which consisted of flour,
pork, and a limited quantity of beef, a very little butter, and as
little salt. We find in Rev. Mr. Carroll’s “Past and Present” that
“their mode of serving out rations was rather peculiar.” “Their plan
was, to prevent the appearance of partiality, for the one who acted as
Commissary, either to turn his back, take one of the articles, and say,
‘who will have this?’ or else the provisions were weighed, or assorted,
and put into heaps, when the Commissary went around with a hat, and
received into it something which he would again recognize, as a button,
a knife, &c.; after which he took the articles out of the hat, as they
came uppermost, and placed one on each of the piles in rotation. Every
person then claimed the parcel on which he found the article which he
had thrown into the hat.”

They were also supplied with “clothes for three years, or until they
were able to provide these articles for themselves. They consisted of
coarse cloth for trowsers and Indian blankets for coats, and of shoes;
beside, each received a quantity of seed grain to sow upon the newly
cleared land, with certain implements of husbandry. To each was allotted
an axe, a hoe, and a spade; a plough, and one cow, were allotted to two
families; a whip and cross-cut saw to every fourth family; and, even
boats were provided for their use, and placed at convenient points;” and
“that nothing might seem to be wanting, on the part of the Government,
even portable corn mills, consisting of steel plates, turned by hand
like a coffee-mill, were distributed among the settlers.” We have
learned they were also supplied with nails, hand-saws and other
materials for building. To every five families were given a “set of
tools,” such as chisels and augers, of various sizes, and
drawing-knives; also pick-axes, and sickles for reaping. But,
unfortunately, many of these implements were of inferior quality. The
axe, with which the burden of the work was to be done, was unlike the
light implement now in use, it was but a short-handled ship axe,
intended for quite a different use than chopping trees and clearing
land. Notwithstanding, these various implements, thoughtfully provided
by Government, how greatly must they have come short in meeting the
varied wants of the settler, in his isolated clearing, far separated
from places whereat things necessary could be procured. However, the old
soldier, with his camp experience, was enabled by the aid of his tools,
to make homely and rude articles of domestic use. And, in farming, he
constructed a rough, but serviceable plow, and harrow, and made handles
for his scythe.

Thus provisioned and clothed, and thus armed with implements of
industry, the old soldiers advanced to the attack of a last enemy, the
wild woods. Unlike any previous warfare, was this lifetime struggle.
With location ticket in hand, they filed into the batteaux to ascend the
rapids. A certain number of batteaux joined together, generally about
twenty or twenty-five, formed a brigade, which was placed under the
command of a suitable officer; if not one who had in previous days, led
them against the foe. It is quite impossible to conceive of the emotions
which found a place in the breasts of the old veterans as they journeyed
along wearily from day to day, each one bringing them nearer to the spot
on which the tent was to be pitched for the last time. Eagerly, no
doubt, they scanned the thickly wooded shores as they passed along.
Curiously they examined the small settlement, clustering around
Cataraqui. And, it cannot be doubted, when they entered the waters of
the lovely Bay Quinté, the beauty of the scene created a feeling of joy
and reconciliation to their lot, in being thus cast upon a spot so rich
in natural beauty. These disbanded soldiers, at least each family, had a
canvass tent capable of accommodating, in a certain way, from eight to
ten persons. These were pitched upon the shore, at first in groups,
until each person had learned the situation of his lot, when he
immediately removed thereto. But there were by no means enough tents to
give cover to all, and many had only the friendly trees for protection.
The first steps taken were to clear a small space of trees, and erect a
place of habitation. We have seen what were the implements he had to
work with—the materials he must use to subdue the forest tree standing
before him.

Here, at the very threshold of Upper Canadian history, was initiated the
“institution” of “bees.” “Each with his axe on his shoulder, turned out
to help the other,” in erecting a log shanty. Small and unpretending
indeed, were these humble tenements first built along the shores of the
bay. The size of each depended upon the number to occupy it. None were
larger than twenty by fifteen feet; and an old man tells me that his
father, who was a carpenter, built one fifteen feet long and ten feet
broad, with a slanting roof seven or eight feet in height. The
back-woodsman’s shanty, which may yet be seen in the outskirts of our
country, is the counterpart of those which were first built; but perhaps
many of our readers may never have seen one. “Round logs,” (generally of
basswood,) “roughly notched together at the corners, and piled one above
another, to the height of seven or eight feet, constituted the walls.
Openings for a door, and one small window” (always beside the door)
“designed for four lights of glass, 7 × 9, were cut out,” (Government
had supplied them with a little glass and putty); “the spaces between
the logs were chinked with small splinters, and carefully plastered
outside and inside, with clay for mortar. Smooth straight poles were
laid lengthways of the building, on the walls, to serve as supports of
the roof. This was composed ‘of strips of elm bark, four feet in length,
by two or three feet in width, in layers, overlapping each other, and
fastened to the poles by withs.’” (The roof was some times of black oak,
or swamp oak, bark,) “with a sufficient slope to the back, this formed a
roof which was proof against wind and weather. An ample hearth, made of
flat stones, was then laid out, and a fire back of field stone or small
boulders, rudely built, was carried up as high as the walls. Above this
the chimney was formed of round poles, notched together and plastered
with mud. The floor was of the same materials as the walls, only that
the logs were split in two, and flattened so as to make a tolerably even
surface. As no boards were to be had to make a door, until they could be
sawn out by the whip saw, a blanket suspended from the inside for some
time took its place. By and by four little pains of glass, were stuck
into a rough sash, and then the shanty was complete.”—(_Croil._)

Furniture for the house was made by the old soldier; this was generally
of the roughest kind. They had the fashion of exchanging work, as well
as of having bees. Some of them had been mechanics in other days. A
carpenter was a valuable acquisition, and while others would assist him
to do his heavy work, he would in return do those little nicer jobs by
which the household comforts would be increased. No chests of drawers
were required; benches were made of split basswood, upon which to sit,
and tables were manufactured in the same style. The bedstead was
constructed at the end of the cabin, by taking poles of suitable size
and inserting the ends between the logs which formed the walls on either
side. These would be placed, before the cracks were filled in and
plastered.


                           CLEARING THE LAND.

A log hut constructed, wherein to live; and such plain rough articles of
furniture as were really necessary provided, the next thing was to clear
the land, thickly covered with large trees and tangled brush. Many a
swing of the unhandy axe had to be made ere the trees could be felled,
and disposed of; and the ground made ready for the grain or root.

A few years later, and the settler would, in the dry summer season, fire
the woods, so as to kill the trees. By the next year they would have
become dry, so that by setting fire again they would burn down. In this
way much labor was saved. But sometimes the fire would prove
unmanageable and threaten to destroy the little house and log barn, as
well as crops. Another mode of destroying the large trees, was to girdle
them—that is, to cut through the bark all around the tree, whereby it
was killed, so that the following year it would likewise burn down.

A portion of the disbanded troops, as well as other loyalists, had been
bred to agricultural pursuits; and some of them, at least those who had
not been very long in arms, could the more readily adapt themselves to
their new circumstances, and resume their early occupation. The axe of
the woodsman was soon swung as vigorously along the shores of the well
wooded river and bay, as it had been in the forests years before, in the
backwoods of New England.

It is no ordinary undertaking for one to enter the primeval forest, to
cut down the tough grained trees, whose boughs have long met the first
beams of the rising sun, and swayed in the tempest wind; to clear away
the thick underbrush, which impedes the step at every turn; to clear out
a tangled cedar swamp, no matter how hardy may be the axeman—how well
accustomed to the use of the implement. With the best mode of
proceeding, with an axe of excellent make, and keen edge; and, combined
with which, let every other circumstance be favorable; yet, it requires
a determined will, an iron frame and supple muscle, to undertake and
carry out the successful clearing of a farm. But, the refugees and
disbanded soldiers, who formed the pioneers of Upper Canada, enjoyed not
even ordinary advantages. Many of the old soldiers had not the slightest
knowledge of the duties of pioneer life, while others had but an
imperfect idea. Some scarcely knew how to fell a tree. Hardy and
determined they were; but they possessed not the implements requisite to
clear off the solid trees. We have seen that the axe furnished by
government was large and clumsy, and could be swung only with difficulty
and great labor, being nothing more than the ship axe then in use. Slow
and wearisome indeed, must have been the progress made by the
unaccustomed woodsman in the work of clearing, and of preparing the logs
for his hut, while he had, as on-lookers, too often a feeble wife and
hungry children.

The ordinary course of clearing land is pretty well known. At the
present day the autumn and winter is the usual time, when the wood is
cut in sleigh lengths for home use, or made into cord wood for the
market. The brush is piled up into huge heaps, and in the following
season, when sufficiently dry, is burned up. Now, wood, except in the
remote parts, is very valuable, and for those who can part with it, it
brings a good income. But then, when the land was everywhere covered
with wood, the only thought was how to get rid of it. The great green
trees, after being cut down, had to lie until they had dried, or be cut
into pieces and removed. Time was necessary for the first. To accomplish
the second, involved labor with the unwieldy axe; and there were at
first, no beast of burden to haul the heavy logs. The arm of the pioneer
was the only motor power, and the trees had to be cut in short lengths,
that they might be carried. To overcome the more heavy work connected
with this, the settlers would have logging bees from place to place, and
by united strength subdue the otherwise obstinate forces. Mainly, the
trees were burned; the limbs and smaller portion first, and subsequently
the large trunk. The fire would consume all that was flammable, leaving
great black logs all over the ground. Then came “logging,” that is,
piling these black and half burned pieces into heaps, where, after a
longer time of drying, they might be consumed. A second, perhaps a third
time the pieces would have to be collected into “log heaps,” until
finally burned to ashes. It was by such means, that slowly the forest
along the St. Lawrence, and surrounding the Bay Quinté, as well in the
adjacent townships melted away before the daily work of the aggressive
settler. Although deprived of all those comforts, which most of them had
enjoyed in early life in the Hudson, and Mohawk valleys, and fruitful
fields of Pennsylvania, they toiled on determined to conquer—to make new
homes; and, for their children at least, to secure comforts. They rose
early, and toiled on all day, whether long or short, until night cast
its solemn pall over their rude quiet homes. The small clearing of a few
acres gradually widened, the sound of the axe was heard ringing all the
day, and the crash of the falling tree sent the startled wild beast to
the deeper recesses of the wild wood. The toilers were not all from the
same social rank, but now in the main, all found a common level; the
land allotted to the half pay officers was as thickly covered with wood.
A few possessed limited means, and were able to engage a help, to do
some of the work, but in a short time it was the same with all; men of
education, and who held high positions, rightly held the belief that it
was an honor to be a refugee farmer.

At the close of the war a considerable number of the refugees found
safety in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. But a certain number, not
finding such prospects as they had hoped, resolved to try Canada.
Consequently, for five or six years after the peace, this class
continued slowly to flow, to swell the number of inhabitants of Upper
Canada. Some of them tarried, or remained in Lower Canada; but the
majority ascended the Bay Quinté, and settled the new townships at the
head of the bay; not a few would remain for a year or two in the
townships already settled, working farms on shares, or living out, until
the future home was selected. A good many of the first settlers in the
sixth, seventh, and eight townships, had previously lived for a while in
the fourth township.

The advance of the settlements was along the bay, from Kingston township
and Ernest town, westward along both sides. When the settlers in the
first, second, third and fourth townships, had, to a certain extent
overcome the pioneers’ first difficulties, those in the sixth, seventh,
eight and ninth, were yet undergoing mostly all the same hardships and
trials. Far removed from Kingston, they could, with difficulty, procure
necessities, and consequently endured greater privation, and experienced
severer hardships; but in time these settlers also overcome, and ended
their days in comparative comfort.

Gen. Simcoe, after he became the first Governor of Upper Canada in 1792,
held the opinion that there remained in the States a large number of
Loyalists, and conceived the idea of affording them an inducement to
again come under British rule, as they were British in heart. He, by
proclamation, invited them to free grants of the rich land of Upper
Canada, in the following words:

“A PROCLAMATION, to such as are desirous to settle on lands of the
Crown, in the Province of UPPER CANADA, BY HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN GRAVES
SIMCOE, ESQUIRE, Lieutenant-Governor and Commander-in-Chief of the said
Province, and Colonel commanding His Majesty’s Forces, &c., &c. Be it
known to all concerned that His Majesty, both by his royal commission
and instructions to the Governor, and in his absence, to the
Lieutenant-Governor of the said Province of Upper Canada, gives
authority or command to grant the lands of the Crown in the same by
patent under the great seal thereof. I do accordingly make known the
terms of grant and settlement to be:” &c.

Without introducing the somewhat lengthy terms given under the heads, it
is sufficient to say that they were most liberal; in the meanwhile
reserving what was necessary to maintain the rights previously granted
to Loyalist settlers. No lot was to be granted of more than 200 acres,
except such as the Governor might otherwise desire, but no one was to
receive a quantity exceeding 1000 acres. Every one had to make it appear
that he, or she was in a condition to cultivate and improve the land,
and “beside taking the usual oaths, subscribe a declaration, viz: I, A.
B. do promise and declare that I will maintain and defend to the utmost
of my power, the authority of the king in his parliament as the supreme
legislature of this province.” These grants were free excepting the fees
of office, “in passing the patent and recording the same.” The
proclamation was dated 7th February, 1792, Thomas Talbot, acting
Secretary.

It was obligatory on settlers to clear five acres of land, to build a
house, and to open a road across the front of his land, a quarter of a
mile.

Whether Simcoe was right in his opinion, that many loyalists remained in
the States, ready to avail themselves of a judicious opportunity of
becoming citizens of British territory, may be questioned; that there
were some, cannot be doubted. Not a few responded to his invitation, and
entered the new province. The recall of Simcoe led to the abrogation of
the terms specified in the aforementioned proclamation, and some of the
new comers were doomed to disappointment. As may naturally be supposed,
these later comers were not altogether regarded with favor by the first
settlers, who now regarded themselves as lords of the soil. The old
staunch loyalists were disposed to look upon them as Yankees, who came
only to get the land. And it seems that such was often the case. We have
the impartial statement of Rochefoucault, that there were some who
“falsely profess an attachment to the British monarch, and curse the
Government of the Union for the mere purpose of getting possession of
lands.” Even at this early day, they set about taking possession of
Canada! Indeed, it was a cause of grievance in Walford township,
Johnstown district, that persons from the States entered the country,
petitioned for land, took the necessary oaths—perjured themselves, and
having obtained possession of the land resold it, pocketed the money,
and left to build up the glorious Union.

But, while so much has to be said of some Americans, who took land in
Canada for mercenary motives, and committed fraud, it is pleasing to say
likewise, that a large number of settlers from the States, who came in
between 1794 and 1812, became worthy and loyal subjects of the Crown.
How far all of them were at first Britons in heart, may be questioned.
But the fact that the first settlers regarded them with doubtful eye,
and often charged them with being Yankees, led many, for very
peace-sake, to display their loyalty. But at last, when the war of 1812
broke out, they exhibited unmistakeable attachment to the British Crown.
To their honor be it said, they were as active in defending their homes
as any class. The number who deserted from Canada, was quite
insignificant. As would be expected, the war of 1812 arrested the stream
of emigration from the States. The Government of Canada thereafter
discountenanced it, and instead, made some efforts to draw British
European emigrants.




                              DIVISION IV.
                    THE FIRST YEARS OF UPPER CANADA.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.

  CONTENTS—Father Picquet—Provision of Forts in Upper Canada just
    before Conquest—Frontenac—Milk—Brandy—Toronto—The Several Forts—
    Detroit—British Garrisons—Grasping Rebels—Efforts to Starve out
    Loyalists in Canada—Worse Treated than the Acadians—Efforts to
    Secure Fur Trade—The Frontier Forts—Americans Conduct to Indians—
    Result—Conduct of British Government—Rations for Three Years—
    Grinding by Hand—“Hominy Blocks”—“Plumping Mill”—The Women—Soldier
    Farmers—The Hessians—Suffering—The “Scarce Year”—Charge against
    the Commissariat Officers—Famine—Cry for Bread—Instances of
    Suffering—Starving Children—No Salt—Fish—Game—Eating Young Grain—
    Begging Bran—A Common Sorrow—Providential Escapes—Eating Buds and
    Leaves—Deaths—Primitive Fishing—Catching Salmon—Going 125 miles to
    mill—Disconsolate Families—1789—Partial Relief—First Beef
    Slaughtered in Upper Canada—First Log Barn—A Bee, what they Ate
    and Drank—Tea Introduced—Statements of Sheriff Sherwood—Roger
    Bates—John Parrott—Col. Clark—Squirrelly Swimming Niagara—Maple
    Sugar—How it was made—Women assisting—Made Dishes of Food—Pumpkin
    Loaf—Extract from Rochefoucault—1795—Quality of Grain Raised—
    Quinté Bay—Cultivation—Corn Exported—The Grain Dealers—Price of
    Flour—Pork—Profits of the Merchants.


                        MODE OF PROCURING FOOD.

We have seen with what spirit and determination the loyalists engaged in
the duties pertaining to pioneer life; how they became domiciled in the
wilderness and adapted themselves to their new and trying situation.
Thus, was laid the foundation of the Province of Upper Canada, now
Ontario. Upon this foundation was to be erected the superstructure. Let
us proceed to examine the circumstances of the first years of Upper
Canadian life. And first with respect to _food_.

Father Picquet visited the Bay and Lake Ontario, from _La Présentation_—
Ogdensburgh, the year of the Conquest. He speaks of his visit to Fort
Frontenac, and remarks, “The bread and milk there, were bad; they had
not even brandy there to staunch a wound.” By which we learn that the
French garrison had a cow, although she gave indifferent milk; and that
even brandy for medicinal purposes could not be had. The missionary
proceeded to Fort Toronto which was situated upon Lake Simcoe, no doubt
ascending by the bay Quinté and Trent. Here he found “good bread and
good wine” and “everything requisite for trade” with the Indians. The
cession of Canada to the British by the French had been followed by a
withdrawal of troops from many of the forts, around which had clustered
a few hamlets, specks of civilization in a vast wilderness, and in most
places things had lapsed into their primal state. And, when rebellion
broke out in the Colonies of Britain, there were but a few posts whereat
were stationed any soldiers, or where clustered the white settlers.
There were a few French living at Detroit, and at Michilmicinac, and to
the north-east of Lake Huron. We have seen that during the war, refugees
found safety at the several military posts. The military rations were
served out to these loyal men in the same proportion as to the soldiers,
and when the war closed the garrisons continued to dispense the
necessaries of life to the settlers upon the north shores of the lake,
and St. Lawrence.

For ten years, after the terms of peace was signed between England and
the Independent States, the forts of Oswego, Niagara, Detroit, and
Michilmicinac, with the garrison on Carleton Island, remained in the
possession of the British troops. To this the grasping Americans warmly
took exceptions. Although it would have been next to impossible to
supply these places with provisions for troops of their own, they
nevertheless wished to dispossess the Royal troops; we learn that the
object was to starve out the refugees who had found shelter upon the
borders, and who would be depending for years to these forts, for the
very necessaries of life. In this, their cruelty exceeded that practised
towards the Acadians. Having driven away the loyalists and dispossessed
them at home, they would have followed them to their new wilderness
home, there to cut off their supplies and leave them to perish. They
wished to obtain possession of the forts not only to glut their vengeful
feeling against the tories, but to secure the traffic carried on with
the Indians. Dreams of aggrandizement floated through their avaricious
minds. It was regarded an excellent stroke of policy to turn the current
of the fur trade from the St. Lawrence, and starve out by degrees the
refugees, and the French who would have none of _their_ “Liberty.” Hence
their desire to get possession of the frontier forts. But it was
destined that this valuable traffic should never come into the hands of
the United States; or rather it should be said, the Americans had
determined to pursue a course which would completely alienate the Indian
tribes from them. Under such circumstances no possession of the forts
could have turned the trade from its natural channel by the St.
Lawrence, across the continent to New York.

The British Government never desired to stint the loyal refugees and the
disbanded soldiers. At the close of hostilities it was determined that
both alike, with their families, should receive while traveling, and for
a period of three years, such rations as are allowed daily to the
private soldier. And the Commissariat Department was instructed to make
the necessary provision to have transported to each township by batteau,
what should be requisite. Dépôts were established, in addition to the
different garrisons, in each township, to which some prominent and
trusted refugee of their number, generally a half pay officer, was
appointed as Commissary, and at which ample provisions of the specified
kind, as well as certain implements, it was ordered should be stored, to
be dealt out with regularity and fairness to each family, according to
the number of children. In some of the townships two batteaux were
provided to bring the provisions from Montreal. Besides the food thus
obtained, they were often enabled to freely supply themselves with game
of different kinds. The greatest trouble of all was to get the grain
supplied to them, ground into flour. According to Carroll and Croil, the
townships upon the St. Lawrence, were supplied with steel mills for
grinding grain; but no word of such indifferent convenience for the
settlers of the Bay, has by us been received; the settlers had to get
the grain crushed as best they could. Various modes were adopted to do
this; but in all cases the work was done by hand. Sometimes the grain
was crushed with an axe upon a flat stone. Many prepared a wooden
mortar, by cutting a block, of suitable length, about four feet, out of
the trunk of a large tree, oak or maple. Sometimes it was the stump of a
tree. In this a cavity was formed, generally by heating a piece of iron,
and placing it upon the end. In some quarters, a cannon ball from the
Garrison was used. By placing this, red hot, upon the wood, a hollow of
sufficient depth could be made. These mortars, sometimes called “Hominy
Blocks” and sometimes “Plumping Mill,” varied in size; sometimes holding
only a few quarts, sometimes a bushel, or even more. The pestle or
pounder, was made of the hardest wood, six or eight feet long, and eight
inches in diameter at the bottom end; the top sufficiently small to be
spanned by the hand. The pestle was sometimes called the stamper; and
the stump or block, with the pestle, was called the stump-mortar.
Generally, it was by the unaided hand that the grinding was done; but
after a time a sweep pole was arranged, similar to a well pole, and a
hard weighty substance being attached to the pole, much less strength
was required to crush the grain; at the same time a larger quantity
could be at once done. The work was generally done by two men. The grain
thus pounded was generally Indian Corn, and occasionally wild rice. To
crush wheat required much more labor, and a small mortar. The bran was
separated from the flour by a horse-hair sieve, one of which generally
served a whole community, as they were possessed only by a few. This
rude method continued for many years, especially in those townships
remote from the flouring mills. Frequently, an individual would possess
a large mortar, that would be used by a whole neighborhood. Mr. Diamond,
of Belleville, a native of Fredericksburg, remembers when a boy, to have
accompanied his father “to mill.” The mill was one of these larger
mortars which would contain a bushel of grain when being ground, but
which would hold, even measure, two bushels. The grain was crushed by a
sweep with a weight attached, of ten or twelve pounds.

But grinding grain in this rude manner, was very frequently done by the
women; and was but one of the difficulties attending the production of
meal. It was a hard task to prepare for use the corn supplied by
Government; but when that supply was cut off, and the settler had but
his own raising, it became much worse. Elsewhere we have seen the
difficult process by which seed was planted, and the fruit of the soil
reaped, and then thrashed. It had been thought by the Government that
three years would suffice to give the settler ample time to reap
sufficient grain for their sustenance. In most cases, industry and a
right application of labor, enabled the farmer to accomplish what was
expected of him. But the habits which some of the soldiers had acquired
during the war, were highly detrimental to regular industry. When the
three years’ supplies were discontinued, many found themselves
unprepared to meet the requirements of their new condition. It is said
that some of them entertained the belief that “Old George,” as they
familiarly called the King, would continue to feed them, for an
indefinite period of time, upon the bread of idleness. The Hessians, who
had settled in the fifth township, who had no idea of pioneer life, were
great sufferers, and it is stated that some actually died of starvation.
Again, there was a considerable class who had not had time to prepare
the land, and reap the fruit of the soil, prior to the supplies being
stopped; or who could not procure seed grain. These were likewise placed
in the most distressing circumstances. The fearful suffering experienced
in consequence will be mentioned under the head of the “Scarce Year.”

Notwithstanding, that Government supplied the settlers with provisions
for three years, and also with spring wheat, peas, corn, and potatoes
for seed, and took steps to furnish them, first with one mill at
Kingston, and then a second one at Napanee, at the expiration of the
three years, there were many unprepared. The mills were almost deserted,
and the hearts of the people were faint because there was no grain to
grind, and famine began to rest upon the struggling settlers, especially
along the Bay Quinté. It has already been said that with some of the
disbanded soldiers, there was some degree of negligence, or, a want of
due exertion to obtain home-raised grain before the Government supplies
were discontinued; also, that there was a certain number, who came with
their families two or three years after the first settlement, who were
not entitled to get Government rations, and who had not had time to
clear the land. Many of these brought provisions with them, but the long
distances traveled by them through a wilderness, allowed no large
quantity of stores to be transported. And within a few months, or a year
their store of food was exhausted. But the greatest evil of all it is
averred, was the failure on the part of the Commissary Department to
bring up from Lower Canada, the supplies which were required by those
yet in the service, and who rightly looked to that source for the bread
of life. And, it has been alleged that some who had charge of military
stores forgot this public duty, in their anxiety to secure abundant
supplies for their own families. And a spirit of cupidity has been laid
to the charge of one or two for retaining for private use the bread for
which so many were famishing. At this remote period it is impossible to
arrive at positive conclusions relative to the matter. We can only
examine the circumstances, and judge whether such a thing was likely. Of
course the Commissary officers, whose duty it had been to distribute
food in the several townships, would not be likely to disburse with a
hand so liberal, that they should themselves become destitute; yet the
fact that such had food, while others had none, would naturally create
an erroneous impression. But the famine was not limited to the Bay
region; although, being remote from Montreal, it was here the distress
was most grievously felt. Throughout Lower Canada the pinch of famine
was keenly experienced. Even there, in places, corn-meal was meted out
by the spoonful, wheat flour was unknown, while millet seed was ground
for a substitute. Still more, the opinion is given, that the accusation
against certain parties is contrary to the spirit which pervaded the
refugee settlers at that time. That they had laid up stores, and looked
indifferently upon the general suffering, is contrary to the known
character of the parties accused. In after days, as at the present time,
there were aroused petty jealousies, as one individual exceeded another
in prosperity. Family jars sometimes rise to feuds, and false surmises
grow into untruthful legends.

The period of famine is even yet remembered by a few, whose memory
reaches back to the immediately succeeding years, and the descendants of
the sufferers, speak of that time with peculiar feelings, imbibed from
their parents; and many are the touching stories even yet related of
this sad first page in the history of Upper Canada, when from Lower
Canada to the outskirts of the settlement was heard the cry for _bread!
bread! bread!_

The year of the famine is spoken of sometimes as the “scarce year,”
sometimes as the “hungry year,” or the “hard summer.” The extreme
distress seems to have commenced in the year 1787. With some, it lasted
a part of a year, with others a year, and with others upwards of a year.
The height of the distress was during the spring and early summer of
1788. But plenty to all, did not come till the summer of 1789. The
writer has in his possession accounts of many instances of extreme
suffering, during the famine, and for years after, through the ten
townships. A few will here be given, as briefly as may be possible.

One, who settled in the Sixth Township, (who was subsequently a Member
of Parliament for twenty years,) with wife and children, endured great
suffering. Their flour being exhausted he sent money to Quebec for some
more flour, but his money was sent back; there was none to be had. The
wife tried as an experiment to make bread out of some wheat bran, which
was bought at a dollar a bushel. She failed to make bread, but it was
eaten as a stir-about. Upon this, with Indian Cabbage, or “Cale,” “a
plant with a large leaf,” also wild potatoes or ground-nuts, the family
lived for many a week. In the spring they procured some potatoes to
plant, but the potatoe eye alone was planted, the other portion being
reserved for food. One of the daughters, in her extreme hunger digged up
for days, some of the potatoe rind and ate it. One day, her father
caught her at it, and seized hold of her arm to punish her, for
forgetting the requirements of the future, but he found her arms so
emaciated that his heart melted in pity for the starving child. Others
used to eat a plant called butternut, and another pig-weed. Children
would steal out at night with stolen potatoes, and roast them at the
burning log heap, and consider them a great treat. One individual has
left the record that she used to allay the pangs of hunger by eating a
little salt. But the majority of the settlers had no salt, and game and
fish, when it could be caught, was eaten without that condiment. Even at
a later date, salt was a scarce and dear article as the following will
show: “Sydney, 20th November, 1792—Received from Mr. John Ferguson, one
barrel of salt, for which I am to pay nine dollars.” (Signed), John
German. Often when fish or game was caught, it was forthwith roasted,
without waiting to go home to have it dressed. As spring advanced, and
the buds of the trees began to swell, they were gathered and eaten.
Roots were digged out of the ground; the bark of certain trees were
stripped off and consumed as food. One family lived for a fortnight on
beech leaves. Everything that was supposed to be capable of alleviating
the pangs of hunger, whether it yielded nutriment or not, was
unhesitatingly used; and in the fifth township some were killed by
eating poisonous roots. Beef bones were, in one neighbourhood, not only
boiled again and again, but actually carried from house to house, to
give a little taste to boiled bran, until there remained no taste in the
boiling water. In the fourth township, upon the sunny side of a hill,
was an early field of grain, and to this they came, from far and near,
to eat the milk-like heads of grain, so soon as they had sufficiently
grown, which were boiled and eaten. The daughter of the man who owned
the field, and gladly gave to all, still remains with us; then, she was
in the freshness of girlhood; now, she is in the autumn of a green old
age, nearly a hundred. She remembers to have seen them cutting the young
succulent grain, to use her own words “as thick as stumps.” This young
grain was a common dish, all along the Bay, until it became ripe. One
family lived several months solely on boiled oats. One day, a man came
to the door of a house in Adolphustown, with a bag, and a piece of
“calamink,” to exchange for flour. But the flour was low, and the future
doubtful, and none could be spared. The man turned away with tears of
anguish rolling down his face. The kind woman gave him a few pounds of
flour; he begged to be allowed to add some bran lying on the floor,
which was permitted, and he went his way.

There were, scattered through the settlements, a few who never were
entirely out of provisions, but who had procured some from Lower Canada,
or Oswego. Many of these, even at the risk of future want, would give
away, day after day, to those who came to their door, often a long
distance, seeking for the very bread of life. A piece of bread was often
the only thing to give; but thus, many a life was saved. These poor
unfortunates, would offer various articles in exchange for flour or
food. Even their lands—all they had, were offered for a few pounds of
flour. But, with a few execrable exceptions, the last loaf was divided;
and when flour was sold, it was at a fair valuation. A common sorrow
knit them together in fraternal relationship. The names of some are
handed down, who employed others to work all day for their board, and
would give nothing for their famishing ones at home. One of them also,
sold eight bushels of potatoes for a valuable cow. In some instances,
families living remotely, forsook their houses and sought for food at
Kingston. One family in Thurlow, set out for Kingston, following the bay
shore on foot. Their only food was bran, which, being mixed with water,
was cooked by the way, by heating flat stones and baking thereupon. As
before stated, the settlers of the fifth township suffered fearfully,
and it is stated, that some of them actually died. Mr. Parrott says,
that he has heard it stated that persons starved to death. And the
extraordinary statement is found in the M.S. of the late Mr. Merritt,
that one old couple, too old to help themselves, and left alone, were
preserved providentially from starvation, by pigeons, which would
occasionally come and allow themselves to be caught. The fact is stated
by others, that pigeons were at times, during the first years of
settling, very plentiful, and were always exceedingly tame. Another
person remarks, that although there was generally plenty of pigeons,
wild fowl, fish and partridge, yet, they seemed to keep away when most
wanted.

One family, four in number, subsisted on the small quantity of milk
given by a young cow, with leeks, buds of trees, and often leaves were
added to the milk. A barrel of bran served a good purpose for baking a
kind of cake, which made a change on special occasions. At one time,
Reed, of Thurlow, offered a three year old horse for 50 lbs of flour.
This family would, at one time actually have starved to death, had not a
deer been miraculously shot. They often carried grain, a little, it is
true, to the Napanee mills, following the river, and bay shores. And
when they had no grain, articles of domestic use were taken to exchange
for flour and meal. A woman used to carry a bushel and a half of wheat
ten miles to the Napanee mills, and then carry the flour back.

Ex-Sheriff Ruttan says of his father’s family, with whom his uncle
lived, “We had the luxury of a cow which the family brought with them,
and had it not been for this domestic boon, all would have perished in
the year of scarcity. The crops had failed the year before, and the
winter that followed, was most inclement and severe. The snow was
unusually deep, so that the deer became an easy prey to their rapacious
enemies, the wolves, who fattened on their destruction, whilst men were
perishing for want. Five individuals, in different places, were found
dead, and one poor woman also, with a live infant at her breast; which
was cared for and protected.” “Two negroes were sent to Albany for corn,
who brought four bushels. This, with the milk of the cow dealt out day
by day in limited quantity, kept them alive till harvest.” “The
soldiers’ rations were reduced to one biscuit a day.” Referring to other
days after the famine he says: “Fish was plentiful”—the “fishing tackle
was on a primitive plan; something similar to the Indians, who fixed the
bait on part of the back bone of the pike, which would catch these finny
tribe quite as expeditiously as the best Limerick hook; but our supply
was from spearing by torchlight, which has been practiced by the Indian
from time immemorial; from whom we obtained a vast deal of practical
knowledge.”

Roger Bates, near Cobourg, speaking of the first years of Upper Canada,
says that his grandfather’s family, living in Prince Edward for a while,
“adopted many ingenious contrivances of the Indians for procuring food.
Not the least simple and handy was a crotched pole, with which they
secured salmon in any quantity, the creeks being full of them.” He
removed to the township of Clarke, where he was the first white settler,
and for six months saw no white person. “For a long time he had to go to
Kingston, 125 miles, with his wheat to be ground. They had no other
conveyance than batteaux; the journey would sometimes occupy five or six
weeks. Of an evening they put in at some creek, and obtained their
salmon with ease, using a forked stick, which passed over the fish’s
back and held it fast. Sometimes they were so long gone for grist, in
consequence of bad weather, that the women would collect together and
have a good cry, thinking the batteaux had foundered. If their food ran
short, they had a dog that would, when told, hunt a deer and drive it
into the water, so that the young boys could shoot it.”

The summer of 1789 brought relief to most of the settlers,—the heaviest
of the weight of woe was removed. But, for nearly a decade, they enjoyed
but few comforts, and were often without the necessaries of life. The
days of the toiling pioneers were numbering up rapidly, yet the wants of
all were not relieved. Those whose industry had enabled them to sow a
quantity of grain reaped a goodly reward. The soil was very fruitful,
and subsequently for two and three years, repeated crops were raised
from a single sowing. But flour alone, although necessary to sustain
life, could hardly satisfy the cravings of hunger with those who had
been accustomed to a different mode of living. It was a long way to
Montreal or Albany, from which to transport by hand, everything
required, even when it could be had, and the settler had something to
exchange for such articles; beside the journey of several weeks. Game,
occasionally to be had, was not available at all seasons, nor at all
times; although running wild, ammunition was scarce, and some had none.
We have stated that Government gave to every five families a musket and
forty-eight rounds of ammunition, with some powder and shot, also some
twine to make fishing nets. Beef, mutton, &c., were unknown for many a
day. Strangely enough, a circumstantial account of the first beef
slaughtered along the Bay, probably in Upper Canada, is supplied by one
who, now in her 90th year, bears a distinct recollection of the event.
It was at Adolphustown. A few settlers had imported oxen, to use in
clearing the land. One of a yoke, was killed by the falling of a tree.
The remaining animal, now useless, was purchased by a farmer upon the
Front, who converted it into beef. With the hospitality characteristic
of the times, the neighbors were invited to a grand entertainment; and
the neighborhood, be it remembered, extended for thirty or forty miles.
A treat it was, this taste of an article of diet, long unknown.

The same person tells of the occasion when the first log barn was raised
in Adolphustown, it was during the scarce period. The “bee” which was
called, had to be entertained, in some way. But there were no
provisions. The old lady, then a girl, saw her mother for weeks previous
carefully putting away the eggs, which a few hens had contributed to
their comfort; upon the morning of the barn raising, they were brought
forth and found to amount to a pailful, well heaped. The most of the
better-to-do settlers always had rum, which was a far different article
from that sold now-a-days. With rum and eggs well beaten, and mixed with
all the milk that could be kept sweet from the last few milkings, this,
which was both food and drink was distributed to the members of the bee,
during the time of raising the barn.

Tea, now considered an indispensable luxury by every family, was quite
beyond the reach of all, for a long time; because of its scarcity and
high price. Persons are yet living who remember when tea was first
brought into family use. Various substitutes for tea were used, among
these were hemlock and sassafras; there was also a plant gathered called
by them the tea plant.

Sheriff Sherwood, in his most valuable memoirs, specially prepared for
the writer, remarks, “Many incidents and occurrences took place during
the early settlement which would, perhaps, at a future day be thought
incredible. I recollect seeing pigeons flying in such numbers that they
almost darkened the sky, and so low often as to be knocked down with
poles; I saw, where a near neighbor killed thirty at one shot; I almost
saw the shot, and saw the pigeons after they were shot.” Ducks were so
thick that when rising from a marsh “they made a noise like the roar of
heavy thunder.” “While many difficulties were encountered, yet we
realized many advantages, we were always supplied with venison,
partridge, and pigeon, and fish in abundance, no taxes to pay and plenty
of wood at our doors. Although deprived of many kinds of fruit, we had
the natural production of the country, strawberries, raspberries,
gooseberries, blackberries, and lots of red plums, and cranberries in
the various marshes all about the country, and I can assure you that
pumpkin and cranberries make an excellent substitute for apple pie.” Mr.
Sherwood refers to their dog “Tipler,” which was invaluable, in various
ways, in assisting to procure the food. He also speaks of “Providential”
assistance. “After the first year we raised wheat and Indian corn
sufficient for the year’s supply for the family; but then we had no
grist mill to grind it; we made out to get on with the Indian corn very
well by pounding it in the mortar, and made what we called samp, which
made coarse bread, and what the Dutch called sup-pawn; but let me tell
you how we made our mortar. We cut a log off a large tree, say two-and-a
half feet through and about six feet long, which we planted firm in the
ground, about four feet deep, then carefully burnt the centre of the top
and scraped it out clean, which gave us a large mortar. We generally
selected an iron-wood tree, from six to eight inches through, took the
bark off clean, made the handle to it of suitable length, this was our
pestle; and many a time have I pounded with it till the sweat ran down
merrily. But this pounding would not do for the wheat, and the
Government seeing the difficulty, built a mill back of Kingston, where
the inhabitants, for fifteen miles below Brockville had to get their
grinding done. In our neighborhood they got on very well in summer, by
joining two wooden canoes together. Three persons would unite, to carry
each a grist in their canoes, and would perform the journey in about a
week. But in winter this could not be done. After a few years, however,
when some had obtained horses, then a kind Providence furnished a road
on the ice for some years until a road was made passable for sleighs by
land. And it has not been practicable, indeed I may say possible, for
horses with loaded sleighs to go on the ice from Brockville to Kingston,
fifty years past.”

Roger Bates says that “the woods were filled with deer, bears, wolves,
martins, squirrels, and rabbits.” No doubt, at first, before fire-arms
were feared by them, they were plentiful and very tame. Even wild geese,
it would seem, were often easily shot. But powder and shot were
expensive, and unless good execution could be made, the charge was
reserved. Mr. Sherwood gives a trustworthy account of the shooting of
thirty pigeons at one shot; and another account is furnished, of Jacob
Parliament, of Sophiasburgh, who killed and wounded at a single shot,
four wild geese and five ducks. These wild fowl not only afforded
luxurious and nutritious diet, but their feathers were saved, and in
time pillows and even beds were thus made. Mr. John Parrott, of Ernest
Town, descendant of Col. Jas. Parrott, says, “there were bears, wolves,
and deer in great abundance, and there were lynx, wild cats, beavers and
foxes in every directions; also martins, minks and weasels beyond
calculation.” In this connection, we may record a fact related by Col.
Clark, respecting the migration of squirrels in the early part of the
present century across the Niagara river, from the States. He says, “an
immense immigration of squirrels took place, and so numerous were they
that the people stood with sticks to destroy them, as they landed on the
British shore, which by many was considered a breach of good faith on
the part of John Bull, who is always ready to grant an asylum to
fugitives of whatever nation they may belong to.”


                              MAPLE SUGAR.

                  “Soon the blue-birds and the bees
                    O’er the stubble will be winging;
                  So ‘tis time to tap the trees
                    And to set the axe a-ringing;

                  Time to set the hut to rights,
                    Where the girls and boys together
                  Tend the furnace fire o’nights
                    In the rough and rainy weather;

                  Time to hew and shape the trough,
                    And to punch the spile so hollow.
                  For the snow is thawing off
                    And the sugar-thaw must follow.

                  Oh, the gladdest time of year
                    Is the merry sugar-making,
                  When the swallows first appear
                    And the sleepy buds are waking!”

In the great wilderness were to be had, a few comforts and luxuries.
Sugar is not only a luxury, but is really a necessary article of food.
The properties of the sap of the maple was understood by the Indians,
and the French soon availed themselves of the means of making sugar. To
the present day, the French Canadians make it in considerable
quantities. At first, the settlers of Upper Canada did not generally
engage in making it; but, after a time a larger number did. The maple,
the monarch of the Canadian forest, whose leaf is the emblem of our
country, was a kind benefactor. In the spring, in the first days of
genial sunshine, active operations for sugar making were commenced.
Through the deep snow, the farmer and his sons would trudge, from tree
to tree, to tap them upon their sunny side. The “spile” would be
inserted to conduct the precious fluid into the trough of bass-wood,
which had been fashioned during the long winter evenings. A boiling
place would be arranged, with a long pole for a crane, upon which would
be strung the largest kettles that could be procured. At night, the sap
would be gathered from the troughs, a toilsome job, and put into
barrels. In the morning a curling smoke would rise from amidst the thick
woods, and the dry wood would crackle cheerily under the row of kettles,
all the sunny spring day; and night would show a rich dark syrup,
collected in one smaller kettle, for the more careful work of being
converted into sugar. Frequently the fire would be attended by the
women; and the men would come to gather the sap in the evening. In this
way many a family would be provided with abundant sugar, at all events
it had to serve them for the year, as they felt unable to purchase from
the merchant. In another place, we have related how a few made a
considerable quantity of sugar and sold it all, to pay for a farm, doing
without themselves.

The absence of various articles of food, led the thoughtful housewife to
invent new made dishes. The nature of these would depend in part upon
the articles of food most abundant, and upon the habits peculiar to
their ancestry, whether English, Dutch or some other. The great desire
was, to make a common article as tasty as possible. And at harvest time,
as well as at bees, the faithful wife would endeavour to prepare
something extra to regale the tired ones. There was, for instance, the
“pumpkin loaf,” a common dish. It consisted of pumpkin and corn meal
made into a small loaf, and eaten with butter. Another dish which seems
to have been derived from the Dutch, was Pot Pie, which was always, and
is even yet in many places, made to feed the hands at bees and raisings,
and even was generally made to grace the board on a wedding occasion. We
cannot give the space, if we felt prepared to speak, of the several made
dishes commonly in use among the older Canadians of Upper Canada. Many
of them are truly excellent in taste and nutritious in quality. They are
often similar to, or very like the dishes in the New England and Midland
States.

This subject will be concluded by giving a few extracts from
Rochefoucault who wrote of what he saw and learned in Canada in 1795,
and who may be regarded as quite correct.

He says, “It is asserted” (by Simcoe) “that all Canada, produces not the
necessary corn for the consumption of its inhabitants, the troops are
supplied with flour from London, and with salt meat from Ireland.” But
Simcoe then thought that Canada was capable not alone of feeding her
inhabitants, but of becoming the granary of England, and receiving
commodities in Exchange. Speaking of Forty Mile Creek, he says: “Before
it empties itself into the lake, it turns a grist mill and two saw
mills, which belong to a Mr. Green, a loyalist of Jersey, who, six or
seven years ago, settled in this part of Upper Canada.” “Land newly
cleared yields here, the first year, twenty bushels of corn. They plough
the land after it has produced three or four crops, but not very deep.
The price of flour is twenty-two shillings per hundred weight, that of
wheat from seven to eight shillings per bushel. Laborers are scarce, and
are paid at the rate of six shillings a day. Wheat is generally sown
throughout all Upper Canada, but other sorts of grain are also
cultivated.” “Mr Green grinds the corn for all the military posts in
Upper Canada.”

Approaching Kingston by water he remarks that “on the left is Quinté
Bay, the banks of which are said to be cultivated up to a considerable
extent. The eye dwells with pleasure once more on cultivated ground. The
country looks pleasant. The houses lie closer than in any of the new
settled parts of Upper Canada which we have hitherto traversed. The
variegated verdure of the cornfields embellishes and enriches the
prospect, charms the eye, and enchants the mind.”

“This district not only produces the corn requisite for its own
consumption, but also exports yearly about 3 or 4000 bushels. This
grain, which, in winter, is conveyed down the river on sledges, is
bought by the merchants, who engage, on the arrival of the ships from
Europe, to pay its amount in such merchandise as the sellers may
require. The merchants buy this grain for government, which pays for it
in ready money, according to the market price at Montreal. The agent of
government causes part to be ground into flour, which he sends to the
different ports in Upper Canada, where it is wanted; and the surplus he
sends to England. The price of flour in Kingston is at present (12th
July, 1795) six dollars per barrel. The district of Kingston supplied,
last year, the other parts of Canada with large quantities of pease, the
culture of which, introduced but two years ago, proves very productive
and successful. In the course of last year, 1000 barrels of salt pork,
of 208 pounds each, were sent from Kingston to Quebec; its price was
eighteen dollars per barrel. The whole trade is carried on by merchants,
whose profits are the more considerable, as they fix the price of the
provisions which they receive from Europe, and sell without the least
competition.” Indeed, the profits of the dealers must have been immense.
They sold to the military authorities at a rate which would remunerate
them when the provisions came from England; and when the farmers of
Canada began to raise grain to sell, they bought it, or exchanged
merchandise for it, upon which they fixed the price, and continued to
sell the flour at the same price to the military authorities.




                              CHAPTER XIX.

  CONTENTS—Kingston Mills—Action of Government—The Millwright—
    Situation of the first Mill—Why Selected—The Machinery—Put up by
    Loyalists—No Toll—Only Mill for three years—Going to Mill, 1784—
    The Napanee Mill—Commenced 1785—Robert Clarke—An old Book—
    “Appenea” Falls—Price of certain articles—What Rum cost, and was
    used for—The Mill opened 1787—Sergt.-Major Clarke in charge—Indian
    Corn—Small Toll—Surveyor Collins in charge—Becomes the Property of
    R. Cartwright, 1792—Rebuilt—Origin of Napanee—Price of Butter,
    1788—Mills at Four Mile Creek, Niagara Falls, Fort Erie, and Grand
    River—Mills on the St. Lawrence—The Stone Mills—Van Alstine—Lake
    of the Mountain—1796—Natural Beauty, _versus_ Utility—The Mill—Van
    Alstine’s Death—Wind Mill—Myer’s Mill—Mill at Consecon.


                       THE FIRST FLOURING MILLS.

Government was not an indifferent spectator of the difficulty spoken of
as to the grinding of grain—the procuring of flour, and at an early day,
ordered means to meet the requirements of the pioneers. We have the
certain statement of John C. Clark, of Ernest town, now dead, written
ten years ago, that his father, Robert Clark, who was a millwright, “was
employed by Government, in 1782–3, to erect the Kingston Mills
preparatory to the settlement of the Loyalists in that section of Upper
Canada.” The place selected for erecting the mill, was upon the
Cataraqui River, seven miles north of the Fort, now the entrance of the
Rideau Canal, where are situated the first locks of that artificial
water way. When in a state of nature, the place must have been
strikingly beautiful; it is so at the present time, when the
achievements of art give variety of attraction. This situation, selected
for the first flouring mill, was central to the population strung along
the banks of the St. Lawrence, and Bay Quinté. Everything required for
the construction of the mill, was furnished by Government, such as the
mill stones, and the machinery. The rougher work, the walls of the
building, was done by men detailed for the purpose, from the company of
soldiers. The structure consisted of logs, or timber roughly squared,
and was erected, as well as the mill house, by the combined efforts of
the soldier settlers, collected for the purpose. All the settlers had
their grists ground without paying toll. The original building was
standing as late as 1836.

For nearly three years, the Cataraqui Mill was the only one in Central
Canada. The settlers came from Cornwall in the east, and the most remote
settlement up the Bay. At the present day, when railroads and swiftly
running steamers assist so materially to annihilate space as it were,
and bring distant places into close relationship, it would be regarded a
matter of no little trouble and inconvenience, to carry grain from
Cornwall on the one hand, and Sidney on the other, to Kingston, and wait
to have it ground into flour; but how infinitely greater the difficulty,
when a trackless woods covered the intervening spaces, when the only
mode of carrying anything was upon the back, or in a canoe, or batteaux,
or upon a raft, in summer; and upon a hand-sleigh in winter, drawn
through deep snow, following the windings of the shore along many a
dismal mile.

The increasing population around the Bay, caused the authorities to seek
a proper site for a second mill. The Napanee River, with its natural
falls, offered an advantageous place upon which to erect a second mill
for the settlers, upon the Bay. We have been fortunate, through the
kindness of Mr. P. Clark, of Collinsby, in being permitted to examine an
account book kept by Robert Clark, the millwright, of both the Kingston
and Napanee mills. By this, we learn that in the year 1785, Robert
Clark, who had completed the Kingston Mill, removed to the second
township, and, according to instructions received from Government,
proceeded to construct a mill upon the Napanee River, at the site of the
natural falls. In the absence of the full particulars relating to the
building of the Napanee Mills, the following cannot fail to be of
interest. In the account book aforementioned, the following references
to the building of the mill, are found recorded:

“An accompt of articles bought for the use of the works, November 8.”
“To 4 Augers of different size, from Mr. Phillips, carpenters at
Catariqui, 13s, 8d. To 3 quires of Writing Paper, 5s. December 6, To 20
lbs. of Nails, £1; December 22, To 6 Whip Saw Files, 3s. 9d.” Omitting
some items, and coming to March 23, 1786, we find “For Raising the Saw
Mill,” “2 gallons and 3 pints of Rum, 17s. 6d.” “April 20th, To 1 quart
of Rum, 2s.” On the “25th May, To 4 gallons and 1 quart of Rum, for
Raising the Grist Mill, at 7s. 6d.” The “26th, To 1 quart of Rum for the
People at work in the water at the Dam.” By this we learn the day upon
which the Napanee mill was erected. On the 20th July, Government is
again charged with “3 pints of Rum for raising the fender-post,” &c. On
the 27th, a pint was again required, but for what special purpose is not
mentioned. In December, 1786, we find “To making Bolt Cloth 15s.” “To
Clearing one acre and three-quarters of Land for a mill, at seven
dollars per acre, £3.” And we find that the iron or smith work for the
mill was done by David Palmer and Conly. From the fact that the bolting
cloth was not made until December, 1786, we may infer that the mill did
not commence operations until the beginning of 1787. The mill was a
great boon to the inhabitants around the Bay Quinté, not only because
they had a shorter distance to travel, but the amount of work pressing
upon the Kingston mill, made it very uncertain as to the time one would
have to wait, to get his gristing done. Consequently many came from the
Lower Bay, and the dwellers upon the South Bay in Marysburg, who
followed the shores around Indian Point and up the Bay Quinté. To those
living in Thurlow, Sidney, and at the Carrying Place, the mill was a
great blessing.

The father of the late Col. John Clark, of Port Dalhousie, who had been
Sergeant Major in the 8th Regiment, and who had, from 1777, been clerk
and naval storekeeper at Carleton Island, removed to within three miles
of Napanee, the same year the mill was built, to take charge of the
works, in addition to his other duties. John Clark, who was then a small
boy, says in his memoirs; the grain principally brought to be ground,
was Indian corn; but as the clearances increased, wheat became more
plentiful. He also speaks of the great industry which characterized the
settlers. “A small toll was exacted to pay for the daily expenses of the
mill, but this was a mere trifle, considering the advantages the
settlers derived from loss of time in proceeding to Kingston.” From this
we infer that no toll was demanded at the Kingston mill. “When my
father,” continues Col. Clark, “was ordered to Niagara, the mill was
delivered up to surveyor Collins, under whose directions it was
continued in operation for many years, and then the mill site became the
property of the Hon. R. Cartwright of Kingston.” But, we find the
statement elsewhere made that the land was originally granted to Captain
McDonald of Marysburg, who sold it to Cartwright.

Robert Clark, in his account book, says, “Commenced work for Mr.
Cartwright at the Napanee mills, the 28th August, 1792.” This was
probably the time when Cartwright became the owner. In the same year,
reference is made to timber, for the “new mill,” by which we learn that
Mr. Cartwright found it desirable to rebuild. The iron work for the new
mill came to £14.

By the book, from which we have made extracts, we see that the name is
spelled in different ways, the first being Appenea. For many years the
name was spelled Apanee. It has been said that it was an Indian name,
signifying flour, and was given by the Mississaugas, from the existence
of the flouring mill. Napanee may signify flour, in the Indian language,
but the inference drawn cannot be correct, as we find the name Appenea
Falls given to the place in 1785, before the mill was commenced.

Cartwright having rebuilt the mill put in one run of stone at first,
shortly after two, and then three. Robert Clark was the millwright, and
one Profect was in charge of the works. The mill seems to have been
constructed with some care, and Gourlay says, in 1817, that the Napanee
mill is the best in the Province. The old account book from which we
have gleaned, gives the price at which certain articles were vended.
Thus, we learn that in June, 1787, and July 1788, butter sold at Napanee
for 1s. per pound.

Some time after the erection of the Kingston and Napanee mills, others
were erected in other parts of the Province; one at Four Mile Creek, one
at the Niagara Falls, one at Fort Erie, another at the Mohawk Village,
Grand River; and still later, one at Twelve Mile Creek. “In the year
1788, the first grist mill in Dundas was built by Messrs. Coons and
Shaver in Matilda. It contained but one run of stone, and had a saw mill
attached. It stood about a mile above the present village of Iroquois.
It could grind 100 bushels of wheat per day, and turned out good flour.
Soon after, another mill was built on a much larger scale, by John
Munroe, also in Matilda, which had three run of stone.” There was also a
gang of saws. The machinery was driven by the St. Lawrence waters. At a
still later period VanAlstine’s mill was erected, at the Lake on the
Mountain.

The events connected with Captain, afterwards Major VanAlstine, as a
settler, are recorded in the settlement of Adolphustown. Directly
opposite the rich and sloping land on the north shore, on which he
settled, is a high prominent hill, which stands boldly up against the
bay. This “mountain” is famous on account of the lake upon its summit, a
particular account of which is given elsewhere. It is referred to here
in a practical sense. While, upon the hill-top is the work of nature,
presented in a striking manner; at its feet is the work of man, which,
particularly in the past, was of no little consequence to the well-being
of the settlers of the Bay. About the year 1796, the third flouring mill
of the bay was erected at this place by VanAlstine, to whom had been
granted a large tract of land. The surplus waters of the lake, in
primeval days, made their escape over the cliff, falling into the bay,
and forming, it must have been at times, a beautiful cascade. But, if
Captain VanAlstine had a taste for the beautiful in nature, he also had
a just appreciation of the wants of the people, and he proceeded to
utilize the falling water. A canal was cut down the mountain side, to
form a channel for the water to descend, and at the bottom was erected a
mill, the machinery of which was to be propelled by the descending
stream. From that day to this the work of grinding has been carried on.
However beautiful the lake above, and delightful the prospect, they
cannot exceed in interest the foundation of this mill. Imagination would
almost give words to the sound of the mill, which so peacefully clicks
the daily round of work. The down-rushing waters by the artificial
channel would seem to utter reminiscences of the past—regrets that they
may no longer tumble headlong over the hill-side to form a lovely
cascade; but the water-witch has been driven away by the spirit of
utilitarianism. This conspicuous hill has often been the point of hope,
the goal to which the farmer turned his little bark, containing, it is
true, but a few bushels of grain, yet so precious, and about which the
hungry ones in the little log house, thought so frequently, with bodies
long accustomed to suffer for the want of enough to eat. And, often this
mountain stood up as a guide to the settler, as he trudged along wearily
through the thick snow with a bag or two of grain upon a hand-sleigh.
Although not the very first mill, it dates back to the last century.

The Kingston _Gazette_ of the 16th April, 1811, contains an
advertisement, signed by the executors of the deceased Major
VanAlstine’s will, namely, George W. Myers, Cornelius VanAlstine, and
Thomas Dorland, in which it is stated that the mill contains two run of
stone, one superfine and two common bolts.

A windmill was built at a somewhat early period, by Sergeant Howell,
nearly opposite the Upper Gap, in Fredericksburgh. It was sold to one
Russell, who was an Engineer in Kingston, in the war of 1812. The
windmill was never much used, if at all.

About the beginning of the century, 1802, Capt. Myers built a flouring
mill upon the Moira. (See Thurlow.) It seems to have been a good mill,
for persons came a long distance to get grinding done. For instance:
Isaiah Tubs, who lived at West Lake, would come, carrying a bag of grain
upon his back.

In the year 1804, Mr. Wilkins says, a gristing mill was built at
Consecon, to the south of the Carrying Place. Consecon is an Indian
name, from Con-Cou, a pickerel.




                              CHAPTER XX.

  CONTENTS—Clothing—Domestic and Farming Implements—Style of Dress
    eighty years ago—Clothing of the Refugees—Disbanded Soldiers—No
    Fresh Supply—Indian Garments of Skin—Deerskin Pants—Petticoats—Bed
    Coverings—Cultivating Flax—Sheep—Home-made Clothes—Rude
    Implements—Fulling—French Mode—Lindsay Woolsey—The Spinning-wheel—
    Industry—Young men Selecting Wives—Bees—Marriage Portion—Every
    Farmer his own Tanner and Shoemaker—Fashions—How odd hours were
    spent—Home-made Shoes—What Blankets were made of—Primitive
    Bedstead—Nakedness—Bridal Apparel—No Saddles—Kingston and Newark—
    Little Money—Bartering—Merchants from Albany—Unable to buy—Credit
    with Merchants—The Results—Itinerant Mechanics—Americans—Become
    Canadians—An old Stone-mason—Wooden Dishes—Making Spoons—Other
    Hardships—Indians Friendly—Effects of Alcohol upon the
    Mississaugas—Groundless Panic—Drunken Indians—Women, defending
    Themselves—An erroneous Statement about Indian Massacre in
    “Dominion Monthly Magazine”—Statement of an Old Settler, Sherwood—
    Wild Beasts—Few Fire-arms—Narrow Escapes—Depredations at Night—
    Destroying Stock—An Act of Parliament—“A Traveller’s” Statement—
    The Day of Small Things—Settlers Contented—The Extent of their
    Ambition—Reward of Industry—Population in 1808—Importations—Money—
    The Youth.


          CLOTHING—FURNITURE—DOMESTIC AND FARMING IMPLEMENTS.

The style of clothing worn by the refugees and disbanded soldiers was
such as prevailed eighty years ago in England. A certain difference, no
doubt, existed between the English and the Colonists, yet mainly the
style was the same. Among the first settlers upon the bay were those who
had fetched with them, and wore, at least occasionally, garments of
fashionable cut and appointments. Tight knee-breeches and silver buckles
would decorate the bodies of some, who had in other days mixed in the
fashionable throng, perhaps luxuriated in the gay city of New York,
where the presence of British soldiers always gave life and gaiety.
Indeed some of the inhabitants had been commissioned officers in the
regular army. Dr. Dougall, who had been in the navy, and who had settled
in the sixth Township, is remembered as a wearer of “tights” and silver
buckles. Also, Major VanAlstine wore this elegant attire, and the
M’Leans, of Kingston. Those who left their homes hurriedly during the
course of the war, and fled to Lower Canada and the several British
Forts, brought only what was upon their backs. Those who came more
leisurely might have a little more; but the distance to travel on foot
would deter from undertaking to bring more than supplies of food. The
disbanded soldiers had no more than what belongs to a soldier’s kit, and
no doubt the close of the war left many of them with well worn garments.
A few years of exposure to the wear and tear of pioneer life would quite
destroy the best supplied wardrobe, however carefully husbanded, or
ingeniously mended by the anxious wife. To replace the clothing was far
from an easy matter to the settlers, many of whom had no money,
certainly no time for a long journey to Montreal or Albany. After a few
years, Kingston became a place of trade, but the supply of clothing was
scant and dear, placing it beyond the reach of mostly all. The result
was that the vast majority of the inhabitants had to look to the
production of their lands wherewith to cover the nakedness of their
families. Those living up the bay continued to want for clothing for a
longer time, being unable to exchange with the merchants of Kingston,
until peddlers began to visit the more remote settlers.

The faded garments, patched until the original material could no longer
be distinguished, ultimately succumbed to the effects of time and labor.

The Indians, who as a general thing were friendly and kind, when they
visited the settlement, gave to the settlers the idea of manufacturing
garments out of deer skin. They, now and then exchanged skins for
articles the settlers could part with, and taught them how to prepare
the fresh pelt so as to make it pliable. The process consisted in
removing the hair and then working the hide by hand with the brains of
some animal, until it was soft and white. Trowsers made of this material
were not only comfortable for winter, but very durable. A gentleman who
recently died in Sophiasburgh at an advanced age, remembered to have
worn a pair for twelve years, being repaired occasionally, and at the
end they were sold for two dollars and-a-half. Petticoats for women were
often made of the same material. Roger Bates says “My grandmother made
all sorts of useful dresses with these skins, which were most
comfortable for a country life, and for going through the bush, could
not be torn by the branches.” Also, moccasins were procured from the
buckskin, and some had enough deer-skin to make covering for beds. But
deer-skin was not sufficiently abundant to give covering to all, such as
it was; and, certain clothing was required, for which it was unfit. Thus
left to their own resources, the settlers commenced at an early period
to cultivate flax, and as soon as possible to procure sheep. For many
years almost every family made their various garments, for both sexes,
of the coarse linen made from the flax, and cloth from wool raised at
home and carded by hand. Preparing the flax for weaving, as well as
spinning were done by hand, with inferior implements rudely made. But in
later years, occasionally spinning wheels and looms were brought in by
settlers. There were no fulling mills to complete the fabric. Even the
mode adopted then, in Lower Canada, was not practised, which was as
follows: A meeting of young folks, similar to a bee, was held from house
to house, at which both sexes took part. The cloth to be fulled was
placed in large tubs, and bare-legged youths would step in and with much
amusement dance the fulling done. In Upper Canada, both high and low
were glad to be able to don the home-made linen, and the linsey-woolsey
petticoat.

                  *       *       *       *       *

“The growth of flax was much attended to as soon as lands were cleared
and put in order.” “Then spinning-wheels were all the go, and home-made
linen, the pride of all families, manufactured substantial articles that
would last a lifetime.” The young men of industry would look for the
spinning-wheel and loom before selecting a wife. “A young farmer would
often be astonished to find on his marriage that his fair partner had
got a good supply of linen for her marriage portion. I have known as
much as sixty yards spun and manufactured at one bee or gathering.”—
_Clark_.

When the skins of sheep, and of calves and beef become available, every
farmer became his own tanner, and dressed his leather; and then his own
shoemaker. Fashions did not change, except as the continued practice of
making for an increasing family, gave the maker ability to make
something more like a boot than a moccasin. Rainy days, and the nights,
were spent in doing such kind of work, not by candle light, but by the
hearth fire. It was at the same time that an axe-helve, a wooden plow, a
reaping cradle, a wooden fork, &c., were made. But many a child, whose
grand-children are now occupying positions of wealth and influence,
stayed in the log cabin the winter through, because he had nothing with
which to protect his feet from the snow. The writer’s father was not a
shoemaker by trade; but he remembers when a boy to have worn shoes made
by him. They were not conspicuous for their beauty, but it was thought
by the wearer they would last forever; within his recollection there was
not a shoemaker in Thurlow.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Much ingenuity was displayed in making clothes and blankets. What was
called the “Kearsy” blanket was made at an early date; the writer has
seen the first one said to have been manufactured in Upper Canada,
certainly the first on the Bay Quinté. It is yet in use and belongs to
one, nearly one hundred years of age, who is the daughter of the maker,
whom we remember to have seen when a boy, who, although then in the sear
and yellow leaf, was as tall and erect as if untold hardships had not
crowned her life. Within fifteen miles of Belleville, across the Bay,
was a log cabin, the occupants of which had for their first blanket, one
made out of hair, picked out of the tanner’s vat, and a hemp-like weed
growing in the yard. The hair was first cleaned by whipping it; then it
was carded and worked up with the hemp, and then spun. It was afterward
doubled and twisted, and finally woven into a blanket. The individual
whose wife did this, and whose descendants are among the most wealthy
farmers, bought his farm for a horse. For many a day, they had no
furniture, not even a chair, and the bedstead was made out of two poles,
driven between the logs of the shanty; and basswood bark was twisted so
as to bind them substantially together. Clean straw upon this, was
really the only thing they had in the house. And so it was with very
many, the exceptions being, some half pay officers, who had brought a
table, or a chest of drawers. In 1790, the brother of an individual,
holding an important post in Kingston, was near the head of the bay,
staying at a house in a state of nakedness; in which condition his
brother writes, “he must remain until I am able to go up.” “I have
agreed to put him to trial with a carpenter to learn the trade,” he must
therefore have been a large boy.

It was not until the close of the last century, that wearing articles,
other than those made out of flax and wool, were to be obtained. A
calico dress was a decided luxury. The petticoat, and short gown of
linen, was more common. A long chintz dress to go to meeting, was the
height of many a damsel’s ambition, or a grogran dress and short
petticoat. As years passed away, and a grown up daughter was about to be
married, efforts would be made to array the bride in fitting costume.
Often a dress, worn by the mother in other days, amid other scenes,
which had been laid carefully away, was brought forth to light, and made
by suitable alterations to do renewed service, although the white had
assumed a yellow cast, and had lost its lustre.

As late as 1816, a farmer owning land in Sidney, and who died rich, made
in winter a journey to Kingston with flour, wearing nothing on his feet,
but a pair of shoes, and who had his trowsers strapped down to keep his
ankles warm. Leg boots took too much leather. It was many years before a
bridle and saddle were known, and then, but a few possessed such a
convenience. Bare-back, or on a deer skin was the primitive mode.

After the erection of Upper Canada into a separate province, both
Kingston and Newark, where there were always troops, and where articles
of clothing were to be purchased from a few, who had gone into the
mercantile business, exhibited a degree of comfort and even gaiety in
dress.

At the first there was but little money in circulation. But few of the
refugees, or disbanded soldiers had any when they entered the
wilderness. The government were constantly paying a certain sum to the
troops at Kingston and Newark, and likewise to the retired half pay
officers. The few who could command money, were placed in a position of
greater comfort, as soon as articles of provisions and merchandise, were
brought to the new settlement. Mainly, however, trading was carried on
by exchanging one commodity for another. Probably the first articles for
trade, was the ticket for grants of land in the back concessions, often
parted with so cheaply. The settlers required clothing, grain for
sowing, and stock; these wants in time, led to trade, two kinds of which
were introduced. One carried on by merchants established at Kingston,
the other by pedlars, Yankee pedlars, who would come from Albany with
their pack in a canoe or small batteau, and who plied their calling
along the bay shore from clearing to clearing. Both the merchant at
Kingston, who waited for his customers to come to him, and the pedlar
who sought customers, asked for their wares, only grain or any other
produce. But wheat was desired above all others. It was an event of no
little interest to the back woodsman’s family, when the pedlar’s canoe
or batteau came along, and halted before the log house, by the shore.
And, even when their circumstances would not permit them to buy, it was
a luxury to have a look at the things, which were so temptingly
displayed. The toil-worn farmer, with well patched trowsers, would turn
with an inward sigh from the piece of cloth, which although so much
wanted, could not be got. The wife looked longingly at those little
things, which would just suit baby. The grown up daughters gazed
wistfully, but hopelessly at the bright calico prints, more valuable, in
their eyes than the choicest silks are to their descendants to day. But
a calico dress was a thing not enjoyed, but by few, until it was bought
for the wedding dress. Frequently some articles of family use was
exchanged for goods, which were deemed of more use. The trade of
merchants at Kingston steadily increased; but not a cash business. A
credit system was initiated and carried on. Goods would be purchased
with an engagement to pay in wheat or potatoes, or something else, at a
certain time. Here and there along the bay were Indian fur traders.
They, also, began to exchange with the settlers. While this was a great
convenience, and gave immediate comfort to many a family, it, at the
same time, led to serious results with many. Disappointed in the return
of crops, or in some other way, the payment could not be made.
Promissory notes were given at interest; and, after a few years, suing
and seizing of stock was the result. Sometimes even the farm went to
satisfy the creditor. Unfortunately, there are too many such cases in
the records of the settlers of the bay. Not alone did pedlars come from
the States, to pick up the fruit of the industry, of those they had
driven away; but there were itinerant Yankee mechanics who would
occasionally come along, looking for a job. Carpenters, Masons, &c.,
after a few years, found much to do. We would not speak disparagingly of
these Americans, because they served a good turn in erecting buildings,
as houses, barns, &c. They also introduced many valuable articles of
husbandry and domestic use. And finally, many of them forsook their
republican government, and permanently settled under the King, and
became the best of subjects. Even in the first decade of the present
century, mechanics would go up and down the bay seeking work. For
instance, there was one Travers, a stone mason, who found employment
along the bay, and even up the lake. Of this we are informed by one of
his apprentices who is now upwards of eighty years old. (We make place
in our Review to state that John W. Maybee, referred to, aged 88, died
7th February, 1869.)

A hundred things enter into the list of what constitutes home comforts.
But spare, indeed, were the articles to be found upon the kitchen
shelves. Plain enough, was the spread table, at which the family
gathered morning, noon, and night. Many had but one or two dishes, often
of wood, rudely made out of basswood; and spoons of the same material.
Knives and forks in many families were unknown. A few families had
brought a very limited number of articles for eating, relics of other
days, but these were exceedingly scarce. The wooden spoon was the most
common table article with which to carry food to the mouth. By and by
the pedlar brought pewter spoons, and once in a while the settler
procured pewter and moulds and made spoons for himself.


                           VARIOUS HARDSHIPS.

Apart from the suffering arising from want of food, and clothing to
wear, and furniture to make the house comfortable, there were others of
more or less magnitude. It would naturally be expected that one of the
first dangers in entering a wilderness, would be from the Indians, whose
territory was being occupied. But in the main this evil was not added to
their other distress. The considerate and just policy pursued by the
British Government, left the Indians no cause of complaint, and they did
not at any time assume an hostile attitude toward the infant colony. But
that curse of the human race,—baneful curse to the Indians, alcohol,
came with the white man; and, too often, the unscrupulous trader, and
merchant would, not only sell the fire water to them, but rely upon its
intoxicating qualities, to consummate more excellent bargains for furs.
The evil thus inflicted upon the Indian, returned in some cases, upon
innocent pioneers. The Indians under the influence of liquor are
particularly savage and ungovernable; prone to exhibit their wild
nature. Thirsting for the liquor, they would sometimes enter dwellings,
when they knew the men were absent, and endeavour to intimidate the
women to give them rum. A few instances of alarm and actual danger, come
to us, among the bay settlers. At one time particularly, there arose a
wide spread alarm, (long remembered as the “Indian alarms,”) that the
Indians were, upon some fixed night, when the men were away to Kingston
mills, going to massacre the settlers. This arose from some remarks, let
fall by a half drunken Indian. A few of the settlers, did actually leave
their homes, and sought protection in a more thickly settled locality,
while active steps were taken to defend their homes against the Indians.
Mrs. Dempsey, of seventh township, gathered up what she could, and with
her children crossed in a canoe to the eighth township. On another
occasion, when her husband was absent, several half drunken Indians came
to the house, and one stepping up to where she sat, trembling with fear,
and with her little ones nestling close to her, drew his knife, and
cutting a piece from the palm of his hand, held the bleeding wound
before her face, crying out “look, look, Indian no fraid.” Then he
brandished his knife in the most menacing manner. She hearing the sound
of a passing team, got up and slowly walked backwards to the door,
looking the savage bravely in the eye all the time. Her husband had
opportunely arrived, in time to save his family, which he did by a free
use of the horse-whip. On another occasion, Mrs. D. saved her life and
the children from drunken Indians, by rushing up a ladder with them,
into the garret, which could only be reached by a small opening through
the ceiling, and then hauling the ladder up. The Indians endeavoured to
assist each other up, and through the entrance, but she having a knife
succeeded by cutting their fingers, when they attempted to get up, in
keeping them back. These hostile attempts were exceptions, and always
the result of intoxication.

Since writing the above, an article has been published in the _Dominion
Monthly Magazine_, in which it is stated that a family of settlers were
massacred by the Indians upon the banks of the St. Lawrence in 1795.
This statement is at variance with facts known to us, and with the
testimony of one who cannot be mistaken. His statement is as follows:

                                         BROCKVILLE, 13th April, 1868.

  MY DEAR SIR,—

  I am in receipt of your note of this date, adverting to the
  statement of the massacre of a family in Upper Canada, by the
  Indians in 1795. I noticed the same statement in some paper I have
  lately read, and at the time I thought it to be a mistake in the
  date, or an entire fabrication. I am not aware of the least
  hostility shewn by the Indians to any of the U. E. Loyalists since
  1784, eleven years previous to date stated, and I do not believe a
  syllable of it.

                              Yours truly,

                                                       ADIEL SHERWOOD.

Although the native Indians did not, as a general thing, alarm the
settler, there were wild beasts that did. For years the wolf, and the
bear, and other ferocious animals were a source of terror and suffering.
These animals, unaccustomed to the sight of man, were at first
exceedingly tame. The settlers had but few fire-arms, and ammunition was
very scarce; and the beasts knew no terror of them. They would even by
day, come to the very door of the cabin, ready to seize the little
child, or the scanty stock of poultry, pigs, or sheep, or calves, or
salted provisions which had been left exposed, government stores, &c.
And at night they made the most hideous and incessant howls, until
morning. Many instances of their rapacity in robbing the scanty yard of
the settlers, and of hair breadth escapes of individuals from wolves and
bears, are mentioned. The destruction of stock by the wolf especially,
caused the government of Canada, at an early date, (1793,) to legislate,
with a view of gradually exterminating them; and an act was passed,
granting a premium of four dollars to every one who should bring a
wolf’s head to the proper officer; and two dollars for a bear’s. It was
withdrawn with regard to bears, in 1796. “A traveller,” writing in 1835,
remarks that in Kingston, resided a person who privately bred wolves to
obtain the reward. But whether such an enterprising citizen did actually
live in the good old town the writer saith not. Instances of narrow
escapes from the wild beasts are still remembered; for instance, Lewis
Daly, of Ernest town, was suddenly attacked by a bear within a mile of
home. He sprung up a small tree, which bending over, he was in momentary
danger of being reached. His cries brought help.

In those early days, the settler, looked not for great things; schooled
by the hardships of civil war, and inured to want, and half starvation,
they asked not for riches. Enough to eat, and to be warmly clad, and
housed from the winter’s cold, was the great point to which they
stretched their longing hopes. Plenty in the future for the little ones,
and for themselves, when they had grown old, was the single purpose of
their toilsome life. A descendant of a first settler upon the front of
Sidney, tells of his grandmother whom he had heard say, that her great
ambition at first, was to raise vegetables, onions and other useful
articles in her garden bed; to have poultry then, about her. After years
she got the fowls; but a mink, in a single night killed them all. Then,
again, they had got a breeding sow, and one morning a bear walked out of
the woods, and with one hug destroyed all their hopes of future porkers.

Gradually, as years passed away, comforts began to reward the patient
and industrious pioneers; acre after acre was brought under cultivation.
The log house received an addition, a little stock was procured, and the
future brightened up before them, and by the year 1808, the settlements
in Upper Canada were increasing in number, and spreading in every
direction. “The frontier of the country was fast filling up. Persons
were taking up land several miles from the water’s edge. Some had
ventured to take up land in the second tier of townships, in the midst
of the wilderness, and many miles from any habitation. The population
was now increased to about 70,000 souls. The importations was chiefly
liquors and groceries, which by the St. Lawrence and the United States,
brought a revenue of nearly £7,000. The bulk of the inhabitants
manufactured and wore their own clothing. The way of trade was mostly by
barter, as gold and silver were scarce, and there were no banks to issue
paper currency. Intemperance was very prevalent, and schools were
scarce. The youth were too fond of foolish amusements.”—(_Playter._)




                              CHAPTER XXI.

  CONTENTS—Sweat of the Brow—No Beast of Burden—No Stock—Except by a
    Few—Horses and Oxen—From Lower Canada—York State—Later comers,
    brought some—No Fodder—First Stock in Adolphustown—Incidents—Cock
    and Hen—“Tipler”—Cattle Driving—First Cow in Thurlow—First House
    in Marysburgh—The First Oxen—No Market for Butter and Cheese—
    Sheep—Rev. Mr. Stuart, as an Agriculturist—Horses at Napanee—An
    offer for a Yoke of Steers.


              INTRODUCTION OF STOCK AND BEASTS OF BURDEN.

We have seen that the refugees and disbanded soldiers who entered
Canada, brought but a limited number of implements, and those of an
imperfect nature. The most of them had no means of lessening labor, no
beasts of burden. All the work had to be done by the sturdy arm, and by
the sweat of the brow. For years, mostly all alike thus labored, and for
many years the increasing number continued to toil, being unable to
procure beasts of burden, or any stock. The distance to go for them was
too far, and the way too difficult to be undertaken easily. But, a
greater difficulty, an insurmountable reason was that they had not the
means to purchase, until years of struggling had extracted from the
ground, covered with stumps, produce to exchange for the much required
help, in the form of beasts of burden. Some of the half-pay officers,
and other persons, favored by those holding some situations in the
government, were enabled to get beasts of burden at first, or within a
year or two. There were a few old soldiers who had a little money,
received at being discharged; and again, some sold their location
tickets of a portion of their land, and thereby were enabled to make
purchase of cows or oxen.

For beasts of burden, they, as a general thing, preferred oxen in
preference to horses, to work among the stumps with. Both oxen and
horses were brought from Lower Canada and York State. The later comers,
especially, fetched with them horses, oxen and cows from the latter
place.

A few of the very first settlers, perhaps, brought one or more cows. We
find it stated that the disbanded soldiers had a cow allotted to every
two families; these must have been procured at Lower Canada, perhaps a
few by way of Oswego, where were stationed some troops. Sheriff Ruttan,
speaking of the famine, says: “We had the luxury of a cow which the
family brought with them.” Thomas Goldsmith came in 1786, and drove a
lot of cattle to the Bay: but he could not get enough for them to eat
and they, starved to death, excepting one heifer and a yoke of oxen. The
Petersons, who settled in the Fourth Town in 1785, and cleared a small
lot of land, went “the following year to Montreal and brought up some
horses and three cows, which comprised the principal stock then in the
Township.”

After a few years, when the settlers had become somewhat established,
steps were taken more generally, to procure stock, so necessary to give
ordinary comfort to their families; while those who now entered the
country brought cows with them. Although the cows and oxen were procured
occasionally from Lower Canada; the most of them were obtained from the
States; but the horses were in the main at first, brought from Lower
Canada. Many incidents attending the long and devious journey through
the wilderness, are still told. Thomas Goldsmith, before mentioned, who
settled in Prince Edward, came into Canada by way of the Mohawk, Wood
Creek, Oneida Lake, and Oswego river, thence to Cataraqui. He undertook
to drive some cattle through the woods to Cape Vincent, piloted by a
friendly Indian, to swim them across the St. Lawrence. In this journey
he suffered almost every privation—hunger, fatigue, exposure. Resting
one night in the ordinary manner, with his head slightly raised, upon
the root of a tree, with no other covering than the tree’s branches, and
sleeping very soundly, after a day’s walking, he became benumbed from
exposure, and knew not of the rapidly descending rain, which had
actually covered his body when he awoke. Yet this man lived to be ninety
years old. Driving cattle through the woods was no easy matter, and dogs
were often employed for that purpose. Ex-Sheriff Sherwood, in his
valuable memorandum, relates an incident which throws light upon those
primitive days. After remarking how well he recollects the pleasure, he
and an elder brother experienced from a present made them of a cock and
hen, no common luxuries then, and with what care they watched over them,
he says: “let me tell you the tragic story of our little ‘Tipler,’ she
had become famed for driving cattle, and we thought much of her. Two
persons, one named Urehart, from the Bay Quinté, and the other Booth,
started to go through the woods to Fort Stanwix for cattle, and
prevailed upon my father to let them take poor little ‘Tipler.’ We saw
them safe across the river; but, sad to say, neither the men nor Tipler
were ever heard of after.”

John Ferguson, writing from Sidney, in July 1791, says that he cannot
get horses for the farm until winter.

In the summer of 1787, Elisha Miller and Col. Richey brought from
Saratoga County several cattle and horses. They were driven by way of
Black River, and swam the St. Lawrence at Gananoque.

The Reeds, who settled in Thurlow, in 1789, had a cow, which afforded
the principal means of sustenance. This, with basswood leaves and other
greens, constituted their food for many a day.

Mr. Harrison, now living in Marysburgh, tells of the first horse “below
the rock.” It was brought, and owned by Colonel McDonald. This, and
another were the only ones for many years. Afterward, oxen were brought
in, as well as cows, by drovers from Lower Canada.

Rochfoucault says, 1795: “The cattle are not subject to contagious
distempers; they are numerous, without being remarkably fine. The finest
oxen are procured from Connecticut, at the price of seventy or eighty
dollars a yoke. Cows are brought, either from the State of New York, and
these are the finest; or from Lower Canada; the former costs twenty, and
the latter fifteen dollars. These are small in size, but, in the opinion
of the farmers, better milch cows, and are, for this reason, preferred.
There are no fine bulls in the country; and the generality of farmers
are not sensible of the advantages to be derived from cattle of a fine
breed. In the summer, the cattle are turned into the woods; in winter,
that is, six months together, they are fed on dry fodder. There is no
ready market at which a farmer can sell that part of his cheese and
butter which is not wanted for the use of the family. Of cheese and
butter, therefore, no more is made than the family need for their own
consumption.” “Sheep are more numerous here than in any part of the
United States, which we have hitherto traversed. They are either
procured from Lower Canada or the State of New York, and cost three
dollars a head. They thrive in this country, but are high-legged, and of
a very indifferent shape. Coarse wool, when cleaned, costs two shillings
a pound.”

The above information was derived, the writer says, from Mr. Stuart, the
Curate of Kingston, “who cultivates, himself, seventy acres of land, a
part of 2,000 acres which had been granted him as a Loyalist. Without
being a very skilful farmer, he is perfectly acquainted with the details
of agriculture.” These statements refer no doubt, to the settlements of
the Bay. There is reference to horses, by Col. Clarke, whose father,
living at the Napanee Mills in 1788, had two favorite horses, Jolly and
Bonny.

In an old account book, now before us, for which we are indebted to Mr.
P. C. Clarke, of Collinsby, and which belonged to his grandfather,
Robert Clarke, who built the Napanee Mills, we find the following entry.

                                  “Appenea Falls, 23rd November, 1785.

  “Acct. of work for Adam Bower with his horses. Dec. 3, To day’s
  work, do., &c. He continued to work for sixty-two days with his
  horses.”

The following supplies valuable information:

                                        “Appanne Mills, 3rd Aug. 1788.

  “Messrs. Collins and Frobisher, Dr.” &c. (They must have been agents
  for the Government).

  “Aug. 21st. To David Bradshaw, one day with his oxen, 6s. June 11.
  To Samuel Browson, Jun’r., 2 days work with two yoke of oxen, at
  10s. March 28th. To 11½ days, Adam Arehart, with a span of horses,
  at 6s.

  “1789. Oct. 1. To Asa Richard; 9 days work with a pair of horses and
  a woman, at 9s.”

There is a memorandum in Robert Clarke’s book, as follows: “Mr. Joseph
Crane got at Canada” (it will be remembered that the first settlers
spoke of the Lower Province as Canada) “a bay horse six years old. A
brown mare four years old. Second Township, 13th March, 1787.”

The Dempsey’s drove in, 100 miles, some cattle in 1789 to Ameliasburgh.
He was offered 200 acres of land for a yoke of four-year-old steers,
which offer he refused. At another time he was offered 100 acres for a
cow.




                             CHAPTER XXII.

  CONTENTS—Old Channels of Trade, and Travel—Art and Science—New
    Channels—The Wilderness—Loyalists Traveling on Foot, from Kingston
    to York—Formation of Roads—Act of Parliament—1793—Its Provisions—
    Crooked Roads—Foot-path—Bridle-path—King’s Highway from Lower
    Canada—When Surveyed—Road from Kingston Westward—Its Course—
    Simcoe’s Military Road—Dundas Street—Asa Danforth—Contract with
    Government—Road from Kingston to Ancaster—Danforth Road—1799—
    Misunderstandings—Danforth’s Pamphlets—Slow Improvement—Cause—
    Extract from Gourlay—Thomas Markland’s Report—Ferries—1796—Acts of
    Parliament—Statute Labor—Money Grants—Commissioners—Midland
    District—Distribution—The Cataraqui Bridge Company—The
    Petitioners—An Act—The Provisions—The Plan of Building—The Bridge—
    Toll—Completing the Bridge—Improvement of Roads—McAdam—Declines a
    Knighthood.


           THE CONSTRUCTION OF ROADS THROUGH THE WILDERNESS.

The channels followed by the Europeans, as they penetrated the unknown
wilderness of America, were those indicated by the Indians, who had
themselves for centuries followed them, in their pursuit after the
chase, or when upon the war path. The great routes mentioned elsewhere,
are the natural ones, and no other could have been pursued. It was only
when art and science followed emigration to the new world that new
channels were opened up, and the canal and railroad superseded the old
devious ways along the windings of rivers.

Prior to the visiting of Europeans, the Indian paths were more or less
trodden as the requirements of food and the existence of prey led the
hunter here or there, or the war cry led them to the deadly encounter.
But when the Europeans initiated trade by giving for furs the attractive
trinkets, and such articles as contributed to the Indian taste of
comfort and grandeur, then there were more regular and frequent
travelings from the sea-board to the far west.

The occupation of Western Canada found the country in its primeval
state; a vast wilderness, and no roads. The only way of traveling from
one clearing to another was by the canoe and batteau, or by foot through
the trackless woods, guided by the banks of the bay, or a river, or the
blazing of the trees. For a long time not even a bridle-path existed,
had there been horses to ride upon. Even at a late date, journeys were
made on foot from Kingston to York along the lake shore. The formation
of roads was a very slow process. In the year 1793, an act was passed
“to Regulate the Laying out, Amending, and Keeping in Repair, the Public
Highways and Roads.” The roads were to be not less than thirty feet, nor
more than sixty wide. Each settler was under obligation to clear a road
across his lot; but there was the reserve lands for the Clergy and
Crown, which were not provided with roads. Any one traveling the older
settled districts will be struck with the devious character of the
highways. The configuration of the Bay Quinté, and the mode of laying
out the lots to secure a frontage upon the water, tended to cause this
irregularity. The settlements being apart, when a communication took
place between them the shortest cut would be taken, so far as hill, and
marsh, and creek would permit. The consequences were that many of the
roads were angular with the lots, or running zigzag. In later years,
some of these roads were closed up, but many remain to mark an original
foot-path. The banks of the bay and of creeks and rivers were naturally
followed, as sure guides, or perhaps as an Indian path. And thus
sometimes the road was made not direct, but roundabout. In the survey of
the concessions, provision was made for roads between the concessions,
and cross-roads were to be left between every fifth and sixth lots.

Many of the main roads were at first marked by the blazing of the trees,
when made through the woods, after a while a foot-path could be seen,
and then boughs were trimmed off, that one might ride on horseback; and
in time the sleigh was driven, and finally a waggon road was made.

Government was slack in giving funds to open up the country, and the
legislation, for many years, in reference to the subject, seemed as if
it was intended to do as little as possible, forgetting the fact that
“the first improvement of any country should be the making of good
roads.” But it soon became important to have a mail road between
Montreal and Kingston, and between Kingston and York, and then by way of
Dundas to the Thames, and to Niagara. Says Mr. A. Sheerwood, “I
recollect when the King’s highway was established from the Provincial
line to Kingston, the line was run by a surveyor named Ponair, with a
surveyor under his direction by the name of Joseph Kilborne. The
distance from the Provincial line to my father’s farm, three miles below
Brockville, was ninety-five miles, and from Brockville to the fort, this
side of Kingston, fifty miles; at the end of each mile was planted a red
cedar post, marked on it the number of miles from the Provincial line;
this line of road was made some years after the first settlement, but I
have forgotten the year.” The original mail road between Kingston and
York did not altogether follow the present line. At first, from
Kingston, the road followed the bay shore to Bath, and continued along
the shore to Adolphustown to Dorland’s Point, where was established a
ferry to communicate with Marysburg at the Lake of the Mountain; thence
the road followed the shore to the head of Picton Bay, and soon to
Bloomfold, Wellington, Consecon, by the Carrying Place, and continued to
closely follow the lake shore. Subsequently this great highway was
called the York Road when going towards York, and the Kingston Road when
going towards Kingston.

Gen. Simcoe intended to have a grand military road from one end of the
Province to the other. This he lined out and gave it the name of Dundas
Street. But he left the Province before his intentions were carried out,
and but a small portion was then constructed; while settlers had located
here and there along the proposed road, and had cleared land and built
with the full expectation that the great thoroughfare would shortly be
opened up. But years passed away, before this was done. Piece after
piece was here and there made passable, until at last the road was made
through the length of the Province.

The late Mr. Finkle of Ernest Town writes: “An American gentleman came
into Canada, 1798, by the name of Asa Danforth, and made a contract with
the Upper Canada Government, to open a road from Kingston through to
Ancaster, at the head of Lake Ontario, which road he completed.
Danforth’s home was at my father’s (Henry Finkle), before and after the
contract was taken. The work commenced in 1798, and was finished in
three years time.” This road passed through Prince Edward by Wellington.
Danforth “became dissatisfied with the government when the settlement
took place, and left Canada with a bitter feeling, so much so, that he,
some time after, sent to my father a package of pamphlets, he had
published to shew the injustice of the government transaction. He
desired they should be circulated through the country along the road.
However, the pamphlets were not distributed, and the fact never became
generally known.” For many years the main road was called the Danforth
Road.

As time advanced, the road between York and Kingston was gradually
improved. The great hindrance to road making is sufficiently indicated
by the following, taken from Gourlay. It is the expression of a meeting
of yeomen, held at the village of Waterloo, Kingston, February 2, 1818,
Major John Everett in the chair. Among other things it is asserted that
what retards the progress is that “great quantities of land in the
fronts and public situations, that remain unimproved, by being given
very injudiciously to persons who do not want to settle on them, and
what is most shameful and injurious, no law is made to compel them to
make or work any public road; but this is to be done by industrious
people, who settle around. Such lands remain like a putrid carcass, an
injury and a nuisance to all around: at the same time, to the owners,
this land increases in value, without their being made to contribute
towards it, at other men’s expense. Our worthies, a few years ago,
passed an act, that required a poor man to work three days upon the
public roads, and these over-gorged landowners but twelve days, and
others, with twenty times as much property, doing no more. It would
excite surprise at Governor Gore’s signing such a bill, if it was not
known that the Parliament voted him £3,000, to buy a piece of plate.”

Says Thomas Markland, in a General Report of Midland District:

“The same cause which has surrounded Little York with a desert, creates
gloom and desolation about Kingston, otherwise most beautifully
situated; I mean the seizure and monopoly of the land by people in
office and favour. On the east side, particularly, you may travel miles
together without passing a human dwelling; the roads are accordingly
most abominable to the very gates of this, the largest town in the
Province; and its market is often supplied with vegetables from the
United States, where property is less hampered, and the exertions of
cultivators more free, accordingly.”

In 1797, Parliament passed an Act, which was the first “for the
regulation of ferries.”

In 1794, an Act was passed “to make further provisions respecting
Highways and Roads.” An Act was passed, 1798, respecting “Statute duties
on Highways and Roads.” In 1804 an Act was passed “granting £1,000 for
repairing, laying out new roads, and building bridges in the several
districts.” Again, in 1808 £1,600 was granted for the same purpose; and
again the same sum in the following year. In 1811, £3,450 was granted.
In 1812, an Act was passed “to prevent damage to travelers on the
highways of the Province.” All persons meeting sleighs or waggons to
turn out to the right, and give half the way. Two or more bells to be
attached to every sleigh.

In 1812, it was found that “many roads were unnecessarily laid out;” to
remedy this, every one had to be confirmed by Justices of the Peace, and
if this were not done, the party who applied for the survey should pay
for the same.

In 1814, £6,000 was granted for Highways and Bridges; and the year
following, “£20,500 to be appropriated,” and Commissioners were
appointed on the road, to receive £25 each. Again, the year after,
£21,000 was granted.

In 1819, Parliament passed an “Act repealing and amending certain
portions of previous Acts,” by which a more elaborate provision was made
to secure statute labor. This was again amended in 1824. In 1826 was
enacted to grant £1,200 for making and repairing roads and bridges—Item:
“In aid of the Society for improving the Public Roads,” in a part of
Ernesttown and Kingston. In 1830, £13,650 was granted “for the
improvement of Roads and Bridges,” of which the Midland District
received £1,900, to be expended as follows, by contract after public
notice: “On the Montreal road, between the Town of Kingston, and the
limits of the County of Frontenac, the sum of fifty pounds. Joseph
Franklin, Elijah Beach, and James Atkinson to be Commissioners for
expending the same: On the road leading from the Town of Kingston, to
the Village of Waterloo, the sum of fifty pounds; and that Samuel
Askroyd, Horace Yeomans, and Benjamin Olcott, be Commissioners for
expending the same. On the leading road from Kingston to the Village of
Bath, the sum of one hundred pounds, and that Henry Lasher, Joseph Amy,
and Prentiss J. Fitch, be Commissioners for expending the same. On the
road leading from the Village of Waterloo to the Napanee Mills, the sum
of three hundred and fifty pounds; and that the Treasurer and Trustees
of the Kingston and Earnesttown Road Society be Commissioners for
expending the same. On the road leading from Loughborough to Waterloo,
the sum of fifty pounds; and that Samuel Aykroyd, John Campbell, and
Henry Wood be Commissioners for expending the same. On the road leading
from the fifth Concession of Portland to the third concession of the
Township of Kingston, fifty pounds; and that Jacob Shibly, Byron Spike,
and Thomas Sigsworth, be Commissioners for expending the same. On the
road leading from Bath to the Township of Camden, the sum of fifty
pounds; and that Ebenezer Perry, Benjamin Clarke, and John Perry, be
Commissioners for expending the same. On the road leading from Wessel’s
Ferry, in Sophiasburg, to Demorest’s Mill, the sum of one hundred
pounds; and that Abraham VanBlaricum, Daniel B. Way, and Guilliam
Demorest, be Commissioners for expending the same. On the road between
the widow M’Cready’s and the north-east of Chrysler’s Creek Bridge, in
the seventh concession of Thurlow, the sum of twenty-five pounds. On the
road in the township of Huntington, leading to the township of Madoc,
and surveyed by W. Ketcheson, in one-thousand eight hundred and
twenty-eight, seventy-five pounds, and that Jacob Jowngs, of Thurlow,
Garret Garritson, of Huntingdon, and James O’Hara, of Madoc, be
Commissioners for expending the same. On the road leading from the
Napanee Mills to Belleville, the sum of eight hundred pounds, and that
Allan McPherson, John Turnbull, William Post, David B. Soles, and John
Mabee, of Thurlow, be Commissioners for expending the same. On the road
leading from VanAlstine’s ferry to the Carrying Place, the sum of two
hundred pounds, and that Simeon Washburn, Esquire, Charles Biggar,
Esquire, and Jesse Henderson, be Commissioners for expending the same.”

During the same session, “there being reason to believe there would not
be enough means on hand to meet the grant,” an Act was passed to raise
by loan £8000. The year after another Act was passed to raise by
debenture the sum of £40,000 more to be appropriated to the several
districts. The Midland district to receive £2,200. Among the
specifications, were “in the Indian woods” £200 for the bridge at the
mouth of the little Cataraqui, £50 “to assist in erecting new bridge
across Marsh Creek, near William Brickman’s, in Ameliasburgh,” £20. “To
erect a bridge across East Creek, at the east end of East Lake, £50.”
“On the road leading from Belleville to the Marmora Iron Works, £250.”

On March, 25, 1828, there was passed an Act respecting “a road between
Ernesttown and the Gore of Fredericksburgh.”

The Preamble says, “whereas, in consequence of a dispute having arisen
between the Justices of the Peace of Ernesttown and Fredericksburgh,
respecting the right of either party to take charge” of the road, and to
which party the right of repairing it belongs, “in consequence of which
dispute, the aforesaid road though much traveled from necessity, is
dangerous and difficult to travel, on account of being left, in a great
measure, for a long time past, without being mended,” &c. It was enacted
that the two townships should equally take charge and keep in repair the
said road, certain portions being allotted to each.

In 1827 an act was passed to incorporate “The Cataraqui Bridge Company.”
Up to this time the communication between Kingston and the opposite
point of Frederick, was only by boat. The Act, or some portions of it
cannot but be interesting: “Whereas John H. Glover, John Marks, John
Macaulay, John Kerby, Christopher Alexander Hagerman, Michael Sproatt,
John P. Hawkins, Robert Moore, Charles Jones, Stephen Yarwood, Augustus
Barber, George Calls, Richard Williams, James B. Forsyth, George
McBeath, Adam Krieu, John S. Cartwright, Robert D. Cartwright, Alexander
Anderson, George O’Kill Stuart, Laughlin Currin, Donald McPherson, James
Jackalls, the younger, Francis Archibald Harper, John Cumming, James
Sampson, Elizabeth Herchmer, Catharine Markland, Anne Macaulay, John
Jenkins, and Edward Forsyth, have petitioned to be incorporated,” &c.
(This furnishes us with the names of the more prominent persons at that
time interested in Kingston). “And whereas, they have represented, by
their agents, that they have made arrangements with His Majesty’s
Government, in case the object above recited be carried into effect, for
the passage of Military and Naval stores, and of the officers and men
belonging and attached to the various Military and Naval departments,
for a certain consideration to be annually paid by the Government, and
that for the purpose of this incorporation, they have subscribed stock
to the amount of £6000.”

The Act of Incorporation provided that “the said Company are authorized
and empowered, at their own cost and charges, to erect and build a good
and substantial bridge over the great river Cataraqui, near the town of
Kingston, from the present scow landing on the military reserve,
opposite to the north-east end of the continuation of Front Street to
the opposite shore on Point Frederick, at the present scow landing on
the Military Reserve, adjoining the western addition of the Township of
Pittsburgh, with convenient access thereto at both ends of the bridge,
to and from the adjacent highways, at present in use; that the said
bridge shall be at least twenty-five feet wide, and of sufficient
strength for artillery carriages,” &c., &c.; they shall also be at
liberty to build tollhouses, and toll-bars; Provided always, that there
be a draw-bridge not less than eighteen feet, in some part, for the
passage of all vessels, which bridge shall be opened at all hours
required without exacting toll, and a space for rafts between the piers,
forty feet.

The amount of toll to be demanded from man and beast, and vehicle, was
fully specified in the Act.

The Company was to be managed by five Directors, Stockholders to hold
office for one year from each last Monday in January. The bridge was to
be completed within three years.

It was provided that no ferry should be allowed, nor other barge.

The final clause enacted that after fifty years his Majesty might assume
the possession of the bridge, upon paying to the Company the full value
thereof, to be ascertained by three arbitrators.

March 20, 1829, an Act was passed extending the time for completing the
bridge, two years from the passing of the Act.

We have seen how the roads throughout Canada, were gradually
constructed. As time advanced steps were taken, sometimes however very
tardily, to place public thoroughfares in a more passable condition. We
believe the road from Kingston to Napanee, was the first to be
macadamized, which for many long years was the exception in an execrable
road, stretching between Kingston and York. The originator of
macadamized roads was John Loudoun McAdam. He was born in Scotland in
1756; emigrated to New York when a lad, and remained in that City
throughout the Revolution. Under the protection of the British troops,
he accumulated a considerable fortune, as agent for the sale of prizes.
At the close of the war he returned to his native land, with the loss of
nearly all his property. His system of making roads is too well known to
require description. The British Government gave him £10,000, and
tendered the honor of knighthood, which he declined, but which was
conferred on his son, James Nicholl McAdam. He died at Moffat, County of
Dumfries, in 1836, aged eighty years.




                             CHAPTER XXIII.

  CONTENTS—Ode to Canada—Early events—First English child in America,
    1587—In New England—First French child, 1621—First in Upper
    Canada, 1783—In Prince Edward—Adolphustown—Ameliasburgh—North of
    the Rideau—Indian marriage ceremony—Difficulty among first
    settlers to get clergymen—First marriage in America, 1608—First in
    New England, 1621—First in Canada, 1620—Marriageable folks—No one
    to tie the matrimonial knot—Only one clergyman—Officers marrying—
    Magistrates empowered—Legislation, 1793—Its provision—Making valid
    certain marriages—Further legislation, 1798—In 1818—1821—1831—
    Clergymen of all denominations permitted to marry—Methodist
    ministers—Marriage license, 1814—Five persons appointed to issue—A
    noticeable matter—Statements of Bates—Mode of courting in the
    woods—Newcastle wedding expeditions—Weapons of defence—Ladies’
    dresses—The lover’s “rig”—A wedding ring—Paying the magistrate—A
    good corn basket—Going to weddings—“Bitters”—Old folks stay at
    home—The dance, several nights—Marriage outfit—Frontier life—
    Morals in Upper Canada—Absence of irregularities—Exceptional
    instances—Unable to get married, Peter and Polly—A singular
    witness—Rev. Mr. Stuart—Langhorn—McDowell—How to adorn the bride—
    What she wore—A wedding in 1808—On horseback—The guests—The
    wedding—The banquet—The game of forfeits—The night—Second day
    wedding—The young folks on horseback—Terpischorean—An elopement by
    Canoe—The Squire—The chase—The lovers successful—The Squires who
    married.


                            “ODE TO CANADA.”

        Canada faithful! Canada fair!
        Canada, beautiful, blooming and rare!
        Canada, happiest land of the earth!
        Hail to thee, Canada! land of my birth!
        Land of fair freedom, where bought not and sold,
        Are sinews and sorrows, for silver and gold!
        Land of broad lakes, sweet valleys and plains!
        Land where justice for rich and poor reigns!
        Land of tall forests, famed rivers and rills!
        Land of fair meadows, bold mountains and hills!
        Land where a man is a man, though he toil!
        Land where the tiller is lord of the soil!
        Land where a people are happy and free—
        Where is the land that is like unto thee?
        Thou hast for the stranger that seeketh thy shore
        A smile, and a cheer, and a welcome in store;
        The needy, relief; and the weary repose;
        A home for thy friends; and a grave for thy foes.
        Thy nobles are those whose riches in store
        Is the wealth of the soul, and the heart’s hidden lore;
        They cringe to no master, they bow to no lord
        Save Heaven’s, each night and each morning adored.
        Land of swift rivers, sweet-gliding along!
        Land of my pride, and land of my song!
        Canada, prosperous! Canada, true!
        Canada loyal, and virtuous, too!
        Canada, happiest land of the earth!
        Hail thee, forever, sweet land of my birth!


                   THE FIRST NATIVES OF UPPER CANADA.

We turn from the sad pictures which have been truthfully, if imperfectly
done, which represent the darker side of the pioneer life of the
refugees, to others more pleasing. In those primitive times, events
which now seem trivial to a general public, were of general interest,
and the recollection cherished by a whole community. In the absence of
those stirring events which characterize the present, incidents of
comparative unimportance, became household words, and recollections.
Hence, it comes that posterity may, in some instances, know who were
first married in certain places in America, of the first birth, and who
first died.

“The first child born of English parents in America, was a daughter of
Mrs. Dore, of Virginia, October 18, 1587.” “There is now standing in
Marshalfield, Cape Cod, a portion of a house built by Perigrine White,
the first male child born of English parents in New England.” According
to the testimony of the registrar of Quebec, the first white child born
in Canada, was upon the 24th October, 1621, which was christened the
same day by the name of Eustache, being the son of Abraham and Margaret
L’Anglois; Abraham was a Scotchman, named Martin Abraham. He was king’s
pilot, and married to Eustache. The plains of Abraham derive their name
from him.

In the obituary notice of Rev. Mr. Pringle, a Methodist preacher, it is
stated that he was born in Prince Edward, in 1780, but this must be a
mistake. There is sufficient proof that the first settlement at Smith’s
Bay commenced in 1784, when the first part of Prince Edward became
settled. Perhaps, indeed, very likely, the first children born of
European parents, was the late Colonel John Clark, of Dalahousie, and an
elder brother and sister. His father, an Englishman, came to Quebec,
attached to the 8th regiment in 1768. From a sergeant-major, he was
appointed in 1776, clerk and naval store keeper at Carleton Island.
Here, Sarah and William Clark were born during the progress of the war.
Col. Clark says, “I was born at Frontenac, now Kingston, in 1783, and
was baptized by the Rev. Mr. Stuart.”

The Rev. Mr. Pringle, before alluded to, was the first, or among the
first-born in Prince Edward.

A son of Thomas Dorland, claimed to be the first white child born in the
fourth township; but the honor was disputed by Daniel Peterson. Mrs. Wm.
Ketcheson, now living in Sidney, daughter of Elizabeth Roblin, of
Adolphustown, was born there in 1784. She must have been one of the very
first, as the first settlers came that same year. On the 16th January
1785, Henry VanDusen was born in Adolphustown, being one of the first
natives.

Upon the 26th April, 1868, was buried Mrs. Bush, she was the first
female born in Ameliasburgh. Mr. Bleeker, yet living at Trenton, was the
first male child born in Ameliasburgh. Mrs. Covert, was also one of the
first persons born in Ameliasburgh.

The first person said to have been born in Toronto, was Mr. J. Cameron,
of Yonge Street, in 1798.

The first child born of white parents north of the Rideau, was Colonel
E. Burritt, Burritt’s Rapids, a relative of Elihu Burritt.


                        MARRYING IN EARLY TIMES.

The native Indians of America practiced no important ceremony in
connection with marrying. Certain steps had to be taken by the one who
might desire to have a certain female as his partner, and those
proceedings were always strictly attended to. But the final ceremony
consisted in little more than the affianced one, leaving the wigwam of
her father and repairing to that of her future lord and master. In many
cases the first settlers of America experienced some difficulty in
obtaining the services of a Christian minister to solemnize matrimony.
In French Canada there was not this difficulty, as from the first the
zealous missionary was ever beside the discoverer as he pressed on his
way.

The first Christian marriage solemnized in America, took place in
Virginia in 1608, between John Loyden and Ann Burras. The first marriage
in New England was celebrated the 12th May, 1621, at Plymouth, between
Edward Waislow and Susannah White. The first marriage in the colony of
French Canada, was between Guillaume Couillard and Guillmet Hebert, July
1620. This is found in the first parish register, which was commenced
this year, 1620.

Among the pioneers of Upper Canada, were persons of every class as to
age, from the tender infant at the breast, to the gray-headed man. There
were young men and young women, as well as the aged, and as hopes and
desires exist to-day in the breast of the young, so did they then. As
the gentle influence of love animates at the present time, so it did
then. But there was a serious drawback; the consummation of courtship
could not easily be realized. Throughout the vast length of the
settlements there were but few clergymen to celebrate matrimony, and
many sighing swains had to wait months, and even years of wearisome time
to have performed the matrimonial ceremony. At the first, when a
chaplain was attached to a regiment, he was called upon, but when the
settlers commenced to clear, there was no chaplain connected with the
regiment. Indeed, Mr. Stuart, of Kingston, was the only clergyman in all
Upper Canada for a few years. But the duties of the chaplain were
frequently attended to by an officer, especially at Niagara, and many of
the first marriages in the young colony were performed by a colonel, an
adjutant, or a surgeon. Subsequently, magistrates were appointed, who
were commissioned to tie the nuptial knot.

                  *       *       *       *       *

In the second session of the first Parliament, 1793, was passed “_An Act
to confirm and make valid certain marriages heretofore contracted in the
country now comprised within the Province of Canada, and to provide for
the future solemnization of marriage within the same._”

“Whereas many marriages have been contracted in this Province at a time
when it was impossible to observe the forms prescribed by law for the
solemnization thereof, by reason that there was no Protestant parson or
minister duly ordained, residing in any part of the said Province, nor
any consecrated Protestant church or chapel within the same, and whereas
the parties having contracted such marriages, and their issue may
therefore be subjected to various disabilities, in order to quiet the
minds of such persons and to provide for the future solemnization of
marriage within this Province, be it enacted and declared by the King’s
Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council and Assembly of the Province of Upper Canada, that
the marriage and marriages of all persons, not being under any canonical
disqualification to contract matrimony, that have been publicly
contracted before any magistrate or commanding officer of a post, or
adjutant, or surgeon of a regiment, acting as chaplain, or any other
person in any public office or employment, before the passing of this
Act, shall be confirmed and considered to all intents and purposes as
good and valid in law, and that the parties who have contracted such
marriages, and the issue thereof, may become severally entitled to all
the rights and benefits, and subject to all the obligations arising from
marriage and consanguinity, in as full and ample a manner as if the said
marriages had respectively been solemnized according to law.

“And be it further enacted, that in order to enable those persons who
may be desirous of preserving the testimony of such marriage, and of the
birth of their children, it shall and may be lawful, at any time, within
three years from the passing of this Act, for any magistrate of the
district where any such parties as may have contracted matrimony as
aforesaid, shall reside, at the request of either of said parties, to
administer to each an oath that they were married on a certain day, and
that there is now living issue of the marriage.” This attestation to be
subscribed to by the parties and certified by the magistrate. The Clerk
of the Peace recorded these certificates in a register for the purpose,
which thereafter was considered sufficient evidence of such matters.

It was further enacted, “That until there shall be five parsons or
ministers of the Church of England, doing duty in their respective
parishes in any one district,” persons “desirous of intermarrying with
each other, and neither of them living within the distance of eighteen
miles of any minister of the Church of England, may apply to any
neighbouring Justice of the Peace,” who should affix in some public
place, a notice, for which he should receive one shilling, and no more.
The purport of the notice was that A. B. and C. D. were desirous of
getting married, and there being no parson within eighteen miles, if any
person knew any just reason why they should not be married, should give
notice thereof to such magistrate. After which a form of the Church of
England was to be followed, but should a minister reside within eighteen
miles of either parties the marriage was null and void.

It is related that these notices of marriage were often attached to
trees by the road side, and as it was considered desirable in those days
to keep intending marriages secret, not unfrequently the intending
parties would watch and remove the notice which had been put up.

In the year 1798, an Act was passed to extend the provisions of the
first Act, which provided that “it shall be lawful for the minister of
any congregation or religious community of persons, professing to be
members of the Church of Scotland, or Lutherans, or Calvinists” to marry
according to the rights of such church, and it was necessary that one of
the persons to be married should have been a member of the particular
church six months before the marriage. The clergyman must have been
regularly ordained, and was to appear before six magistrates at quarter
sessions, with at least seven members of his congregation, to prove his
office, or take the oath of allegiance. And then, if the dignitaries
thought it expedient, they might grant him a certificate that he was a
settled minister, and therefore could marry, having published the
intended marriage upon three Sundays previous.

In November, 1818, a brief act was passed to make valid the marriages of
those who may have neglected to preserve the testimony of their
marriage.

In the year 1821, an act was passed “for the more certain punishment of
persons illegally solemnizing marriage, by which it was provided, that
if persons, legally qualified to marry, should do so without the
publication of banns, unless license be first had, should be guilty of a
misdemeanor.”

There was no further legislation until 1831, when provision was again
made to confirm marriages contracted “before any justice of the peace,
magistrate, or commanding officer of a post, or minister and clergyman,
in a manner similar to the previous acts.” It was at this time enacted
that it should be lawful for ministers of the church of Scotland,
Lutherans, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, Baptists, Independants,
Methodists, Menonists, Tunkers, or Moravians, to solemnize matrimony,
after having obtained certificates from the quarter sessions. According
to the act of 1798, only the church of Scotland, Lutherans, and
Calvinists, beside the English church, were permitted to marry persons.
So it will be seen by this act of 1831, important concessions were made
to different denominations. This act was by the Methodists, especially
regarded as a deserved recognition of the constantly increasing number
of that denomination. It certainly, at this time, seems remarkably
strange, that so obvious a right, was for so long a time withheld, not
alone from them, but other denominations. But the effort was strong, and
long continued to build up the church of England to the exclusion of all
others.

The restriction upon the Methodist ministers was to them greater from
the fact, that for a long time they were members of a Conference
existing, where all denominations were alike endowed with the power to
perform the marriage ceremony. And it is recorded, that in a few
instances, the ministers stationed in Canada, either forgot the
illegality of marrying, or felt indisposed to submit to the unjust law,
and did actually marry some persons. Elder Ryan was one, and was
consequently banished; but was shortly pardoned by government, because
of his known loyalty. His son-in-law, Rev. S. B. Smith, was another; but
he defended himself at the trial and got free. Another was the Rev. Mr.
Sawyer, who at once, being accused, fled the country for a time.

It appears that on the 31st May, 1814, government appointed five persons
to issue marriage licenses. One at Queenston, one at York, one at
Kingston, one at Williamsburgh, and one at Cornwall. John Cumming was
appointed for Kingston. Prior to this, licenses had been occasionally
issued, probably, however, only by application to government. Marrying
by license was so noticeable an event, that it was considered elegant to
state in the marriage notice, “married by license.”

According to a letter in our possession, sometimes the issuer of license
would be without any, when he would give a certificate to the applicant,
by which the party could get married, and subsequently he would furnish
him with the license.

Having given the legal and legislative facts relative to marrying in
early times, it may not be inappropriate to adduce some items of a
social nature.

Roger Bates, of Newcastle, in his memoir at the parliament library,
speaks thus pleasantly and graphically in referring to his father’s
courtship and marriage, which took place at the commencement of the
present century. “The mode of courting in those days was a good deal of
the Indian fashion. The buxom daughter would run through the trees and
bushes, and pretend to get away from the lover; but somehow or other he
managed to catch her, gave her a kiss, and they soon got married, I
rather think by a magistrate. Time was too valuable to make a fuss about
such matters.” Whether this mode of courting was practiced elsewhere,
than in Newcastle, it may be doubted. Speaking of the weddings, and the
journey to get the knot tied, he says, “they generally furnished
themselves with tomahawks and implements to defend themselves, and to
camp out if required. The ladies had no white dresses to spoil, or fancy
bonnets. With deer skin petticoats, home-spun gowns, and perhaps
squirrel skin bonnet, they looked charming in the eyes of their lovers,
who were rigged out in similar materials.” Again, about the wedding
ring, which could not then be procured, he says, “I have heard my mother
say, that uncle Ferguson, a magistrate, rather than disappoint a happy
couple, who had walked twenty miles, made search throughout the house,
and luckily found a pair of old English skates, to which was attached a
ring, with this he proceeded with the ceremony, and fixing the ring on
the young woman’s finger, reminded her, that though a homely substitute,
she must continue to wear it, otherwise the ceremony would be dissolved.
That curious token was greatly cherished, and is still among the family
relics.”

Mr. Sheriff Sherwood, speaking of his father, one of the first
magistrates appointed by Simcoe, says “he probably joined more
individuals together in the happy bonds of matrimony, than any other
person ever has, in the county of Leeds. I have often heard him mention
the circumstance of a young man asking him to marry him, but who said, I
cannot get the money to pay you, but I will make you a good wheat fan,
which he readily accepted, as it was an article much used at that time.
At another time an old man came on the same errand, and said to him, I
cannot get the money to pay you, but I will make you a good corn basket,
with oak splints, and so tight that I will warrant it to hold water, and
the old man punctually fulfilled his promise.”

We have some interesting information from an old lady who settled in
Ameliasburgh, and who still lives. Getting married at the beginning of
the present century was a great event. The Carrying Place was the usual
place of resort. They placed in a lumber waggon, a number of chairs, and
each gallant was supposed to support his partner upon his knee, and thus
economise room. “Bitters” were indulged in, but no fighting allowed. If
one began that, he was put out. Keeping good natured was a point of duty
insisted upon. No old persons went to the wedding, but they joined in
the dance, when the youngsters got back. A wedding without a dance was
considered an insipid affair; and it was generally kept up two or three
successive nights at different places. Francis Weese’s was a half-way
house between McMan’s corners, (Rednerville), and the Carrying Place.
Weese was a distinguished player upon the fiddle, and the wedding
parties often stayed with him the first night.

“A yoke of steers, a cow, three or four sheep, with a bed, table, two
dozen chairs, was regarded a very decent setting out for the bride. And
if the groom was heir to 50 or 100 acres of land, with a little cleared,
he was thought to have the worldly “gear,” to constitute a first-rate
match.”

The history of frontier life; of the advance body of pioneers in the far
west, frequently exhibits great irregularity in morals; a non-observance
of God’s commandments. But the record of the first settlers of Upper
Canada is remarkably bright. When it is recollected that they were but
scattered settlements in a wilderness; far away from civilized life;
excluded from the world, and removed from the influence of the salutary
power of public opinions, it is a matter of wonder, that great and
frequent violation of God’s law, with regard to marrying did not take
place. But such was not the case, as a general thing; the holy bonds of
matrimony, were employed to bind man and woman together, whether through
the officer, the magistrate or the clergyman. For years there was but
few clergymen to marry, and also but few magistrates, and there were
secluded settlements where the clergyman or magistrate came not, and
from which the inhabitants could not go, perhaps for many miles to get
married. But a few, and they are very few instances, are recorded where
parties deviated from the righteous way. Upon the shore of the bay, in a
remote locality, about the year 1796, lived two individuals, whom we
will call respectively Peter and Polly. They were living in the same
family, she as a “help,” and he as a hired man upon the farm. This
couple had desired to enter the bonds of matrimony; but the ministers
and squires lived some distance off, and they could not get away to be
married, so they had to wait for the coming of one who would marry them;
they had to wait, it would seem for several years, in the mean time they
consoled themselves with genuine, and no doubt honest love. At last it
came to pass that a Squire visited that neighbourhood, and stopped at
the house where they lived.

The family bethought them of the wishes of Peter and Polly; and that now
was the time to have the legal knot tied. So Polly was called from the
kitchen just as she was, and Peter from the field besmeared with sweat,
and clean dirt, and the two were made one. Among the witnesses of the
interesting ceremony, was a bright eyed boy who trotted unceremoniously
from the bride to the groom, calling them respectively “mozzer” and
“fadder.” The time came when this same boy was the owner of the land
whereon he had been born. This fact, from excellent authority, stands
out as an exception to a general rule, although there is not about it
that flagrant violation of moral principle which is too often seen at
the present day, under other circumstances which afford no excuse.

The Rev. Mr. Stuart, living at Kingston, was not often called upon to
marry, by persons outside of that village, and persons rarely found time
to go all the way to him. When Mr. Langhorn came and opened a church at
Adolphustown, and Bath, a more central place was supplied, and he
consequently was often employed. But Mr. McDowell was the one who most
frequently was required to marry. Being a minister of the church of
Scotland, he enjoyed the privilege of marrying, and unlike Langhorn, he
would marry them at their homes. So when making his rounds through the
country, on his preaching excursions, he was frequently called upon to
officiate in this capacity.

In the region of the Bay, were some who had in previous days, lived in
comfort, and had not wanted all that belonged to the well-to-do
inhabitants along the Hudson, and at New York. In some cases, these
families brought with them the fine clothes that had adorned their
bodies in former times. Not only was it difficult for them, in many
cases, to get some one to perform the marriage ceremony; but to the
female, especially, it was a grave matter how to adorn the bride with
that apparel which becomes the event. In those cases where rich clothes,
which had been used by parents, were stored away, they were brought
forth, and by a little alteration, made to do service; but by and by
these relics of better days were beyond their power to renovate, and
like others, they had, if married at all, to wear the garb mentioned by
Roger Bates, or some other plain article; a calico print, bought of a
pedlar, or a calamink, or linsey-woolsey petticoat, or a woolen drugget,
were no common luxuries in the wilderness home. An old lady who is still
living, tells us that she was married in 1807, and wore the
last-mentioned; and was thought very extravagant indeed. A venerable
lady, a native of the Bay, and now well-nigh eighty, remembers to have
attended a wedding about the year 1708, up the river Moira. She was
living with her uncle, Col. C. The wedding was one of some importance,
as both parties were well-to-do. There was but a path along the banks of
the river, and they went on horse back. At that time riding on horseback
was a common practice, not a single person merely, but in couples. It
was no unusual thing to see man and wife riding along together, also
brother and sister, and as well lovers. The guests to this wedding all
came on horse back, generally in pairs. They assembled early in the
forenoon, and the happy pair were soon united. The bride’s dress was
unusually grand, being of lawn; the two bridesmaids graced the occasion
by being dressed in muslin. She bears a distinct recollection of the
entertainment. The banquet was crowned with a majestic chicken pie, in a
pan capable of holding some twelve quarts; by roast goose, and with pies
and cakes of all sorts, in abundance. The bride’s father was the deacon
of a church, and did not allow dancing, but the afternoon and evening
were spent in joyous mirth and jovial “plays” in connection with which
forfeits were lost and redeemed. But, however much these plays may have
degenerated in recent days, they were then conducted with purity of
thought, and innocence of soul. The party did not break up the first
day. Half of the company repaired to the house of the groom’s father,
where beds were arranged for them. In the morning they went back to the
scene of the wedding, upon the banks of the river, which at this point
is particularly attractive. After breakfast, the young people, with the
newly married pair, set out for the front, to the mouth of the river.
They formed a joyous, and it must have been a picturesque cavalcade.
Each gentleman selected his fair partner, and having mounted his horse,
she was duly seated behind him. And thus they set out for their
destination. Pleasant, indeed, must have been the ride; striking the
scene, as they wended their way along the running water, and the bright
autumn sun shone upon them through the variegated leaves which clothed
the thickly standing trees. This night was spent at Myers’ Creek, in
following the notes of the fiddle with the nimble feet. This terminated
the wedding party. This is adduced as an illustration of marrying in
early times. Another will be briefly given: it was a case of elopement,
and occurred many years before the wedding above mentioned. A certain
Squire had been for many years in the enjoyment of wedded bliss. His
wife was the daughter of Capt. ——, a half-pay officer, an honest but
wayward Dutchman. The Squire’s wife died, and, in due time, he sought
the hand of another daughter of the Captain. But this the latter would
not listen to; he was determined they should not marry; because she was
his late wife’s sister. The worthy Squire could not see the force of the
objection, and the lady in question was likewise blinded by love. They
resolved to run away, or rather to paddle away, in a convenient canoe.
Clandestinely they set out upon the head waters of the bay, intending to
go to Kingston to obtain the services of a clergyman. But the Captain
learned the fact of their departure and started in pursuit with his
batteau and oarsmen. According to one account, the flying would-be
groomsman, who was paddling his own canoe, saw the angry parent coming,
and made haste to quicken his speed, but finding that they would be
overtaken, they landed upon an island in the bay, and hauled up the
canoe; and concealed it, with themselves, in a cavity upon the island;
and, after the Captain had passed, returned homeward and procured the
services of a Squire to marry them. But, according to another statement,
the lovers set out while the Captain was absent at Montreal, and arrived
at Kingston, unfortunately, as he was returning home. Seeing the Squire,
he had his suspicions aroused, and began to look about for his daughter.
She had, however, concealed herself by throwing an Indian blanket about
her person, and over her head, and by sitting down among some squaws.
The statement goes, that it was well the Captain did not find her, as he
would, as soon as not, have shot the Squire. The end of it was, they
were married, to live a long and happy domestic life. Although there may
be a little doubt as to the details of this early elopement on the bay,
there is no doubt that it took place in some such manner as described.

Among the Squires upon the Bay, the following were the most frequently
called upon to marry: Young, of the Carrying Place; Bleeker, of the
Trent; Lazier, of Sophiasburgh. The magistrates residing nearer Kingston
and Adolphustown had less of this to do, as clergymen could there be
more easily obtained.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.

  CONTENTS—Burying Places—How Selected—Family Burying Places—For the
    Neighbourhood—The Dutch—Upon the Hudson—Bay Quinté—A Sacred Spot
    to the Loyalists—Ashes to Ashes—Primitive Mode of Burial—The
    Coffin—At the Grave—The Father’s Remarks—Return to Labor—French
    Burying-place at Frontenac—Its Site—U. E. Loyalists’ Burying-place
    at Kingston—The “U. E. Burying Ground,” Adolphustown—Worthy Sires
    of Canada’s Sons—Decay—Neglect of Illustrious dead—Repair Wanted—
    Oldest Burying Ground in Prince Edward—Ross Place—At East Lake—
    Upon the Rose Farm—“The Dutch Burying Ground”—Second Growth Trees—
    In Sophiasburgh—Cronk Farm—In Sidney—Rude Tomb Stones—Burial-place
    of Capt. Myers—Reflections—Dust to Dust—In Thurlow—“Taylor Burying
    Ground”—The First Person Buried—Lieut. Ferguson—An Aged Female—Her
    Work Done—Wheels Stand Still.


             THE EARLY BURYING PLACES UPON THE BAY QUINTÉ.

“_Your fathers, where are they?_”

Burying places in all the new settlements were, as a general thing,
selected by the family to which death might first come. This was true of
every part of America. Ere the forest had fallen before the hand of the
axeman, or while the roots and stumps of the trees yet thickly
encumbered the ground, before the scythe had been used to cut the first
products of the soil, the great reaper death passed by, and one and
another of the number were cut down. Some suitable place, under the
circumstances, was selected for the grave, and quietly the body was laid
away. In time, a neighbour would lose a member of the family, and the
body would be brought and laid beside the first buried. And so on, until
a certain circle would be found burying in a common place. But sometimes
families would prefer to have a private burial ground, some conspicuous
spot being selected upon the farm, where the ashes of the family might
be gathered together, as one after another passed away. The Dutch are
particularly attached to this custom. This may be seen even yet in those
old sections of New York State, where the Dutch originally settled,
especially at Hoboken, opposite New York City. Sacred spots were
appropriated by each family upon the farm, in which the family was
buried. The descendants of these Dutch who became such loyal subjects,
and suffering refugees who settled around the bay, followed the same
practice. These spots may be seen along the Hudson, and the Bay Quinté,
which may be regarded as the Hudson of Canada, and are indicated by the
drooping willow, or the locust or cypress. Some from whom reliable
information has been received, state that the spot selected on the Bay
Quinté was often that, where the family had first landed—where they had
rested on the bare earth, beneath the trees, until a hut could be
erected. This spot was chosen by the refugee himself as a suitable place
to take his last rest. Indeed, the devotion of the settler to the land
where he had wrought out his living, and secured a comfortable home, was
sometimes of an exalted character. One instance by way of illustration:—
There came to the shores of Hay Bay an heroic woman, a little rough
perhaps, but one whose soul had been bitterly tried during the conflict
between her king and the rebels. Her husband had been on many a
battle-field, and she had assisted on many an occasion to give comfort
to the British troops. The log hut was duly erected, and day after day
they went forth together to subdue the wilderness. In the sear and
yellow leaf, when competence had been secured and could be bequeathed to
their children, when the first log tenement had fallen to decay, she
caused her children to promise that her body should be laid upon the
spot where that old hut had stood.

The mode of burial was often simple and touching, often there was no
clergyman of any denomination; no one to read a prayer over the dead for
the benefit of the living. Frequently, in the hush of suspended work,
through the quiet shades of the trees whose boughs sighed a requiem,
like as if angels whispered peace to the sad and tearful mourners who
silently, or with suppressed sobs, followed the coffin of the plainest
kind, often of rough construction, which contained the remains of a
loved one to the grave, in some spot selected. The rude coffin being
placed in the grave, those present would uncover, and the father, in sad
tones, would make a few remarks respecting the departed, offer a few
thoughts which the occasion suggested, and then the coffin was hidden
out of sight. The men would return to their labors, and the women to
their duties.

We learn, on excellent authority, that the burial place for the French,
at Fort Frontenac, was where the barracks now stand near the bridge. But
not unlikely the French, when one died away from the fort at any
distance, committed the dead to the earth in Indian burial places. The
first burial place for the U. E. Loyalists in Kingston, was situated
where St. Paul’s Church now stands, on Queen Street, which was formerly
called Grove Street.

No township is more rich in historic matters, pertaining to the U. E.
Loyalists than Adolphustown. Here settled a worthy band of refugees
whose lineage can be traced back to noble names in France, Germany and
Holland. Here was the birth-place of many of Canada’s more prominent and
worthy sons, and here repose the ashes of a large number of the devoted
pioneers.

As the steamboat enters to the wharf at Adolphustown, the observer may
notice a short distance to the west, upon the summit of a ridge, a small
enclosure in which are a number of second growth trees, maple and oak.
He may even see indistinctly a few marble tombstones. If he walks to the
spot he will find that the fence is rough, broken, and falling down.
Casting his eye over the ground he sees the traces of numerous graves,
with a few marble head-stones, and a long iron enclosure within which
are buried the dead of the Casey family; with a marble slab to the head
of each. The ground generally is covered with the _debris_ of what once
formed enclosures of individual graves or family plots. When visited by
the writer, one grave, that of Hannah Vandusen, had growing out of its
bosom a large poplar tree, while the wooden fence around was falling and
resting against the tree. The writer gazed on these evidences, not alone
of decay but neglect, with great regret, and with a sigh. For here,
without any mark of their grave, lie many who were not only noble U. E.
Loyalists, but who were men of distinction, and the fathers of men well
known in Canadian History. Mr. Joseph B. Allison, accompanied us, and
pointed out the several spots where he had seen buried these illustrious
dead.

In the north-west corner of the ground, with no trace even of a grave to
mark the spot, lies the old Major who commanded the company. Mr. Allison
was present, although a little boy at his burial. The event is fixed
upon his mind by the fact the militia turned out and buried him with
military honors. We stood on the spot overgrown with thorn trees, and
felt a pang that his name was thus forgotten, and his name almost
unknown. Close by is a neat marble headstone to a grave, upon which is
the following: “_Henry Hover, departed this life, August 23rd, 1842,
aged 79 years, 5 months and 17 days._” Noble man! Imprisonment with
chains for nearly two years, with many hardships during, and after the
war, did not make his life short, and we were thankful he had left
descendants who forgot not to mark his resting-place. For account of
this person see under “Royal Combatants.”

The entrance gate to the ground is at the east side. To the right on
entering, a short distance off, is an oak tree. Between the gate and
tree was laid the body of Nicholas Hagerman. Sad to say, nothing
indicates the resting-place of the earliest lawyer of the Province, and
the father of Judge Hagerman. (See distinguished Loyalists). In the
middle of the ground rests the dead of the Casey family. The two old
couple whom we remember to have seen when a boy in their green old age,
lie here. “Willet Casey died aged 86. Jane, his wife, aged 93.” We would
say to all here buried, _Requiescat in pace_. But the very crumblings of
the enclosures which were put around the graves by sorrowing friends
when they died cry out against the neglected state of the ground. The
efforts which have repeatedly been made to put the place in repair ought
to be repeated, and a stone wall at least made to effectually inclose
the sacred dust.

The oldest burying place, we believe, in Prince Edward, is some distance
from Indian Point, upon the Lake Shore, and east of the Rock, commonly
known as Ross’s Burying Ground. In this spot are buried some of the
first and most distinguished of the first settlers of Marysburgh.

Another old burying place in Prince Edward is at East Lake, at the
commencement of the Carrying Place. Here may be found the graves of some
eighteen persons who made the first settlement of East Lake. The lot
upon which it is situated belonged to Mr. Dyse. It is no longer used,
but is partially in a ploughed field, and partially covered by a second
growth of trees.

Upon the road along the south shore of Marysburg, a short distance west
of the Rock, upon the Rose farm, are to be seen the lingering remains of
the first church of this township. It was erected at an early date, and
was twenty-four feet square. Here Weant was wont to preach to his flock
of Lutherans, and here at times Langhorn from Bath also held forth. The
situation is pleasant, upon the brow of a comparatively steep hill,
overlooking a pleasant low-land, with the shining Ontario, and Long
Point stretching away into its waters; while to the right is the well
sheltered Wappoose Island. But another object attracts our attention.
Almost immediately fronting us upon a sand-hill close by the water’s
edge is to be seen “the old Dutch burying ground.” It is about
half-a-mile from the road, and we will descend the hill and take the
road through the fields along the fence, the way by which so many have
passed to their long home. The old graveyard is overshadowed by good
sized second growth pines, whose waving tops sigh not unharmoniously
over the ashes of the old Hessian and Dutch settlers. The adjacent shore
washed by the ever throbbing lake gives forth to day the gentlest
sounds. These old burying places remind one that Canada is ever growing
old. Here lie, not alone the early pioneers, but their grand-children;
and over the spot cleared are now good sized second growth trees. The
head boards are fallen in decay, the fence around the plots have
crumbled in the dust.

The oldest burying place in Sophiasburgh is upon the Cronk farm east of
Northport.

Nearly midway between Belleville and Trenton is situated the oldest
burying ground of Sidney. It is pleasantly located upon an eminence by
the bay shore, and affords a fine view of the bay, and opposite shore.
The visitor will be struck with the irregularity of the graves in the
place primarily used, as if the graves had been dug among the stumps.
Some of them are almost north and south. At the ends of mostly all are
placed stones, rough they are, but lasting, and have, in a large number
of cases, more permanently indicated the position of the graves. Upon
some of these rough stones are rudely cut the initials of the occupant
of the grave. In a great number of cases tablets painted on wood have
been placed to commemorate the individual deceased. But these are
totally obliterated, and the wood is falling to decay. Probably the
temporary mark of affectionate sorrowing was as lasting as the life of
the bereaved. We lingered among the graves here, and they are numerous.
We see the name Myers. And we know that old Capt. Myers was buried here,
after an eventful life. Around him also repose his old acquaintances and
friends—and enemies. They are gone with the primeval woods that covered
the slopes by the Bay Quinté—gone with the hopes and aspirations, and
prospects, and realizations that crowned their trying and eventful life—
gone so that their ashes can no longer be gathered, like the old batteau
which transported them thither—gone like their old log houses whose very
foundations have been plowed up—gone like their rude implements of
agriculture—gone by the slow and wearisome steps of time which marks the
pioneer’s life.

It is gratifying to see that while the ground has been extended, a new
fence has been built, and elegant tombstones, 1868.

The first place set apart in which to bury the dead, in the township of
Thurlow was the “Taylor Burying Ground.” It is situated in Belleville,
at the east of the mouth of the Moira, in view of the bay. The first
person committed to the earth here was Lieut. Ferguson, who had been
associated with Capt. Singleton. The second individual is supposed to
have been the mother of John Taylor. She had been brought to the place
by her son, her only son, two having been executed by the rebels during
the war, when almost ninety years of age. But her stay on earth had
almost ended; not long after, she was one day engaged in spinning flax,
and suddenly ceased her work, and told them to put away the wheel, as
she would spin no more. A few minutes after she ceased to live, and the
weary wheels of life stood still. For many years this ground was the
repository of the dead, about the mouth of Myers’ Creek.




                              DIVISION V.
                   THE EARLY CLERGYMEN AND CHURCHES.




                              CHAPTER XXV.

  CONTENTS—French Missionaries—First in 1615—Recollets—With Champlain—
    Jesuits, in 1625—Valuable records—Bishopric of Quebec, 1674—First
    Bishop of Canada, Laval—Rivalry—Power of Jesuits—Number of
    Missionaries—Their “Relations”—First mission field; Bay Quinté
    region—“Antient mission”—How founded—First missionaries—Kleus,
    abbe D’Urfé—La Salle, to build a church—The ornaments and sacred
    vessels—The site of the “Chappel,” uncertain—Bald Bluff, Carrying
    Place—Silver crosses—Mission at Georgian Bay—The “Christian
    Islands”—Chapel at Michilmicinac, 1679—The natives attracted—
    Subjects of the French King—Francois Picquet—La Presentation—
    _Soegasti_—The most important mission—The object—Six Nations—The
    Missionary’s living—“Disagreeable expostulations”—Putting stomach
    in order—Trout—Picquet’s mode of teaching Indians—The same
    afterward adopted by Rev. W. Case—Picquet’s success—Picquet on a
    voyage—At Fort Toronto—Mississaugas request—Picquet’s reply—A
    slander—At Niagara, Oswego—At Frontenac—Grand reception—Return to
    La Presentation—Picquet in the last French war—Returns to France—
    By Mississippi—“Apostles of Peace”—Unseemly strife—Last of the
    Jesuits in Canada.


                     THE FIRST FRENCH MISSIONARIES.

In introducing this subject, we propose first to glance at the original
French Missionaries, and then at the first Protestant Missionaries and
clergymen, who labored in the Atlantic Provinces.

The first missionaries of Christianity to America, came to Canada in the
year 1615. They were four in number, and belonged to the order of
Recollets, or Franciscans, of Spanish origin, a sect who attended to the
spiritual wants of the people without accepting any remuneration. Four
of these devoted men attended Champlain on his second visit to Canada in
1615. Three years later the Pope accorded the charge of missions in
Canada to the Recollets of Paris. In 1625 members of the society of
Jesus likewise entered the mission of America. Ignatius Loyola founded
the Jesuit society in 1521. These two orders of Roman Catholics,
especially the Jesuits, contributed much to the advancement of French
interests in Canada, and by their learning assisted greatly to elevate
the people. Side by side they traversed the vast wilderness of America,
with the intrepid explorers, and by their close observations, committed
to paper, they have left most valuable records of the country in its
primeval state; and the different tribes of savages that held possession
of the country.

Canada was “constituted an apostolic vicariate,” by the Pope, in 1657;
and became an episcopal see, named the Bishopric of Quebec, about 1673.
The first bishop of Canada was Francis de Laval, of the distinguished
house of Montmorency. The rivalry which existed between the Jesuits and
the Recollets, led to the withdrawal from the country of the latter. But
they returned again about 1669. They were welcomed by the people, who
preferred their self-supporting principles to the Jesuits, under Laval,
who required sustentation from them, which was exacted by a system of
tithes. The Jesuits became a very powerful ecclesiastical body, and
commanded even sufficient political influence to secure the recall of
the Governor, who was obnoxious to them, in 1665. Yet the people did not
like them, in their usurpation of temporal power. The second bishop of
Canada was M. de Saint Vallier, who was elevated to that position in
1688.

“Between the years 1635–1647, Canada was visited by eighteen Jesuit
missionaries.” It was due to these missionaries, who remained with, and
adapted themselves to the Indian tribes, that Canada held such a
position among the Aborigines. The relations of these missionaries are
of thrilling interest, and deserve the attention of all who desire to
become a student of history.

When there were no more than sixty inhabitants at Quebec, in 1620, the
Recollets had begun to erect a convent and chapel upon the banks of the
St. Charles River.

The Bay Quinté region may be regarded as the earliest mission field in
America. Of the four Missionaries who came with Champlain from France,
in 1615, one at least accompanied him in his journey up the Ottawa,
across to Georgian Bay, and down the Trent to the Bay. This was in July,
and Champlain was under the necessity of remaining in this region until
the following spring, in the meantime visiting several of the tribes all
along the north shore of Lake Ontario. During this period the zealous
Recollet earnestly labored to lay the foundation of Christianity among
the natives, and planted the “antient mission” spoken of by father
Picquet, 1751. We have positive statements to this effect. Probably when
Champlain returned to Montreal, in the spring of 1616, he was not
accompanied by the missionary; who stayed to establish the work he had
commenced. We find it stated that the earliest missionaries to this
region were M. Dolliere de Kleus, and Abbé D’Urfé, priests of the Saint
Sulpice Seminary. Picquet remarks that the ancient mission at the Bay
Quinté was established by Kleus and D’Urfé.

In June, 1571, DeCourcelles, as we have seen, visited Lake Ontario,
coming directly up the St. Lawrence. On this occasion, it is recorded,
he sent messages from Cataraqui “to a few missionaries residing among
the Indians.” Two years later, when Frontenac came, with a view of
establishing a fort, we find it stated that as he approached Cataraqui,
he was met by a canoe with the “Abbé D’Urfé, and the Captains of the
Five Nations.” The following year, 1674, LaSalle, in his petition for
the grant of Fort Frontenac, and adjacent lands, proposed “to build a
church when there will be 100 persons, meanwhile to entertain one or two
of the Recollet Friars to perform divine service, and administer the
sacraments there.” In the reply to this petition by the King, it was
stipulated that LaSalle should “cause a church to be erected within six
years of his grant.”

When Bradstreet, nearly a hundred years later, in 1751, captured Fort
Frontenac, the Commandant, M. de Moyan, obtained the promise from
Bradstreet, to “permit the ornaments and sacred vessels of the chappel
to be removed in the luggage of the Chaplain.”

By the foregoing, we learn the interesting fact, that for 150 years
before the capture of Canada by the English, and nearly 170 before Upper
Canada was first settled, there existed at the Bay Quinté an active
mission of Roman Catholic Christianity. The exact location of the
“chappel” cannot be fixed; but there is every reason to suppose that it
was upon the shores of the Bay, at some distance westward from
Cataraqui, inasmuch as reference is made to the chapel as quite apart
from the Fort, at Cataraqui.

From the nature of the relics found in the Indian burying ground, near
the Carrying Place, at Bald Bluff, by Weller’s Bay, it might even have
been situated there. Silver crosses, and other evidences of Roman
Catholic Christianity, have been found in this place. Father Picquet
remarks that the land was not good, but the quarter is beautiful.

There seems every probability that not many years after the
establishment of the mission by the Bay Quinté, another was established
in the neighborhood of Lake Huron, or Georgian Bay. Upon the river Wye,
some six miles north of Penetanguishene, Pe-na-tang-que shine, so called
by the Indians upon first seeing the sand banks, meaning “see the sand
is falling,” was established a French fort, at an early date, the
foundation of which may yet be seen. It appears likely that at this
point, at the Christian Islands, (a significant name,) situated between
the Manitoulin Islands and the mainland; and also at Michilmicinac, were
commenced missionary labors by the Recollets and others. We find it
stated that in 1679 there was a chapel at Michilmicinac, which may refer
to the Christian Islands. Here LaSalle, on his way westward, stopped and
attended mass, with the celebrated Recollet, Pére Hennepin.

The natives were strongly attached to these French missionaries.
Presents of porcelaine beads to make wampum, with a kind demeanor, soon
won many of them to become Roman Catholics; and the cross was set up in
their midst. And the time came when they were willing to acknowledge
themselves under the protection of, and subject to the French King.

At the present site of Ogdensburgh, in the year 1748, “Francis Picquet,
Doctor of the Sarbonne, King’s Missionary, and Prefect Apostolic to
Canada,” began to found the mission of _La Presentation_. By the river
Oswegotchie, then called by the Indians _Soegasti_, he succeeded in
planting a mission, which became the most important in all Canada. The
object was to convert the Six Nations to Roman Catholic Christianity,
and thereby to win them from their connection with the English. M.
Picquet was a devoted man. “He received at that time neither allowance
nor presents. From the King he had but one half pound of pork a day,
which made the savages say, when they brought him a buck and some
partridges, “We doubt not, Father, but that there have been disagreeable
expostulations in your stomach, because you had nothing but pork to eat.
Here is something to put your affairs in order.” They sometimes brought
him trout weighing eighty pounds.

In 1749, when French interests were declining in the new world, and when
every effort to secure the alliance of the Iroquois was devised,
Governor de Veudreuil sent the Rev. Abbe Picquet of the missionary house
at La Presentation, he being well and favorably known among the Five
Nations. The object was to draw within the bounds of La Presentation
many of the families, where they should not only be taught the Catholic
religion, but also the elements of husbandry. It was somewhat the same
idea as that which led the Rev. William Case, in later days, to
domesticate the Mississaugas on the Grape Island. L’Abbe Picquet was
successful in his mission, and in 1751, he had 396 heads of families
living at the place. Among these were the most distinguished and
influential families of the Iroquois. The settlement was divided into
three villages, and much taste and skill were displayed in the planning.
Great attractiveness characterized the place up to the conquest of
Canada.

In the month of June, 1751, Father Picquet set out upon a voyage up to
Fort Frontenac, and thence up the Bay Quinté, and the River Trent to
Fort Toronto, and so on around Lake Ontario. He embarked in a King’s
canoe, accompanied by one bark, in which were five trusty savages. The
memoir of this trip is curious and edifying.

Proceeding to Fort Toronto, by way of the Trent, then an important
trading post with the Indians, he found Mississaugas there who flocked
around him; they spoke first of the happiness their young people, the
women and children, would feel, if the King would be as good to them as
to the Iroquois, for whom he procured missionaries. They complained that
instead of building a church, they had constructed only a canteen for
them. Abbe Picquet did not allow them to finish, and answered them, that
they had been treated according to their fancy; that they had never
evinced the least zeal for religion; that their conduct was much opposed
to it;—that the Iroquois, on the contrary, had manifested their love for
Christianity, but as he had no order to attract them to his mission, he
avoided a more lengthy explanation,” (Paris Doc). This conduct on the
part of Abbe Picquet must be regarded as heartless in the extreme. Such
language ought not to come from the lips of a missionary. It shows that
the Iroquois, because of his relationship with the English, had souls of
far more importance than the Mississauga, whose character for peace
rendered him of minor importance. The reflection upon the character was
uncharitable; and, judging by the light supplied by later days, it was
untrue—shamefully untrue. That the Mississauga Indians acquired a taste
for the brandy vended to them by the French trader was certainly a fact;
but that did not indicate an unwillingness on their part, to become
Christians. Missionaries, of the present century, have succeeded in
raising the Mississauga, not alone from paganism, but from a degrading
love of spirituous liquors acquired of the French, to a distinguished
place among converted Indians.

Abbe Picquet went from Fort Toronto, probably by the River Don, and
thence across the lake, to Fort Niagara, to negotiate with the Senecas.
Passing along the south shore, he visited the English fort at the mouth
of the River Oswego, called _Choueguen_. He also visited the River
Gascouchogou, (Genesee) and returned to Frontenac, where a grand
reception awaited him. “The Nippissings and Algonquins who were going to
war, drew up in a line of their own accord above Fort Frontenac, where
three standards were hoisted. They fired several volleys of musketry,
and cheered incessantly. They were answered in the same style from all
the little crafts of bark. M. de Verchere, and M. de la Valtrie, caused
the guns of the fort to be discharged at the same time, and the Indians,
transported with joy at the honors paid them, also kept up a continual
fire with shouts and exclamations which made every one rejoice. The
commandants and officers received our missionary at the landing. No
sooner had he landed than all the Algonquins and Nippissings of the lake
came to embrace him. Finally, when he returned to _La Presentation_, he
was received with that affection, that tenderness, which children would
experience in recovering a father whom they had lost.” Three years later
war was, for the last time, in progress between the French and English
in America. Father Picquet contributed much to stay the downfall of
French domination. He distinguished himself in all the principal
engagements, and by his presence animated the Indian converts to battle
for the French King. At last, finding all was lost, he retired on the
8th May, 1760. He ascended the Bay Quinté and Trent by Fort Toronto, and
passed on to Michilmicinac, and thence to the Mississippi; and then to
New Orleans, where he stayed twenty-two months. Died 15th July, 1781,
called the “Apostle of the Iroquois.”

During the French domination in Canada, the dissentions between the
Recollets and Jesuits were almost incessant. Now the one was sustained
and patronized by the governor regnant, now the other, and many were the
struggles between Church and State. The closing days of French rule
witnessed scenes of unseemly strife between the clergy and the
governors. The last of the Jesuits in Canada, Father Casat, died in
1800, and the whole of their valuable possessions came to the
government.




                             CHAPTER XXVI.

  CONTENTS—First Church in New York, 1633—First Dominie, Rev.
    Everardus Bogardus—The Dutch, Huguenots, Pilgrims—Transporting
    ministers and churches—First Rector of New York, Wm. Vesey—Henry
    Barclay, 1746—First Catholic Bishop in America, 1789—Episcopalian
    Bishop, 1796—Moral state of Pioneers in Canada—Religion—No
    ministers—No striking immorality—Feared God and honored their
    King—The Fathers of Upper Canada—Religious views—A hundred years
    ago—“Carousing and Dancing”—Rev. Dr. John Ogilvie—First Protestant
    Clergyman in Canada—Chaplain 1759, at Niagara—A Missionary—
    Successor of Dr. Barclay, New York—Death, 1774—Rev. John Doughty—A
    Graduate Ordained—At Peekskill—Schenectady—A Loyalist—A Prisoner—
    To Canada—Chaplain—To England—Returns—Missionary—Resigns—Rev. Dr.
    John Stuart—First Clergyman to settle—His Memoir—The “Father of
    the U. C. Church”—Mission Work—The Five Nations—The Dutch—Rev. Mr.
    Freeman—Translator—Rev. Mr. Andrews—Rev. Mr. Spencer Woodbridge,
    Howley—New England Missionaries—Rev. Dr. Whelock—The Indian
    Converts—The London Society—Rev. Mr. Inglis—John Stuart selected
    missionary—A Native of Pennsylvania—Irish descent—A Graduate,
    Phil. Coll.—Joins Church of England—To England—Ordination—Holy
    Orders 1770—Enters upon his work.


               THE FIRST PROTESTANT CLERGYMAN IN AMERICA.

According to the Rev. J. B. Wakley, “The Reformed Dutch Church was the
first organized in New Amsterdam, (New York). This year, 1633, the first
church edifice was erected on this island, (Manhatten). It was built on
what is called Broad Street. It was a small frail wooden building. The
name of the first Dominie is preserved, the Rev. Everardus Bogardus. He
came over from Holland with the celebrated Wanter Van Twiller. The Dutch
and the Huguenots, as well as the Pilgrims, brought the church, the
school-master, and their Bibles with them. They erected a dwelling for
the Rev. Mr. Bogardus to reside in. This was the first parsonage built
on the island, if not in America. This first minister in New Amsterdam
met with a sad end. After spending some years in the new world, in
returning to his native land, he, with eighty-one others, was lost off
the coast of Wales. The Bogarts are probably descended from this pioneer
minister, he having left children behind him in America, or some near
connection. The first Rector of the Church of England in New York, was
the Rev. William Vesey, pastor of Trinity Church. The Rev. Dr. Henry
Barclay was the second Rector, who had previously been catechist for ten
years to the Mohawk Indians. He became Rector October 22, 1746.” He was
the father of the late Thomas Barclay, Consul-General of His British
Majesty in the United States, and grandfather of Mr. Anthony Barclay,
late British Consul at New York, who was under the necessity of
returning home during the Russian war, in consequence of the jealousy
and partiality of the American Government.

We find it stated that Dr. Carroll, of Maryland, was the first Catholic
Bishop in America, 1789.

Dr. Seabury, Bishop of Connecticut, was the first Episcopalian Bishop of
that State, he died in 1796.

The circumstances of the settlers in Upper Canada were not such as would
conduce to a growth of religion and morality. Apart from the effect upon
them resulting from a civil war, and being driven away from home—
isolated in a wilderness, far removed from civilization; there were
circumstances inimical to the observance of religious duties. The
earnest contest for life, the daily struggle for food, and more
especially, the absence of ministers of the gospel, all combined to
create a feeling of indifference, if not a looseness of morals. In a few
instances, there was on the part of the settlers, a departure from that
strict virtue, which obtains at the present time, and in which they had
been trained. But on the whole, there was a close adherence, and a
severe determination to serve the God of their fathers. From many a log
cabin ascended the faithful prayer of the followers of Luther; of the
conscientious Episcopalian, and the zealous Methodist and Baptist. Yet,
for years, to some the word of life was not preached; and then but
rarely by the devoted missionary as he traveled his tedious round of the
wilderness. After ten years, the average of inhabitants to the square
miles, was only seven. This paucity of inhabitants, prevented regular
religious sermons by clergymen, as it did the formation of well taught
schools. This absence of educational and religious advantages, it might
be expected, would naturally lead to a demoralized state of society, but
such was not the case with the settlers of the ten townships. This
sparseness of population, arose in part, it must be mentioned, from the
system pursued by government, of reserving tracts of land, of granting
to the clergy, and to non-resident owners, all of which remained to
embarrass the separated settlers, and prevent advance of civilization,
by begetting ignorance and indifference to religion.

When it is remembered how great had been the trials of the refugees
during the continuation of the war; when we call to mind the school of
training belonging to a camp life; and still more, when it is taken into
consideration to how great an extent the settlers were removed from the
salutary influences of civilized life, it at once strikes the thoughtful
mind as surprising, that the early colonist did not relapse into a state
of non-religion and gross immorality. But it is a remarkable fact that
the loyalists who planted Upper Canada, not only honored their King, but
feared God, and in a very eminent degree fulfilled the later commandment
to love one another. Certainly there were exceptions. Even yet are
remembered the names of a few who availed themselves of their neighbors’
necessities to acquire property; and the story still floats down the
stream of time, that there were those who had plenty and to spare of
government stores, while the people were enduring the distress of the
“Hungry Year.” But even these reports lack confirmation, and even if
true, are the more conspicuous by their singularity. There is no
intention or desire to clothe the founders of Upper Canada with a
character to which they are not entitled, to suppress in any respect
facts that would tend to derogate the standing of the loyalists. This is
unnecessary to place them upon an elevated ground, but were it not, it
would be contrary to the writer’s feelings, and unfair to the reader.
There will be occasion to allude to a few instances, where gross evils
manifested themselves, yet after all, they are but the dark corners
which only serve to bring out the more glowing colors of the picture
presented. In arriving at a just estimate of their state of morals, it
is necessary to take into consideration, that many of the views held by
truly religious men a hundred years ago, differed widely from those held
by many to day. Reference is made to certain kinds of amusements then
unhesitatingly indulged in, which to-day are looked upon as inimical to
sound Christianity. One of these is the habit of using intoxicating
liquors. It was also charged against them, that they were “wofully
addicted to carousing and dancing.”


                        REV. JOHN OGILVIE, D.D.

This divine was probably the first Protestant clergyman that ever
officiated in Canada. He did so in the capacity of chaplain to a British
Regiment in an expedition to Fort Niagara, in 1759, when that French
stronghold was surrendered. Dr. Ogilvie, was a native of New York, and a
graduate of Yale college. He was employed by the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, as a missionary with
success. In 1765 he succeeded the Rev. Dr. Barclay, as Rector of Trinity
Church, New York. He died in 1774. “A portrait of him is still preserved
in the vestry office of Trinity Church.” The next Protestant clergyman
we believe, was the Rev. John Doughty.

“An Episcopal minister. He graduated at King’s College, New York, in
1770. He was ordained in England for the church at Peekskill, but was
soon transferred to Schenectady. In 1775, political troubles put an end
to divine service, and he suffered much at the hands of the popular
party. In 1777, he obtained leave to depart to Canada, (after having
been twice a prisoner,) where he became chaplain of the “King’s Royal
Regiment,” of New York. In 1781 he went to England; but returned to
Canada in 1784, and officiated as missionary at Sorel. He resigned his
connection with the society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign
parts, in 1803.”—(_Sabine._)

The first clergyman to settle in Canada, and one of the refugee pioneers
at the first settlement of Kingston, was the Rev. John Stuart. We are
fortunate in having before us a transcript of the memoir of this
distinguished person.

  “_Memoirs of the Rev. John Stuart, D.D., father of the Upper Canada
    Church. He opened the first academy at Cataraqui—Kingston 1786.
    The last missionary to the Mohawks._”

“The conversion and civilization of the American Indians, engaged the
attention of Europeans at an early date.” The Jesuits first gave
attention to the Mohawks, 1642, a few years later, Father Joynes laid
down his life on the Mohawk River. The first colonizers, the Dutch did
not give the subject much attention. “The government of New York, did
not make any effort to Christianize the five nations, further than to
pay, for some time a small salary to the clergyman, at Albany, to attend
to the wants of such Indians, as might apply to him.” The Rev. Mr.
Freeman, translated into the Mohawk language, the Church of England
Prayer Book, with some passages of the Old and New Testament. “In 1712
Mr. Andrews was sent as a missionary to the Mohawk, by the society, for
propagating the gospel, and a church was built at the mouth of the
Schoharie creek, but that missionary soon abandoned the place. As he was
the first, so he was the last that resided among them for a great many
years. After that the only ministration was at Albany. In 1748, the Rev.
Mr. Spencer, Mr. Woodbridge and Howly, were sent successively by the
people of New England,” to this field of labor.

The French war soon interrupted this, and not until 1761, was anything
more done, when the Rev. Dr. Wheelock, directed his attention to that
quarter, with missionaries, and schoolmasters. The testimony mainly of
all these mentioned, who labored among the Indians, is to the effect
that, although they were quick to learn, and would for a time live a
Christian life, they mostly all lapsed into their former savage state.
“The necessity of having missionaries of the Church of England, resident
among the Mohawks, was again brought before the society for promoting of
the gospel, a few years before the revolution, both by Sir William
Johnson, and the Rev. Mr. Inglis, of New York, the last of whom also
laid the subject before the government of England, in the form of a
memorial. In 1770 the society again consented to ordain a missionary for
the exclusive service of the Mohawks. John Stuart, who was selected for
this purpose, was born at Harrisburgh, in Pennsylvania, in 1730. The
family mansion in which he was born was still standing in 1836.” His
father, an Irishman, came to America in 1730. John Stuart had two
brothers who sided with the Americans. When he “graduated at the college
of Philadelphia, he made up his mind to join the communion of the Church
of England.” His father being a Presbyterian, this was extremely
distasteful to him. But his father finally consenting, he proceeded to
England for ordination, and received Holy Orders in 1770, and was
appointed missionary to the Mohawks at Fort Hunter.




                             CHAPTER XXVII.

  CONTENTS—At Fort Hunter—Mr. Stuart’s first sermon, Christmas—
    Officiates in Indian tongue—Translates—The Rebellion—Prayers for
    the King—The Johnsons—Rebels attack his house—Plunder—Indignity—
    Church desecrated—Used as a stable—A barrel of rum—Arrested—
    Ordered to come before Rebel Commissioners—On Parole—Limits—Idle
    two years—To Albany—Phil—Determines to remove to Canada—Not
    secure—Exchanging—Security—Real estate forfeited—Route—Negroes—The
    journey, three weeks—At St. John’s—Charge of Public School—
    Chaplain—At the close of the war—Three Protestant Parishes—
    Determines to settle at Cataraqui—Chaplain to Garrison—Missionary—
    Bishop of Virginia, Dr. Griffith—Visits Mr. Stuart—Invitation to
    Virginia Declined—“Rivetted prejudices,” satisfied—“The only
    refugee clergyman”—Path of duty—Visits the settlement, 1784—
    Mohawks, Grand River—Reception of their old Pastor—First Church—
    Mohawks, Bay of Quinté—Remains in Montreal a year—Assistant—
    Removes to Cataraqui, 1785—His land—Number of houses in Kingston—A
    short cut to Lake Huron—Fortunate in land—5000 settlers—Poor and
    Happy—Industrious—Around his Parish, 1788—Two hundred miles long—
    By Batteau—Brant—New Oswego—Mohawk Village church, steeple, and
    bell—First in Upper Canada—Plate—Organ—Furniture—Returns—At
    Niagara—Old Parishioners—Tempted to move—Comfortable not rich—
    Declines a Judgeship—New Mecklenburgh—Appointed Chaplain to first
    House of Assembly—Mohawk Mission—At Marysburgh—Degree of D.D.—
    Prosperity—Happy—Decline of life—His duties—Illness, Death, 1811—
    His appearance—“The little gentleman”—His manners—Honorable title—
    His children—Rev. O’Kill Stuart.


  MEMOIRS OF DR. STUART CONTINUED—“FATHER OF THE UPPER CANADA CHURCH.”

Mr. Stuart immediately returned to America and proceeded to his mission,
preaching his first sermon to the Mohawks on Christmas of the same year,
1770. He preached regularly every Sunday after the service had been read
in Indian. In the afternoon he officiated in the Mohawk chapel to the
whites, mostly Dutch. “In 1774 he was able to read the liturgy, baptize
and marry in the Indian tongue, and converse tolerably well with them.
He subsequently, assisted by Brant, translated parts of the Bible. After
the commencement of the rebellion, until 1777, Mr. Stuart did not
experience any inconvenience,” although in other places the clergy had
been shamefully abused; he remained at Fort Hunter even after the
Declaration of Independence, and constantly performed divine service
without omitting prayers for the king. Mr. Stuart’s connection with the
Johnson family, and his relations to the Indians rendered him
particularly noxious to the Whigs. Although they had not proof of his
being active in aiding the British, everything was done to make his home
unbearable. “His house was attacked, his property plundered and every
indignity offered his person. His church was also plundered and turned
into a tavern, and in ridicule and contempt, a barrel of rum was placed
in the reading desk. The church was afterwards used as a stable, July,
1778. He was ordered by the Board to detect conspiracies, to leave his
home and repair forthwith with his family to Connecticut until his
exchange could be procured.” He was to leave within four days after
receiving the orders, or be committed to close confinement. “Mr. Stuart
appeared before the Commissioners two days after receiving the above
order, and declared his readiness to convince them that he had not
corresponded with the enemy, and that he was ready and willing to enter
into any engagement for the faithful performance of such duties as may
be enjoined him.” The Board took his parole, by which he was obligated
to abstain from doing anything against the Congress of the United
States, or for the British, and not to leave the limits of Schenectady
without permission of the Board. Soon after he writes there are only
three families of my congregation, the rest having joined the King’s
forces, nor had he preached for two years. In the Spring of 1780, the
Indians appeared in the county infuriated because of the conduct of
General Sullivan the previous year. Mr. Stuart had to abandon his house
and move to Albany. So imminent was the danger that the fleeing family
could see the houses about in flames, and hear the report of arms. At
Albany, Mr. Stuart received much civility from General Schuyler, and
obtained permission to visit Philadelphia. Having returned, he made up
his mind to emigrate to Canada, and communicated his resolution as
follows: “I arrived here eight days from the time I parted with you (at
Philadelphia) and found my family well, and after being sufficiently
affrighted, the enemy having been within twenty miles of this place, and
within one mile of my house in the country, considering the present
state of affairs in this part of the Province, I am fully persuaded that
I cannot possibly live here secure, either in regard to ourselves or
property during the ensuing season; this place is likely to be a
frontier, and will probably be burnt if the enemy can effect it. For
these and other weighty reasons, materially weighed, I have resolved,
with the approbation and consent of Mrs. Stuart, to emigrate to Canada,
and having made an application for an exchange, which I have reason to
believe will be granted.”

Mr. Stuart applied by letter to Governor Clinton, to be exchanged, March
30, 1781. His application received prompt attention, and he was the same
day allowed permission on certain conditions, which are stated by Mr.
Stuart in a letter to Rev. Mr. White, of Philadelphia. The letter is
dated Schenectady, April 17, 1781. “Being considered as a prisoner of
war, and having forfeited my real estate, I have given £400 security to
return in exchange for myself, one prisoner out of four nominated by the
Governor, viz.: one Colonel, two Captains, and one Lieutenant, either of
which will be accepted in my stead; or if neither of the prisoners
aforesaid can be obtained, I am to return as a prisoner of war to
Albany, when required. My personal property I am permitted to sell or
carry with me, and I am to proceed under the protection of a public
flag, as soon as it will be safe and convenient for women and children
to travel that course. We are to proceed from here to Fort Arin in
waggons, and from thence in Batteaux.” The danger of the journey was
adverted to, and the probability of obtaining a chaplaincy in Sir
William Johnson’s 2nd Battalion of Royal Yorkers, which is nearly
complete on the establishment. “My negroes being personal property, I
take with me, one of which being a young man, and capable of bearing
arms. I have given £100 security to send back a white person in his
stead.”

“Mr. Stewart set out with his family, consisting of his wife and three
small children, on his long and tedious journey, on the 19th of Sept.,
1781, and arrived at St. Johns on the 9th of the following month, thus
accomplishing the journey in three weeks, which is now done in twelve or
fifteen hours. As there was no opening in Montreal, he took charge of a
public school, which, with his commission as Chaplain, gave him
support.” In a letter to Dr. White, dated Montreal, October 14, 1783, he
says: “I have no reason hitherto to dislike my change of climate; but,
as reduction must take place soon, my emoluments will be much
diminished, neither have I any flattering prospect of an eligible
situation in the way of my profession, as there are only three
protestant Parishes in this Province, the Pastors of which are
Frenchmen, and as likely to live as I am.” Soon after, Mr. Stuart
determined to settle at Cataraqui, where was a garrison, and to which a
good many loyalists had already proceeded. He was promised the
chaplaincy to the garrison, with a salary of one thousand dollars a
year, and he writes, “I can preserve the Indian mission in its
neighborhood, which, with other advantages, will afford a comfortable
subsistence, although I wish it laid in Maryland.” After the
acknowledged independence of the United States, and the separation of
the Episcopalian Church of America from the mother Church, Dr. Griffith,
the Bishop elect of Virginia, invited Mr. Stuart to settle in his
diocese; but Mr. Stuart declined. He writes, “The time has been when the
chance of obtaining a settlement in that part of Virginia would have
gratified my utmost desire; but, at my time of life, and with such
rivetted principles in favor of a Government totally different, ‘it is
impossible.’” Though Mr. Stuart did visit Philadelphia in 1786, he never
seems to have repented his removal to Canada. Yet the isolation in which
he sometimes found himself, would sometimes naturally call up memories
that could not fail to be painful. “I am,” he writes, “the only Refugee
Clergyman in this Province, &c.” As a relief from such thoughts, he
turned to the active duties of his calling. “I shall not regret,” said
he, “the disappointment and chagrin I have hitherto met with, if it
pleases God to make me the instrument of spreading the knowledge of His
Gospel amongst the heathen, and reclaiming only one lost sheep of the
house of Israel.” In this spirit he set out on the second of June, 1784,
to visit the new settlements on the St. Lawrence, Bay Quinté, and
Niagara Falls, where he arrived on the 18th of the same month. Already,
3,500 Loyalists had left Montreal that season for Upper Canada. His
reception by the Mohawks, ninety miles from the Falls, was very
affectionate, even the windows of the church in which he officiated were
crowded with those who were anxious to behold again their old Pastor,
from whom they had been so long separated. This church was the first
built in Upper Canada, and it must have been commenced immediately after
the Mohawks settled on the Grand River. He officiated also at Cataraqui,
where he found a garrison of three companies, about thirty good houses,
and some 1,500 souls who intended to settle higher up. He next proceeded
to the Bay of Quinté, where some more Mohawks had settled, and were busy
building houses and laying the foundation of their new village, named
Tyendinaga. Though Mr. Stuart had now received from the Society, whose
missionary he continued to be, discretionary powers to settle in any
part of Canada, he remained in Montreal another year, as assistant to
the Rev. Dr. DeLisle, Episcopal Clergyman of that town. He finally
removed to Cataraqui, in August, 1785. His share of the public land was
situated partly in Cataraqui, and partly at a place, which, in memory of
the dear old place on the Mohawk River, was now called New Johnstown.
Sometime in 1785, Mr. Stuart says, “I have two hundred acres within half
a mile of the garrison, a beautiful situation. The town increases fast;
there are already about fifty houses built in it, and some of them very
elegant. It is now the port of transport from Canada to Niagara. We have
now, just at the door, a ship, a scow, and a sloop, beside a number of
small crafts; and if the communication lately discovered from this place
by water, to Lake Huron and Michilmackinac proves as safe, and short as
we are made to believe, this will shortly be a place of considerable
trade.” Reference here must be made to the route up the Bay and River
Trent. “I have been fortunate in my locations of land, having 1,400
acres at different places, in good situations, and of an excellent
quality, three farms of which I am improving, and have sowed this fall
with thirty bushels in them. The number of souls to westward of us is
more than 5,000, and we gain, daily, new recruits from the States. We
are a poor, happy people, industrious beyond example. Our gracious King
gives us land gratis, and furnishes provisions, clothing, and farming
utensils, &c., until next September, after which the generality of the
people will be able to live without his bounty.” The above must have
been written in 1785, as in May, 1786, he opened an academy. In the
summer of 1788, he went round his Parish, which was then above 200 miles
long. He thus describes his voyage on this occasion. “I embarked in a
batteau with six Indians, commanded by Capt. Brant, and coasted along
the north shore of Lake Ontario, about 200 miles from the head of the
lake; we went twenty-five miles by land, to New Oswego, the new Mohawk
village on the Grand River; these people were my former charge, and the
Society still styles me their Mohawk Vill. Missionary. I found them
conveniently situated on a beautiful river, where the soil is equal in
fertility to any I ever saw. Their village contains about 700 souls, and
consists of a great number of good houses, with an elegant church in the
centre; it has a handsome steeple and bell, and is well finished
within.” By this we learn, that not only was the first Protestant Church
built at the Grand River, but as well here was the first steeple to
contain a bell, which was the first to be heard in Upper Canada. Brant,
when in England, collected money for all this. With the above, they had
the service of plate, preserved from the rebels on the Mohawk; crimson
furniture for the pulpit, and “the Psalmody was accompanied by an
organ.” “This place was uninhabited four years ago.” “I returned by the
route of Niagara, and visited that settlement. They had, as yet, no
clergyman, and I preached to a very large audience. The increase of
population there was immense, and indeed I was so well pleased with that
country, where I found many of my old Parishioners, that I was strongly
tempted to remove my family to it. You may suppose it cost me a struggle
to refuse the unanimous and pressing invitation of a large settlement,
with the additional argument of a subscription, and other emoluments,
amounting to near £300, York currency, per annum more than I have here.
But, on mature reflection, I have determined to remain here. You will
suppose me to be very rich, or very disinterested; but, I assure you,
neither was the case. I have a comfortable house, a good farm here, and
an excellent school for my children, in a very healthy climate, and all
these I could not have expected had I removed to Niagara. But, that you
may be convinced that I do not intend to die rich, I have also declined
an honorable and lucrative appointment. Our new settlements have been
divided into four districts, of which this place is the capital of one,
called New Mecklenburgh, and Courts of Justice are to be immediately
opened. I had a commission sent me, as first Judge of the Court of
Common Pleas. But, for reasons which readily occur to you, I returned it
to Lord Dorchester, who left this place a few days ago.”

In 1789, Mr. Stuart was appointed Bishop’s Commissionary for the
settlements from Point au Boudette to the western limits of the
Province, being the district now constituting Canada West. Though this
appointment added nothing to his emoluments, it increased considerably
his duties. At the meeting of the first Session of Parliament in 1792,
he was named Chaplain to the Upper House of Assembly, an appointment
which required for a time his presence at Niagara. He occasionally
visited and officiated for the Mohawk Village, at the Bay of Quinté.
But, notwithstanding the laudable exertions of the society, and the
partial indulgence of the British Government to this tribe, no
flattering accounts can be given either of their religious improvements,
or approach to civilization; on his return he usually stopped at Col.
McDonnell’s, Marysburgh, and preached in his house. In the year 1799,
the degree of D.D. was conferred on Mr. Stuart, by the University of
Pennsylvania, his Alma Mater, a complement he appreciated from his
native state. About the same time he received the appointment of
Chaplain to the Garrison of Kingston. “He had secured about 4000 acres
of valuable land to which he occasionally made additions.” In his
prosperity and wealth he exclaimed: “How mysterious are the ways of
Providence! How short-sighted we are! Some years ago I thought it a
great hardship to be banished into the wilderness, and would have
imagined myself completely happy, could I have exchanged it for a place
in the City of Philadelphia,—now the best wish we can form for our
dearest friends is to have them removed to us.” It must be remarked that
the above is taken from letters written to a friend in Philadelphia, and
no doubt, being private and social in their nature, there is often a
coloring favorable to the States which emanated from no love to that
country. “The remainder of Dr. Stuart’s life seems to have passed in the
routine of his duties, interrupted however by attacks of illness, to
which the increase of years, and the fatigue attendant on a mission in
so new a country, could not fail to subject him.” Dr. Stuart departed
this life on the 15th of August, 1811, in the seventy-first year of his
age, and was buried at Kingston, where he lives (says one of his
cotemporaries) in the heart of his friends. “He was about six feet four
inches in height, and from this circumstance, was known among his New
York friends as “the little gentleman.” His manners were quiet and
conciliating, and his character, such as led him rather to win more by
kindness and persuasion, than to awe and alarm them by the terrors of
authority. His sermons were composed in plain and nervous language, were
recommended by the affectionate manner of his delivery, and not
unfrequently found a way to the conscience of those who had long been
insensible to any real religious convictions. The honorable title of
Father of the Upper Canada Church, has been fitly bestowed on him, and
he deserves the name not more by his age and the length of his services,
than by the kind and paternal advice and encouragement, which he was
ever ready to give those younger than he on their first entrance on the
mission.” “By his wife, Jane O’Kill, of Philadelphia, who was born in
1752, he had five sons and three daughters.” All of his sons
subsequently occupied distinguished positions. His eldest son George
O’Kill, graduated at Cambridge, England, in 1801, entered Holy Orders,
and was appointed missionary at York, now Toronto, from whence he
returned on his father’s death to Kingston, where he became Archdeacon.
He died in 1862, at the age of eighty-six.




                            CHAPTER XXVIII.

  CONTENTS—A Missionary—Chaplain at Niagara—Pastor to the Settlers—
    Chaplain to Legislature—Visits Grand River—Officiates—A Land
    Speculator—Receives a pension, £50—1823—Rev. Mr. Pollard—At
    Amherstburgh—Mr. Langhorn—A Missionary—Little Education—Useful—
    Odd—On Bay Quinté In Ernesttown—Builds a Church—At Adolphustown—
    Preaches at Hagerman’s—Another Church—A Diligent Pastor—Pioneer
    Preacher around the Bay—Christening—Marrying—Particular—His
    Appointments—Clerk’s Fees—Generosity—Present to Bride—Faithful to
    Sick Calls—Frozen Feet—No Stockings—Shoe Buckles—Dress—Books—
    Peculiarities—Fond of the Water—Charitable—War of 1812—Determined
    to leave Canada—Thinks it doomed—Singular Notice—Returns to
    Europe—His Library—Present to Kingston—Twenty Years in Canada—
    Extract from Gazette—No One Immediately to take His Place—Rev.
    John Bethune—Died 1815—Native of Scotland—U. E. Loyalists—Lost
    Property—Chaplain to 84th Regiment—A Presbyterian—Second Legal
    Clergyman in Upper Canada—Settled at Cornwall—Children—The
    Baptists—Wyner—Turner—Holts Wiem—Baptists upon River Moira—First
    Chapel—How Built—Places of Preaching—Hayden’s Corners—At East
    Lake—The Lutherans—Rev. Schwerdfeger—Lutheran Settlers—County
    Dundas—First Church East of Kingston—Rev. Mr. Myers lived in
    Marysburgh—Marriage—His Log Church—Removes to St. Lawrence—
    Resigns—To Philadelphia—Mr. Weant—Lives in Ernesttown—Removes to
    Matilda—Not Supported—Secretly Joins the English Church—
    Re-ordained—His Society Ignorant—Suspicion—Preaching in Shirt
    Sleeves—Mr. Myers Returns, by Sleigh—Locking Church Door—The
    Thirty-nine Articles—Compromise—Mr. Myers continues Three Years a
    Lutheran—He Secedes—The End of both Seceders—Rev. I. L.
    Senderling—Rev. Herman Hayunga—Rev. Mr. Shorts—Last Lutheran
    Minister at Ernesttown, McCarty—Married.


    THE FIRST EPISCOPALIANS, CONTINUED—PRESBYTERIANS, BAPTISTS, AND
                               LUTHERANS.

The Rev. Robert Addison came as a missionary from the Society for
Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, in 1790. He probably discharged
the duties of chaplain to the troops stationed at Niagara, and also was
Clergyman, and officiated as such, to the settlers. When the government
was formed at Niagara, in 1792, Mr. Addison, was appointed Chaplain. He
occasionally visited the Grand River Indians, officiating through an
interpreter, and baptizing and marrying. Col. Clark says, Mr. Addison
was a land speculator. In 1823, an act was passed by Parliament,
granting Mr. Addison a pension of £50 per annum during life, for service
rendered as Chaplain to the House of Assembly for thirty years. Another
Episcopalian Clergyman, who came to Canada about the same time, was the
Rev. Mr. Pollard, whose station was at Amherstburgh.

A fourth Church of England Clergyman, and one with whom we must become
more familiar, was the Rev. Mr. Langhorn. According to the statement
made to us by the late Bishop Strachan, Mr. Langhorn was sent to Canada
as a missionary by a Society in London, called “The Bees,” or some such
name. He was a Welshman by birth, possessed of but little education or
talent, yet a truthful, zealous, and useful man. Odd in his manner, he
nevertheless worked faithfully among the settlers from Kingston to Hay
Bay. Upon arriving he took up his abode in Ernesttown, living at Hoyts,
the present site of Bath. Here he was instrumental in having, before
long time, erected an English Church. Soon after coming he visited
Adolphustown, and preached at Mr. Hagerman’s, where Mr. Stuart had
previously occasionally held service. Steps were at once taken to build
a church also at Adolphustown, and Mr. Langhorn came to hold service
regularly every second Sabbath. Mr. Langhorn was a diligent pastor in
his rounds among his flock, over an extensive tract with great
regularity, and once in a great while he went as far as the Carrying
Place, where it is said he preached the first of all the pioneer
ministers. He likewise occasionally visited Prince Edward, and preached
at Smith’s Bay, and at Congers, Picton Bay. He was very careful to have
all the children christened before they were eight days old, and never
failed to question the larger in the catechism. Marriage he would never
perform but in the church, and always before eleven in the morning. If
the parties to be joined failed to reach the church by the appointed
time, he would leave; and would refuse to marry them, no matter how far
they had come, generally on foot, or by canoe. Sometimes they were from
the remote townships, yet were sent away unmarried. After performing the
marriage ceremony, he would insist on receiving, it is said, three
coppers for his clerk. For himself he would take nothing, unless it was
to present it to the bride immediately. Seemingly he did not care for
money; and he would go in all kinds of weather when wanted to officiate,
or administer to the wants of the sick. One person tells us that he
remembers his coming to his father’s in winter, and that his feet were
frozen. No wonder, as Mr. Langhorn never wore stockings nor gloves in
the coldest weather. But his shoe buckles were broad and bright; and a
broad rimmed hat turned up at the sides covered his head. Upon his back
he generally carried in a bag some books for reading. We have referred
to his peculiarities; many extraordinary eccentricities are related of
him, both as a man and clergyman. He was very fond of the water, both in
summer and winter. “In summer,” (Playter says,) “he would, at times swim
from a cove on the main shore to a cove in the opposite island, three
miles apart, and in winter, he would cut a hole in the ice, and another
at some distance, and would dive down at one hole, and come up the
other. He had some eccentricities, but he seemed to be a good and
charitable man.”

Mr. Langhorn, when the war of 1812 commenced, acquired the belief, it is
said, that Canada would be conquered by the United States, and so
determined to escape. The following somewhat singular “Notice” appeared
in the Kingston _Gazette_:—“Notice—To all whom it may concern,—That the
Rev. J. Langhorn, of Ernesttown, intends returning to Europe this
summer, if he can find a convenient opportunity; and all who have any
objections to make, are requested to acquaint him with them, and they
will much oblige their humble servant,—J. Langhorn,—Earnesttown, March,
1813.” The Rev. gentleman did go home, and some say that he was again
coming to Canada, and was shipwrecked. Before leaving Canada, he made a
valuable present to Kingston, as the following notice will show:

“The Rev. Mr. Langhorn, of Ernesttown, who is about returning to
England, his native country, has presented a valuable collection of
books to the Social Library, established in this village. The directors
have expressed to him the thanks of the proprietors for his liberal
donation. Many of the volumes are very elegant, and, it is to be hoped,
will, for many years, remain a memorial of his liberality and
disposition to promote the diffusion of useful knowledge among a people,
with whom he has lived as an Episcopal Missionary more than twenty
years. During that period his acts of charity have been frequent and
numerous, and not confined to members of his own church; but extended to
indigent and meritorious persons of all denominations. Many who have
shared in his bounty, will have reason to recollect him with gratitude,
and to regret his removal from the country.”—(_Kingston Gazette_).

After his departure, the churches where he had preached were vacant for
many a day; and, at last, the one in Adolphustown went to decay.

There died, at Williamstown, U. C., 23rd September, 1815, the Rev. John
Bethune, in his 65th year. He was a native of Scotland. Came to America
before the rebellion, and was possessed of property, all of which he
lost, and was thereby reduced to great distress for the time being. The
foundation was then laid for the disease of which he died. During the
rebellion, he was appointed Chaplain to the 80th Regiment. At the close
of the war he settled in Canada. He left a widow and numerous family.

Ex-Sheriff Sherwood, of Brockville, says that “the Rev. Mr. Bethune, a
Presbyterian Clergyman, was the second legalized Clergyman in the
country. He settled at an early period at Cornwall. He was father of the
Rev. John Bethune, now Dean of Montreal, (1866).”


                  BAPTISTS—WYNER, TURNER, HOLTS, WIEM.

The first Ministers of this sect were Elders Wyner and Turner, a brother
of Gideon Turner, one of the first settlers of Thurlow. One, Elder
Holts, also preached around the Bay, but a love of brandy hindered him.
Yet he was an attractive preacher. This was probably about 1794.

A considerable number of Baptists settled up the river Moira, in
Thurlow. The first chapel built here was for that denomination, in the
fifth concession. Its size was thirty feet square. But, prior to the
building of this, a dozen or so would meet for worship at the house of
Mr. Ross. The chapel was mainly built by each member going to the place
and working at the building, from time to time, until it was completed.

Mr. Turner traveled through different sections, preaching wherever he
found his fellow communionists. He occasionally preached at Capt.
McIntosh’s, at Myer’s Creek, and now and then at the head of the Bay.
The Baptists were, probably, the first to preach at Sidney, and Thurlow.
Myer’s Creek was not a central place at which to collect the scattered
settlers until it became a village. Before that, the preaching place of
the Baptists, and afterwards of the Presbyterians and Methodists, was up
at Gilbert’s house, in Sidney, or at Col. Bell’s, in Thurlow. When the
village grew, services were held at Capt. McIntosh’s and Mr. Mitz’s, at
the mouth of the river, by different denominations, and still later, in
a small school house. Preaching also was held up the river, at Reed’s
and Hayden’s Corners.

The first Baptist Minister that preached at East Lake, Hallowell, was
the Rev. Joseph Wiem. Not unlikely, he and Elder Wyner are the same.


               THE LUTHERANS—SCHWERDFEGER, MYERS, WEANT.

Among the early ministers of religion who attended to the spiritual
interests of the pioneers, were several of the Lutheran Church. Of this
denomination, there was a considerable number in the County of Dundas,
chiefly Dutch. There were also a community of them in Ernesttown, and
another in Marysburgh. The first church built in Upper Canada, east of
Kingston, perhaps the next after the one built at Tyendinaga, was
erected by the Lutherans. It was put up in 1790, named Zion’s Church,
and a Mr. Schwerdfeger, who resided near Albany, was invited to be their
Pastor. This invitation was gladly accepted, as he and his family had
suffered severe persecution from the victorious rebels. He died in 1803.

At an early period, indeed it would seem probable before Mr.
Schwerdfeger came to Canada, although the time cannot be positively
fixed, the Rev. Mr. Myers, from Philadelphia, lived in Marysburgh and
preached to the Lutheran Germans of that Township. He married a daughter
of Mr. Henry Smith, one of the first settlers there, where stood his log
church, about twenty-four feet square, upon the brow of a hill
overlooking a lovely landscape. Mr. Myers removed to the St. Lawrence,
and “in 1804 became Pastor of the Lutheran churches there.” (History of
Dundas). He resigned in 1807, not being supported, and removed to
Pennsylvania.

The second Lutheran clergyman to preach upon the Bay, was the Rev. Mr.
Weant. He lived a short distance below Bath, and went every four weeks
to preach at Smith’s Bay; and, in the meantime, preached to the
Lutherans of Ernesttown, where he built a log church, the first there.
In 1808, he received a call from the Lutherans of Matilda, “which he
accepted, and for some time preached acceptably, residing in the
parsonage.” He, too, seems to have been inadequately supported by the
people, and yielding to inducements, too tempting for most men to
resist, he, in 1811, secretly joined the Church of England, and was
re-ordained by Bishop Mountain, in Quebec. Upon his return, he pretended
still to be a Lutheran minister, and preached, as usual, in German
exclusively. Suspicions, however, soon arose that all was not right, for
he began to use the English Book of Common Prayer, and occasionally to
wear the surplice, practices which gave such offence to his former
friends, that they declared they would no longer go to hear a man who
proclaimed to them in his shirt sleeves. A few were persuaded by him to
join the Church of England. The majority remained faithful. In 1814, the
Lutherans again invited the Rev. Mr. Myers; upon his consenting to come,
they sent two sleighs, in the winter, to Pennsylvania, and brought him
and his family to Dundas. But Mr. Weant would not give up the parsonage
and glebe, and put a padlock on the church door, and forbade any one to
enter, unless acknowledging the thirty-nine articles of the Church of
England. A compromise resulted, and the Lutherans were permitted to use
the building once in two weeks. For three years, Mr. Myers continued his
ministrations as a Lutheran, in the meantime being in straitened
circumstances. In 1817, strangely enough, Mr. Myers also forsook the
Lutheran Church, and conformed to the Church of England. (Hist. of
Dundas.) The end of Mr. Weant and Mr. Myers, according to accounts, was
not, in either case satisfactory. The latter died suddenly from a fall,
it is said, while he was intoxicated, and the former was addicted to the
same habit of intemperance.

The successor of Mr. Myers was the Rev. I. L. SENDERLING. He came in
1825, and stayed only a short time.

In 1826, Rev. HERMAN HAYUNIGA became the Pastor; and succeeded, after
many years, in restoring to the church its former prosperity,
notwithstanding much that opposed him. He had a new church erected. His
successor was the Rev. Dendrick Shorts.

The _Kingston Gazette_ contains a notice of perhaps the last Lutheran
Minister at Ernest town. “Married. In Ernesttown, 29th Jan, 1816, the
Rev. Wm. McCarty, Minister of the Lutheran congregation, to Miss
Clarissa Fralick.”




                             CHAPTER XXIX.

  CONTENTS—Bishop Strachan—A teacher—A preacher—A student—Holy Orders—
    A Presbyterian—Becomes an Episcopalian—A supporter of the “Family
    compact”—Sincere—His opinion of the people—Ignorant—Unprepared for
    self-government—Strachan’s religious chart—He was deceived—The
    Methodist—Anomalous connection—A fillibustering people—
    Republicanism egotistical—Loyalty of Methodists—American
    ministers—Dr. Strachan’s position—His birth place—His education—A.
    M., 1793—Studying Theology—Comes to Canada—A student of Dr.
    Stuarts—Ordained Deacon—A missionary at Cornwall—Rector at York—
    Archdeacon—Bishop of Toronto—Coadjutor—Death—A public burial—Rev.
    Mr. McDowell—First Presbyterian at Bay Quinté—Invited by
    VanAlstine—On his way—At Brockville—Settles in second town—His
    circuit—A worthy minister—Fulfilling his mission—Traveling on
    foot—To York—Marrying the people—His death—His descendants—Places
    of Preaching—A Calvinist—Invites controversy—Mr. Coate accepts the
    challenge—The disputation—Excitement—The result—Rev. Mr. Smart—
    Called by Mr. McDowell—Pres. clergyman at Brockville—Fifty years—
    An earnest Christian—A desire to write—“Observer”—A pioneer—A
    cause of regret—Not extreme—Mr. Smart’s views on politics—The
    masses uneducated—The “Family Compact”—Rise of responsible
    government—The Bidwells—Credit to Dr. Strachan—Brock’s funeral
    sermon—Foundation of Kingston gaol—Maitland—Demonstration—
    Sherwood’s statement.


         BISHOP STRACHAN—REV. MR. MCDOWELL AND REV. MR. SMART.

Having elsewhere spoken of this distinguished man as the first teacher
of Higher Education in Upper Canada, it is intended to give him a proper
place among the first who preached the Gospel. Dr. Strachan, who had
studied Divinity at Kingston, under the guidance of Mr. Stuart, took
Holy Orders while engaged in teaching at Cornwall. Although he had been
brought up in the Presbyterian faith, he deliberately connected himself
with the Church of England, as the church of his choice.

From the first, Dr. Strachan took a decided stand in favor of the
exclusive power claimed by the government and the “Family Compact.” This
step was no doubt, deemed by him the very best to secure the interest of
the rising country, believing as he did, that the people generally were
unfitted by want of education to perform the duties of legislation and
self-government. His devotion to the government, led doubtless, in some
instances, to errors of judgment, and on a few occasions placed him in a
false position. Yet he was always seemingly conscientious. The course
pursued by him, in preparing, and sending to the Imperial Government a
religious chart, which subsequent investigation proved to be incorrect,
had, at the time, an unfortunate effect. But it is submitted, that it
has never been shewn, that Dr. Strachan was otherwise than deceived when
preparing the document. He made statements of a derogatory nature with
respect to the Methodist body; but can it be shewn that there was no
reason whatever for his statements. The history of the Methodists of
Canada, exhibits a loyalty above suspicion. But was there no ground on
which to place doubts respecting the propriety of any body of Canadians
receiving religious instruction from men who were subjects of another
country—a country which was ever threatening the province, and who had
basely invaded an unoffending people—a country that constantly
encouraged her citizens to penetrate the territory of contiguous powers
with the view of possessing it. While there is sufficient proof that the
Methodist ministers who came into the country were actuated by the very
highest motives, it cannot be denied that any one taught in the school
of republicanism, will carry with him wherever he goes, whether among
the courtly of Europe, the contented and happy Canadians, or the
blood-thirsty Mexicans, his belief in the immaculate principles of
republicanism. He cannot, even if he would, refrain from descanting upon
the superiority of his government over all others. The proclamation of
Gen. Hull, at Detroit, and of others, shews that the belief was
entertained in the States, that many Canadians were favorable to the
Americans. Whence could have arisen this belief? Not certainly from the
old U. E. Loyalists, who had been driven away from their native country?
Not surely by the English, Irish, or Scotch? Dr. Strachan, with the
government, could not close their eyes to these facts, and was it
unnatural to infer that American-sent Methodists had something to do
with it?

Bishop Strachan was a man of education, and as such, he must be judged
in reference to his opinion that Methodists were unqualified to teach
religious truth, from their imperfect or deficient education. We say,
not that much book learning is absolutely essential to a successful
expounding of the plan of salvation, although it is always most
desirable. But having taken our pen to do justice to all of whom we have
to speak, we desire to place the reader so far as we can upon the stand
of view occupied by the distinguished Divine and Scholar.

Dr. Strachan was born at Aberdeen, Scotland, 12th April, 1778. He was
educated at the Grammar School, and at King’s College, at that city,
where he took the degree of M. A., in 1793. He then removed to the
neighborhood of St. Andrews, and studied Theology, as a Presbyterian. As
stated elsewhere, he came to America in 1799, reaching Canada the last
day of the year. Disappointed in his expectations respecting an
appointment to establish a college, he became a school teacher in
Kingston, and at the same time a student of Divinity, under the guidance
and friendship of Dr. Stuart. He prosecuted his Theological studies
during the three years he was in Kingston, and in 1803, was ordained
Deacon, by Dr. Mountain, the first Protestant Bishop of Quebec. The
following year he was admitted to Holy Orders, and went as a missionary
to Cornwall. Here he continued nine years, attending diligently to his
duties as a minister, all over his widening parish; and also conducted a
Grammar School. In 1812 he received the appointment of Rector at York,
the capital, and in 1825 he was made Archdeacon. Enjoying political
appointments with these ecclesiastical, he finally, in 1839, was
elevated to be the first Bishop of Toronto. Dr. Strachan discharged the
duties of his high office with acceptability. In 1866 Archdeacon Bethune
was appointed as Coadjutor Bishop, the venerable prelate beginning to
feel that his time was almost done. He died 1st November, 1867, having
attained to his ninetieth year, and was accorded a public funeral. No
higher marks of esteem and veneration could have been exhibited than
were displayed by all classes at the death of this Canadian Divine.

The most of the settlers from the Hudson, not Lutherans, were
Presbyterians, or of the Dutch Reformed Church. Mr. McDowell was the
first Presbyterian minister to visit the Bay. He came about 1800,
perhaps before; when yet there were but few clergymen in the province.
We have seen it stated that he was sent for by Major VanAlstine, who was
a Presbyterian. On his way he tarried a day in the neighborhood of
Brockville. Adiel Sherwood was then teaching school, in connection with
which he was holding a public exhibition. Mr. McDowell attended, and
here first took a part as a minister, by offering his first public
prayer in the country. He proceeded to Kingston, and settled in the
second township. But his circuit of travel and places of preaching
extended from Brockville to the head of Bay Quinté. The name of this
worthy individual is too little known by the inhabitants of the bay. No
man contributed more than he to fulfill the Divine mission “go preach;”
and at a time when great spiritual want was felt he came to the hardy
settlers. The spirit of Christianity was by him aroused to no little
extent, especially among those, who in their early days had been
accustomed to sit under the teachings of Presbyterianism. He traveled
far and near, in all kinds of weather, and at all seasons, sometimes in
the canoe or batteau, and sometimes on foot. On one occasion he walked
all the way from Bay Quinté to York, following the lake shore, and
swimming the rivers that could not be otherwise forded. He probably
married more persons while in the ministerial work than all the rest in
the ten townships around the bay. This arose from his being the only
minister legally qualified to solemnize matrimony, beside the clergymen
of the English Church, Mr. Stuart, of Kingston, and Langhorn, of
Fredericksburgh. Persons wishing to be married repaired to him from all
the region of the bay, or availed themselves of his stated ministerial
tours. The writer’s parents, then living in Adolphustown, were among
those married by him, the certificate of which now lies before him. Mr.
A. Sherwood thus speaks of him, “He lived to labor many years in the
service of his Master, and after an honorable and good old age he died
highly esteemed by his friends and much respected by all who knew him.”
Mr. McDowell had at least two sons and a daughter. The last is Mrs.
Carpenter, now living at Demorestville. One of his sons removed to New
York and there established a Magdalene Asylum. Mr. McDowell, used to
pass around the bay twice or three times a year. He was one of the
first, to preach at the extreme head of the bay, the Carrying Place, and
for that purpose occupied a barn. Another of his preaching places was in
Sophiasburgh, on the marsh front. He preached here four times a year. He
was a rigid Calvinist, and preaching one Sabbath at the beginning of the
present century in the Court House at Adolphustown, he offered to argue
with any one publicly the question of Calvinism. The Methodist minister
of the bay, the Rev. Samuel Coate, was urged by his society to accept
the challenge, and after a good deal of hesitation did so. So a day was
appointed for the discussion. The meeting took place at a convenient
place, three miles from Bath, in the Presbyterian church. The excitement
was great; the inhabitants coming even from Sidney and Thurlow. Mr.
McDowell spoke first, and occupied half a day. Then followed Mr. Coate.
After he had spoken two hours Mr. McDowell and his friends left; why, it
is not said. Mr. Coate continued speaking until night. We have the
statement of the Methodists, that Mr. Coate had the best of it, but we
never learned the belief of the other party. Mr. Coate’s sermon was
published by request, and thereafter, it is said Presbyterianism waned
in the locality.

REV. MR. SMART,—This truly pious man, and evangelical minister, came to
Canada in 1811. He never actually lived within the precincts of the Bay;
but he was called to the wilderness of Upper Canada by the Rev. Mr.
McDowell, at least he was chiefly instrumental in bringing him out, even
before his student days were ended. For upwards of fifty years he
discharged the duties of Presbyterian clergyman at Brockville, the first
clergyman of any denomination within fifty miles. We shall ever remember
the kind genial person with whom we spent a few pleasant hours in the
evening of his eventful life, a life spent earnestly in the service of
his Master, and for the welfare of his family, for, to use his own
words, “In his day it was no easy matter to live and rear a family.”
This he said not complainingly, but because it hindered him from
indulging a desire he once felt to do something with his pen—to record,
as he was desired to do, the events connected with his early life in
Upper Canada, and his cotemporaries. At first he did contribute to the
_Kingston Gazette_, over the cognomen “Observer.” But other things
pressed upon him, and when repose came he fancied the fire of his early
days, for scribbling, had too far sunk. This is much to be regretted,
for as a close observer and upright man, and living in eventful times of
Canadian history, he was pre-eminently qualified to treat the subject.
Mr. Smart was always distinguished for moderate and well-considered
views upon Religion, Political Government and Education. He lived when
the battle commenced between the “Family Compact” and the people. While
he firmly set his face against the extreme stand taken by the Rev. Mr.
Strachan, he never identified himself with the party that opposed that
worker for, and with the Government. On this point, Mr. Smart makes
judicious remarks. In speaking of the rise and first days of the
Province, he says, “it was necessary the Government in Council should
create laws, and govern the people, inasmuch as the vast majority of the
inhabitants were unlettered, and unfit to occupy places which required
judgment and discrimination.” There were but few of the U. E. Loyalists
who possessed a complete education. He was personally acquainted with
many, especially along the St. Lawrence, and Bay of Quinté, and by no
means were all educated, or men of judgment; even the half-pay officers,
many of them, had but a limited education. Many of them were placed on
the list of officers, not because they had seen service, but as the most
certain way of compensating them for losses sustained in the Rebellion.
And there were few, if any, of them fitted by education for office, or
to serve in Parliament. Such being the case, the Governor and his
advisers were at the first necessarily impelled to rule the country.
Having once enjoyed the exclusive power, they became unwilling to share
it with the representatives of the people. But the time came when the
mass, having acquired some idea of Responsible Government, were no
longer to be kept in obscurity, and thence arose the war between the
Tory and the Radical. In all the contentions arising therefrom, Mr.
Smart held an intermediate position with the Bidwells and others. In
speaking of all this, Mr. Smart is particularly anxious to give credit
to Dr. Strachan for his honesty of purpose, saying that the Colony is
much indebted to him in many ways.

Mr. Smart was called upon to preach the funeral sermon of Canada’s great
hero, General Brock.

He also delivered an address on the occasion of laying the foundation
stone of the gaol in Kingston, in presence of the Governor, Peregrine
Maitland, who was down from York, on which occasion there was great
demonstration of Free Masons, and the farmers of the Bay.

Mr. Sherwood thus speaks of Mr. Smart: “On his arrival, he for some
little time made his home at my house, he was then 23 years old, he has
now (1866) entered his 78th year, has retired from a public charge, and
is now residing quietly, and I trust comfortably, at Gananoque; and I
feel quite sure, all that know him throughout the whole Province, will
join with me, in wishing him long life and happiness, both here and
hereafter.”




                              CHAPTER XXX.


CONTENTS—The Quakers—Among the Settlers—From Penn.—Duchess County—First
Meeting-house—David Sand—Elijah Hick—Visiting Canada—James Noxen—A first
settler—Their mode of worship—In Sophiasburgh—The meeting-house—Joseph
Leavens—Hicksites—Traveling—Death, aged 92—Extract, Picton Sun—The first
preaching places—First English church—In private houses—At Sandwich—The
Indian church at the bay—Ernesttown—First Methodist church—Preaching at
Niagara—First church in Kingston—At Waterloo—At Niagara—Churches at
Kingston, 1817—In Hollowell—Thurlow—Methodist meeting-houses, 1816—At
Montreal—Building chapels in olden times—Occupying the frame—The old
Methodist chapels—In Hollowell township—In the fifth town—St. Lawrence—
First English Church, Belleville—Mr. Campbell—First time in the pulpit—
How he got out—The old church superseded—Church, front of Sidney—Rev.
John Cochrane—Rev. Mr. Grier—First Presbyterian Church in Belleville—
Rev. Mr. Ketcham—First Methodist Church in Belleville—Healey, Puffer—The
site of the church—A second one.


 THE EARLY CLERGYMEN AND CHURCHES OF UPPER CANADA.—THE QUAKERS.—NOXEN,
                         LEAVENS, HICKS, SAND.

Among the early settlers of the Bay were a goodly number of the Society
of Friends. Some of them were natives of Pennsylvania; but the majority
were from the Nine Partners, Duchess County, New York, where had existed
an extensive community of the followers of Fox. The first meeting-house
built by the Quakers in Canada was in Adolphustown upon the south shore
of Hay Bay, toward the close of last century.

About 1790, two Quaker preachers of some note visited Canada, they were
David Sand and Elijah Hick. By appointment they held service in
Adolphustown; it is uncertain whether this was before or after the
building of the meeting-house. The first and principal preacher among
the Quakers was James Noxen, one of the first settlers of Adolphustown,
under whom the Society was organized. He subsequently in 1814 removed to
Sophiasburgh, where he died in 1842.

The worship of the Quakers consists in essentially spiritual meditation
and earnest examination of the inmost soul, a quiet holding of the
balance, to weigh the actions and motives of everyday life. To the
proper discharge of these duties no place can be too quiet, too far
removed from the busy haunts of men.

The sixth township, or Sophiasburg had among its settlers a good many of
this sect, which at first had meetings at Jacob Cronk’s, until the year
1825, when they erected a meeting-house upon the northern front of the
township.

Two miles below the village of Northport, is situated a Friends’
meeting-house. Here twice a week, on Thursdays and Sundays, congregate
few, or many of the adherents of this persuasion, to commune with their
God. The meeting-house, reposing upon the very verge of the shore, and
half shadowed by beautiful maples and evergreens, is a fit place in
which to submit oneself to strict self-examination. There is nothing
here to disturb the supreme quietude of the place, unless, the gentle
ripples of the water, or the more restless murmuring of the wave.

JOSEPH LEAVENS “was an early settler of Canada, an emigrant from New
York,” he was for many years an esteemed preacher of the Hicksite branch
of Quakers, and was accustomed to travel from place to place, to talk to
his co-religionists. He had a place for preaching in a loft of his
brother’s store in Belleville. He was one of the first Quaker preachers
in Canada and travelled through all the townships at the Bay, and to
East Lake.

“Died in the township of Hallowell, about the 24th of May, 1844, the
venerable Joseph Leavens, in the 92nd year of his age. He was amongst
the early settlers of the Canadian forest, and emigrated from New York
State, and probably was a native of Nine Partners District. He had long
been a Preacher in the Religious Society of Friends, and though not
possessed of more than one talent, yet it is believed that, as he
occupied that to his Maker’s glory, his reward will be as certain as
though he had received ten talents. He was a diligent reader in the
sacred volume. He was much beloved both by his neighbours and friends,
and it is desired that his gospel labours may be profitably remembered
by them and his relatives.”—(_Picton Sun._)

In speaking of the individual clergymen who first came to the Province
we have referred to many of the first preaching places and churches: but
there remains to be added some further remarks.

We have seen that the first church erected in Western Canada was at the
Mohawk settlement, Grand River, which was built the first year of their
habitation in that place—1785–6. Strange that the natives of the wood,
should take the lead in erecting places of worship. It was several years
later before even log meeting-houses were put up by the loyalists. For
many years the pioneer clergymen or preachers officiated in private
houses. Now the service would be at the house of one, to which a
considerable number could come from a circuit of ten or fifteen miles,
then it would be at the place of some settler whose larger log house
afforded a more commodious place of worship.

A church was built at an early date at Sandwich, but the year, we know
not. The first church erected upon the Bay, the Rev. Mr. Smart thinks,
was at the Mohawk village, Tyendinaga. At an early period a log church
was built in Ernesttown by the Lutherans and another on South Bay; one
also for Mr. Langhorn to preach in, and then another in Adolphustown.
The first Methodist church was built in Adolphustown in 1792, and a
second one a month later in Ernesttown.

The Rev. Mr. Addison, went to Niagara in 1792. When Governor Simcoe
lived in Navy Hall, the Council Chamber a building near the barracks it
was said, was used alternately by the English Church, and Church of
Rome.

The first English Church was erected in Kingston in 1793, and up to 1810
it was the only one. A Methodist church was built at a very early date
at Waterloo; it was never finished, but used for many years. The first
at Niagara, was in 1802.

In November 28, 1817, there were in Kingston, “four churches or
meeting-houses, viz: 1 Episcopalian, 1 Roman Catholic and 2 Methodists;
there were 4 professional preachers, viz: 1 Episcopalian, 1 Presbyterian
and 2 Methodists. This enumeration does not include a chaplain to the
army, and one to the royal navy.” In Ernesttown there was one resident
professional preacher, a Methodist.

In Sophiasburgh there were no churches; but the Quakers, Methodists and
Presbyterians had meetings at private houses.

In Hollowell, says Eben. Washburne, “we have one Methodist, and one
Quaker meeting-house; preparations are making also for a Presbyterian
meeting-house. The former is attended by a circuit preacher every two
weeks; the latter by a Quaker every Sabbath.”

In Thurlow, “the Gospel is dispensed almost every Sabbath of the year,
in different parts of the township, by itinerant preachers of the
Methodist and Baptist sects.”

In 1816, there were eleven Methodist meeting-houses in Canada. These
were all of wood excepting one in Montreal, built in 1806, which was of
stone. “The mode of building chapels in the olden times was by joint
labor, and almost without the aid of money. The first step was for
scores of willing hands on a given day, to resort to the woods, and then
fell the trees, and square the timber; others, with oxen and horses,
drawing the hewed pieces and rafters to the appointed place. A second
step was to call all hands to frame the building, selecting the best
genius of the carpenter’s calling for superintendent. A third step was a
“bee” to raise the building; and the work for the first year was done.
The next year, the frame would be enclosed, with windows and doors, and
a rough floor laid loose. As soon as the meeting house was thus
advanced, it was immediately used for preaching, prayer meetings and
quarterly meetings. Some of the early chapels would be finished inside;
others, would be used for years in their rough, cold, and unfinished
state. The people were poor, had little or no money, but loved the
Gospel, and did what they could.”

The oldest of the eleven chapels is the Adolphustown, on the south shore
of the Hay Bay, and on the old Bay of Quinté circuit.

“The next for age is the chapel in the fourth concession of Ernesttown.
It was not erected here at first, but on the front of the township, lot
No. 27, and close to the Bay of Quinté. After some years, (some of the
principal Methodists moving to the fourth concession), the frame was
taken down, drawn to the present site, and put up again. It stands on
the public road, leading from Napanee to Kingston, and near the village
of Odessa. A roughcast school-house, now stands on the old site, east of
Bath. Some challenge the antiquity of the Ernesttown, with the
Adolphustown chapel; but both were commenced at about the same time, by
William Losee; the latter was first erected. As the traveler passes, he
may look on this old and useful meeting-house, still used for public
worship, and see a specimen of the architecture of the pious people
settled in the woods of Ernesttown seventy years ago.

“About nine miles from Odessa toward Kingston is the village of
Waterloo, and on the top of a sand-hill, formerly covered with lofty
pines, is a well proportioned and good looking Wesleyan stone church. It
is on the site of an ancient frame meeting-house, decayed, and gone,
which bore an antiquity nearly as great as the other two chapels. The
meeting-house in the Township of Kingston was an unfinished building, a
mere outside, with rough planks for seats.

“Two miles from the Town of Picton, and in the first concession of the
Township of Hollowell, is still to be seen one of the oldest Methodist
chapels in Upper Canada. The ground and the lumber were the gift of
Steven Conger. The first work was done in June, 1809. An account book,
now existing, shows the receipts and payments for the building. Some
paid subscriptions in money, some in wheat, some in teaming and work;
and one person paid one pound “by way of a turn.” The first trustees
were named Conger, Valleau, Vanblaricum, Dougal, German, Benson, Wilson,
and Vandusen. They are all dead, but children of some of them are still
living in the vicinity. The building is square, with pavilion roof, of
heavy frame timber, yet sound, having a school-house on one side, and a
mill on the other. Here is a burying ground attached, in which lie many
of the subscribers to, and first worshippers in, the chapel. It is still
used as a place of worship, and for a Sabbath school. These four chapels
were all in the old Bay of Quinté circuit.

“In the fifth township east of Kingston is another relic of the times of
old, called the Elizabethtown chapel. It is now within the boundaries of
the village of Lyn, about eight miles from Brockville, and near the
river St. Lawrence. A chapel particularly remarkable for the assembling
of the Genesse conference in 1817, and the great revival of religion
which there commenced.”

The first English Church erected west of Adolphustown, was at
Belleville. It was commenced in 1819, and finished the next year. The
Rev. Mr. Campbell was the first clergyman, and came to the place some
little time before the building was completed. An anecdote has been
related to us by one who saw the occurrence, which will serve to
illustrate the character of those days. Mr. Campbell one day entered the
church, when near its completion, and walked up a ladder and entered the
pulpit; immediately one of the workmen, named Smith, removed the ladder,
leaving the Rev. gentleman a prisoner; nor would they release him until
he had sent a messenger to his home for a certain beverage. This church
when erected was an ornament to the place, and is well remembered by
many, having been taken down in 1858, the present handsome structure
being completed. Mr. Campbell continued in charge until his death in
1835. During this time he caused to be erected a church at the front of
Sidney, midway between Belleville and the Trent, and he held services
there every second Sabbath, in the afternoon, for a time; but the
congregation was never large. Methodism seemed to take more hold of the
feelings of the people. Mr. Campbell’s successor was the Rev. John
Cochrane, who was pastor for three years, when the present incumbent,
the Rev. John Grier, who had been at the Carrying Place for some years,
took charge.

The first Presbyterian clergyman of Belleville, was Mr. Ketcham, under
him the first church was built.

The first Methodist church to be built in the western part of the Bay
country was at Belleville. It was probably about the beginning of this
century that the itinerant Methodist began to visit the head of the Bay
Quinté. They were accustomed to preach in private houses, and barns,
here and there along the front, and up the Moira River, and at Napanee.

Healy and Puffer were accustomed to preach at Col. Bell’s, Thurlow.

Belleville was laid out into lots in 1816; Mr. Ross applied to
government for one, as the society was disqualified from holding landed
property until 1828. The land was accordingly granted to him, and
recorded, January 7, 1819. A frame building was immediately commenced 50
by 30 feet. Before it was inclosed, service was held within the frame.
The building was never completed. The pulpit was of rough boards, and
the seats were of similar material, placed upon blocks. In 1831, a
second chapel was commenced, and the old one removed.




                             CHAPTER XXXI.

  CONTENTS—The first Methodist Preachers—The army—Capt. Webb—Tuffey—
    George Neal—Lyons—School-teacher—Exhorter—McCarty—Persecution—
    Bigotry—Vagabonds—McCarty arrested—Trial—At Kingston—Banished—“A
    martyr”—Doubtful—Losee, first Methodist missionary, 1790—A
    minister—A loyalist—Where he first preached—“A curiosity”—Earnest
    pioneer Methodist—Class-meetings—Suitable for all classes—Losee’s
    class-meetings—Determines to build a meeting-house—Built in
    Adolphustown—Its size—The subscribers—Members, amount—Embury—Those
    who subscribed for first church in New York—Same names—The
    centenary of Methodism—New York Methodists driven away—American
    Methodist forgetful—Embury and Heck refugees—Ashgrove—No credit
    given to British officers—Embury’s brother—The rigging loft, N.
    Y.—Barbara Heck—Settling in Augusta—First Methodist Church in
    America—Subscribers—“Lost Chapters”—The Author’s silence—What is
    acknowledged—“Severe threats”—Mr. Mann—To Nova Scotia—Mr. Wakely
    “admires piety”—not “loyalty”—Second chapel, N. Y.—Adolphustown
    subscribers—Conrad VanDusen—Eliz. Roblin—Huff—Ruttan—The second
    Methodist chapel—The subscribers—Commenced May, 1792—Carpenters’
    wages—Members, Cataraqui Circuit—Going to Conference—Returns—
    Darias Dunham—Physician—First quarterly meeting—Anecdotes—Bringing
    a “dish cloth”—“Clean up”—The new made squire—Asses—Unclean
    spirits—Losee discontinues preaching—Cause—Disappointment—Return
    to New York—Dunham useful—Settles—Preachers traveling—Saddle-bags—
    Methodism among the loyalists—Camp-meetings—Where first held, in
    Canada—Worshipping in the woods—Breaking up—Killing the Devil—
    First Canadian preacher—Journey from New York.


                THE FIRST WESLEYAN METHODISTS IN CANADA.

The first Methodist Preachers both in Lower and Upper Canada were
connected with the British Army; also, the second one in America, who
was Capt. Webb. “In 1780, a Methodist Local Preacher, named Tuffey, a
Commissary of the 44th, came with his regiment to Quebec. He commenced
preaching soon after his arrival, and continued to do so at suitable
times, while he remained,” or until his regiment was disbanded in 1783.
The second Methodist Preacher in Canada was George Neal, an Irishman.
During the war he was Major of a cavalry regiment. He “crossed the
Niagara river at Queenston on the 7th October, 1786, to take possession
of an officer’s portion of land, and soon began to preach to the new
settlers on the Niagara river—his labours were not in vain.”—(Playter).

“In 1788 a pious young man, called Lyons, an exhorter in the Methodist
Episcopal Church, came to Canada, and engaged in teaching school in
Adolphustown.” He collected the people together on the Sabbath, and
conducted religious services. “In the same year came James McCarty, an
Irishman, to Ernesttown.” He was a follower of Whitfield, but acted with
the Methodist, holding religious meetings. His preaching caused severe
persecution against him on the part of certain loyalists, who held the
doctrine that none could be true subjects who adhered not to the Church
of England; but to oppose the Church was to oppose the King. Advantage
was taken of this loyalty to try to prevent the introduction of any
other religious denominations. A law had been enacted by the Governor in
Council, that persons wandering about the country might be banished as
vagabonds. McCarty was arrested on a charge of vagabondism in
Adolphustown, and brought before a magistrate at VanDusen’s tavern, at
the front, who remanded him to Kingston. According to Playter, he was
preaching at Robert Perry’s when arrested; our informant is the Rev. C.
VanDusen, at whose father’s he was first arraigned. After being released
on bail, he was finally tried before Judge C., and was sentenced to be
banished, tradition says, upon an island in the St. Lawrence. At all
events he was placed in a batteau and taken away by French boatmen.
McCarty has obtained the name of _martyr_, but it is the belief of
unbiassed persons that he was not left upon the island, but was conveyed
to Montreal.

William Losee was the first regular preacher of the Methodist
denomination in Canada. He first visited the country in 1790, preached a
few sermons along the Bay of Quinté and St. Lawrence, and returned with
a petition from the settlers to the Conference, to send him as a
preacher. In February, 1791 he again came, as an appointed minister from
the Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States. “Losee was a
loyalist, and knew some of the settlers in Adolphustown, before they
left the United States. He desired to see them and preach to them the
glad tidings of salvation. Had he been on the revolutionary side, the
warm loyalists would not have received him—rather would have driven him
from the country.”—(Playter). One of the first places at which he
preached, was at the house of John Carscallian, in Fredericksburgh. The
tavern of Conrad VanDusen, in Adolphustown, was another, and at Paul
Huff’s, on Hay Bay, another. “A Methodist Preacher was a curiosity in
those days, and all were anxious to see the phenomenon; some would even
ask how he looked, or what he was like! A peculiarity in Losee, too,
was, that he had but one arm to use, the other being withered.” A true
pioneer Methodist, he set earnestly to work to form class-meetings and
organize societies, and during the summer his circuit embraced the
settlements in the Township of Kingston, Ernesttown, Fredericksburgh,
Marysburgh, and even Sophiasburgh. Class-meetings form the corner stone
of Wesleyan Methodism. But little understood, often entirely
misunderstood by others than Methodists, they are generally regarded as
the abode of cant or of priestly control. No greater error could exist.
Rightly conducted they are invaluable as a means of training the
religious mind, and establishing it upon the Rock of Ages. It has been
said that they are only suitable for the uneducated; not so, they are
alike beneficial to the peasant and the noble, the clown and the
_littérateur_. Losee, in accordance with the principles of Methodism, at
once set to work to create classes, and on the Sabbath of February 20,
1792, in the 3rd concession of Adolphustown, at Paul Huff’s house, he
established the first regular class-meeting in Canada. The second class
was formed on the following Sabbath, in Ernesttown, four miles from
Bath.

A third class was formed in March, at Samuel Detlor’s, three miles from
Napanee. The following year the congregation had so increased, which met
at Paul Huff’s house, that a determination was formed to erect a meeting
house. A paper was drawn up, in which was set forth the great blessing
of God in sending a minister to their wilderness home, that a
“Meeting-house or Church” is requisite. Then follows an agreement of the
subscribers to build a Church, under the direction of Losee; to be
thirty-six feet by thirty feet, two stories high, with a gallery. “Said
house to be built on the north-west corner of Paul Huff’s land, lot No.
18, third concession, Fourth Town;” and promising to pay the sums of
money annexed to their respective names. This interesting document, with
the names of subscribers, and the subscription of each, is to be found
in Playter’s History of Methodism, a work that ought to be in the hands
of every Canadian, no matter what his creed, because of the fund of
general knowledge upon Canada it contains. The total number of
subscribers was twenty-two; the amount subscribed was £108. Among the
names are those familiar to every inhabitant of the Bay, some known
throughout Canada. To one, especially, reference must be made, Andrew
Embury, a name of historic interest in connection with Methodism in
America. It is a remarkable fact, that this and other names are to be
found among those who planted Methodism in New York. The celebration of
the centenary of Methodism in America, in 1866, was marked by frequent
and glowing accounts of those who introduced Methodism into America. Too
much credit, too much honor could not be given to the Emburys, the Hecks
and others, which was quite correct. But no reference was made in the
United States, nor in Canada for that matter, to the dark days of the
infant Society in New York, when the cruel rebellion interrupted the
meetings in that place; and where persecution followed the retirement of
the British forces, 1783. It is a page of history in connection with
that body, which American writers of Methodism endeavor to wipe out,
when the very founders of the Church in America were made to flee from
their homes; and had all their property sacrificed. The names of Embury
and Heck; of whom so much was said, were among the refugees from rebel
oppression. No word has been said of the cause of the removal of these
persons to the wilderness of Canada. Barbara Heck, who enjoys the
everlasting honor of causing Philip Embury to begin Preaching, was
driven away from her Methodist home. Philip Embury was not likewise
treated, because death had sealed his eyes a year before the declaration
of independence, ere the demon of rebellion was evoked by the spirit of
radicalism, and unhallowed desire for neighbor’s goods; otherwise his
bones, the resting place of which they have given so glowing a picture
of, would likewise be sleeping in our midst, in the quiet shades of the
Canadian forest, as do those of Paul Heck, who died in 1788; and of his
wife, Barbara, who died in 1804. The remains of Philip Embury, instead
of being urned, as they were, in 1822, in Ash Grove, Washington County,
New York, after lying buried for fifty-seven years in the old burying
ground of Abraham Beninger, should have found a burying place on
Canadian soil, where rests his widow, the place to which his brother and
the Hecks were driven. We have listened to some of the American orators,
and read more of their speeches, and could not help noticing that they
forgot to mention that their impetuous rebellion drove away from them
the founders of Methodism; they forgot to give any credit to Capt. Webb,
who was the second Methodist preacher in America; forsooth, because he
was a British officer, and it would be unpleasant to associate such with
centenary orations in this their day of Anglophobia.

Upon the north shore of Hay Bay, in Fredericksburgh, settled David
Embury, brother of Philip, who officiated as a Methodist Minister in New
York, in a Rigging Loft, on William St., about 1766. To do this he was
urged by Barbara Heck, wife of Paul Heck, both of whom were among the
first to settle on the St. Lawrence, in Augusta, in 1785. The first
Methodist Church erected in America, was in 1768, on John Street, New
York. Among the 250 subscribers, was the name of David Embury, the same
who settled on Hay Bay; he gave £2. Also, the name of Paul Heck, who
contributed £3 5s. Twenty-four years later, and among the twenty-two
subscribers to build the first Methodist meeting-house in Canada, again
appears the name of Embury—Andrew, son of David Embury. The author of
the “Lost Chapters of Methodism,” gives interesting accounts of the
formation of the Methodist Society in New York; but he is remarkably
silent in this instance, as others are, about the treatment they
received from the Americans; not a word to make it known that they were
driven into the wilds of Nova Scotia and Canada by a relentless people.
Yet, at the conclusion, he acknowledges this much: he says, “At the
conclusion of the Revolutionary war, severe threats having been thrown
out against the Loyalists who had taken refuge within the British lines,
Mr. Mann thought it his duty to embark, with a considerable number of
the Society, for the wilds of Nova Scotia.” Mr. Mann was a class leader,
and local preacher, and, during the war, at the request of the Trustees,
kept the chapel in John Street open, after the regular preacher had
left. “We see what became of a part of the Society, in John Street. Some
of them had been so loyal to their sovereign, they were afraid they
would suffer if they remained.” Of course they were, and had they not
sufficient reason from the “threats” which had been “thrown out.” Mr.
Wakely, the author, continues, “We can admire their piety without
endorsing their loyalty.” How kind. The second Methodist Church of New
York was built on the land of DeLancy, who had his immense property
confiscated.

Of the subscribers to the chapel in Adolphustown, Conrad Van Dusen gave
the largest amount, £15. He had been a Tavern keeper on the front, and
was one of the first fruits of Losee’s missionary labors. “He lived a
little east of the Court House. Of him many pleasing and amusing
anecdotes are told; though a tavern-keeper, as well as a merchant, he
opened his house for the Gospel, and when that Gospel entered his heart,
he deliberately took his axe and cut down his sign posts.”—(_Playter._)

The second largest contributor, was Elizabeth Roblin, who gave £12. She
was the widow of Philip Roblin, who died 1788. They had been among the
first settlers of Adolphustown. (See U. E. Loyalists.) Mrs. Roblin
afterwards became the wife of John Canniff, the founder of Canifton, and
her remains now rest on the hill in the old family burying ground, in
that village. She was the grand-parent of John P. Roblin, of Picton, “a
man who has served his country in several Parliaments of Upper Canada.
Her daughter Nancy, born in 1781, is the mother of a large branch of the
Ketcheson family in the County of Hastings.”—(_Playter._) She, with her
husband, still live in the fifth concession of Sidney, yet hale and
hearty, in the autumn of their genial, though toilsome, life. “The
subscription of the widow was liberal; indeed, the Roblins of the Bay of
Quinté have always been a hospitable and liberal minded people.” Paul
Huff and William Ruttan, each gave £10. The others gave smaller sums;
but, considering the date, it is noteworthy that so much was
contributed.

The same month, it is said, Losee undertook to build a second Church in
Ernesttown, a short distance below Bath. The principal persons who aided
in building this meeting-house were James Parrot, John Lake, Robert
Clarke, Jacob Miller, and others. There is evidence in the account book
of Robert Clarke, who was a carpenter, that the chapel was commenced
May, 1792. He credits himself with then working twelve and a-half days;
and with working in October twelve and a-half days, at five shillings
and six-pence per day, which shows carpenter’s wages at that time. But
like a good hearted man, seeing the building fund not too full, he
reduced his wages to two shillings and nine-pence per day. His payment
to the chapel was £10. James Parrot received the subscriptions. The two
buildings were to be of the same size and form. As soon as these two
chapels were inclosed, the congregations sat on boards to hear the
preaching. They were the first Methodist Churches in Canada. At the end
of the year Mr. Losee had 165 members enrolled in the “Cataraqui
Circuit.” He set out on his long journey to attend conference at Albany.
Mr. Losee returned the following year, accompanied by Rev. Darius
Dunham. The latter took charge of the Bay of Quinté district—the
“Cataraqui Circuit,” while Losee went to the St. Lawrence to organize a
new society—this was called the “Oswegotchie” circuit.

On Saturday, September 15, the first “Quarterly” meeting was held, in
Mr. Parrot’s barn, 1st Con., Ernesttown, to which many of the settlers
came from the six townships. Darius Dunham was a Physician by
profession. “He was a man of strong mind, zealous, firm in his
opinions.” “He labored well on the Cataraqui Circuit, and was in high
repute by the people.”—(_Playter._)

Many anecdotes are told of Dunham. On account of his quick and blunt way
of speaking and rebuking evil doings, he acquired the name of “Scolding
Dunham.” Withal, he was witty, and he loved, it would seem, next to
Godliness, cleanliness, so he would, if at a house, where it were not
observed, according to his idea (and as there was only the one room, he
could see the whole process of preparing for the table,) he would tell
the housewife that the next time he came he would “bring a dish-cloth
along,” or perhaps, he would bluntly tell the woman to “clean up.”
Carroll relates the following story, yet often told and laughed at by
the old settlers of the Bay. “His reply to the newly appointed
magistrate’s bantering remarks, is widely reported. A new-made ‘Squire’
rallied Dunham before some company, about riding so fine a horse, and
told him he was very unlike his humble Master, who was content to ride
an ass. The preacher responded with his usual imperturbable gravity, and
in his usual heavy and measured tones, that he agreed with him
perfectly, and that he would most assuredly imitate his Master in that
particular, but for the difficulty of finding the animal required—the
Government having made up all the asses into magistrates.” A person of
the author’s acquaintance, informed him that he saw an infidel, who was
a fallen Lutheran clergyman, endeavoring, one night while Dunham was
preaching, to turn the whole into ridicule. The preacher affected not to
notice him, but went on exalting the excellency of Christianity, and
showing the formidable opposition it had confronted and overcome; when,
all at once, he turned to where the scoffer sat, and fixing his eyes
upon him, the old gentleman continued: “Shall Christianity and her
votaries, after having passed through fire and water,” &c.—“after all
this, I say, shall the servants of God, at this time of day, allow
themselves to be frightened by the _braying of an ass_.” In those days
it was believed, by some at least, that unclean spirits and devils might
be cast out by the power of God through the faithful Christian, and
Dunham had the credit of having, on several occasions, cast out devils.

Mr. Losee remained a preacher only two years, when he became mentally
unfit, having encountered a disappointment of a crushing nature. The
uncertainty of the cause of his discontinuing to preach, has been
dispelled by Playter, in the most touching language, “He was the subject
of that soft, yet powerful passion of our nature, which some account our
weakness, and others our greatest happiness. Piety and beauty were seen
connected in female form then as well as now, in this land of woods and
water, snows and burning heat. In the family of one of his hearers, and
in the vicinity of Napanee river, was a maid, of no little moral and
personal attraction. Soon his (Losee’s) attention was attracted; soon
the seed of love was planted in his bosom, and soon it germinated and
bore outward fruit. In the interim of suspense, as to whether he should
gain the person, another preacher came on the circuit, visits the same
dwelling, is attracted by the same fair object, and finds in his heart
the same passion. The two seek the same person. One is absent on the St.
Lawrence; the other frequents the blest habitation, never out of mind.
One, too, is deformed, the other a person of desirable appearance.
Jealousy crept in with love. But, at last, the preference was made, and
disappointment, like a thunderbolt, overset the mental balance of the
first itinerant minister in Canada.” He subsequently removed to New
York, where he continued to live for many years, and recovered his
mental health. He had purchased lots in Kingston, which he returned to
sell in 1816; at this time he was perfectly sound in mind, and was a
good man. He visited Adolphustown, and other places, preaching here and
there, and finally returned to New York.

Mr. Dunham proved a useful man, especially among the settlers of
Marysburgh. He ultimately in the year 1800, retired from the ministry
and settled near Napanee, having married into the Detlor family. But he
continued to act as a local preacher.

The early preachers often traveled from place to place on horseback
after a bridle-path had been made, with saddle-bags, containing oats in
one part, and a few articles of wearing apparel in another, perhaps a
religious book; thus the zealous preacher would travel mile after mile
through interminable forests. Indeed there are plenty to-day who have
done likewise.

There is one fact connected with the early Methodist preachers, which
requires a passing notice.

The settlers were all intensely loyal; yet when the Yankee Methodist
preacher came in their midst he was gladly received; it is true Losee
the first who came was a loyalist; but many who followed were Americans
and republicans. Although the Lutheran, Presbyterian, and English
churchmen had preceded the Methodists into Canada, neither seemed to
obtain that hold upon the hearts of the plain U. E. Loyalists, that the
Methodists did. The people of every denomination as well as those
belonging to none, flocked to hear them, and many stayed to become
followers. These Americans were always regarded with suspicion by
government, and serious doubts were entertained whether those who became
Methodists were loyal. But the war of 1812, exhibited in a thrilling
manner the old fire of attachment to their sovereign the King. There
seemed to be an adaptability between the Methodist mode of worship and
the plain old settlers, and for years there were many who left the
church of their fathers, and joined the more demonstrative society of
Wesleyans. Not only was this mode of ordinary worship followed by the
Methodist congenial, but especially the camp meeting engaged their
hearty attention. This mode of worshipping in the woods was first known
in Kentucky in 1801, and was initiated by two brothers named McGee, one
of whom was a Methodist, the other a Presbyterian. There are many who
regard the holding of camp-meetings as very questionable, even in the
past. Whatever may be said about the necessity of such meetings at the
present day, they were it is thought, highly appropriate in the infant
days of the country. At the first, and for many long years, there were
but few churches of any size. Then, the inhabitants had been buried as
it were in the primeval forests, left to meditate in its deep recesses,
far away from the busy haunts of men. No doubt the solemn repose, and
silent grandeur awoke in their minds feelings of awe, and of veneration,
just the same as one will feel when gazing along the naves of some old
grand cathedral, with its representations of trees and flowers. It is
not difficult to understand that the mind, trained by habit to
meditation in the woods, with its waving boughs telling of other times,
and of a mysterious future, would naturally find worshipping in the
woods, congenial to the soul,—find it a fit place for the higher
contemplation and worship of the great God. The first camp-meeting held
in Canada was in 1805, on the south shore of Hay Bay, near the chapel.
The meeting was attended by some from the distant townships, who went
down in batteaux. This was a great event to the settlers. Its
announcement, says Dr. Bangs, “beforehand excited great interest far and
near. Whole families prepared for a pilgrimage to the ground,
processions of waggons, and foot passengers wended along the highways.”
The ministers present were Case, Ryan, Pickett, Keeler, Madden and
Bangs. The meeting commenced on the 27th of September; the whole was
characterized by deep religious feeling as well as decided
demonstration, and the joy and comfort of believing, which ought always
to be present with the Christian, was generally experienced, while there
was an absence of that outside exhibition, too often seen in later
years, around the camps. We quote from Carroll respecting the ending of
this meeting. The account is from Dr. Bangs, “The time was at hand at
last for the conclusion of the meeting. The last night was the most
awfully impressive and yet most delightful scene my eyes ever beheld.
There was not a cloud in the sky. The stars studded the firmament, and
the glory of God filled the camp. All the neighbouring forest seemed
vocal with the echo of hymns. Turn our attention which way we would, we
heard the voice of prayer and praise. I will not attempt to describe the
parting scene, for it was indescribable. The preachers, about to
disperse to their distant fields of labor, hung upon each other’s necks,
weeping and yet rejoicing. Christians from remote settlements, who had
here formed holy friendships, which they expected would survive in
heaven, parted probably to meet no more on earth. As the hosts marched
off in different directions the songs of victory rolled along the
highways.”

Apropos of Methodist camp-meetings, Carroll tells an anecdote
characteristic of the times, and as well of the honest Dutch. One of
these old settlers was speaking of a recent camp-meeting from which he
had just come said, “It was a poor, tet tull time, and no goot was tone,
till tat pig Petty (the Rev. Elias Pattie) come; but mit his pig fist,
he did kill te tuval so tet as a nit, and ten te work proke out.” The
Methodists of that day were fond of the demonstrative.

In the year 1806, a native of Prince Edward district entered the
Methodist ministry. He was the first native Canadian preacher of any
denomination, his name was Andrew Pringle.

The same year Thomas Whitehead was sent by the New York Conference. He
was six weeks on the road through the woods with his wife and six
children, “and during most of the time they subsisted on boiled wheat.”




                             CHAPTER XXXIa.

  CONTENTS—Henry Ryan—Ryanites—He comes to Canada—His associate, Case—
    At Kingston—A Singer—Preaching in the Market-place—Their
    treatment—In office—His circuit—1000 miles—What he received—Elder—
    Superseded—Probable cause—A British subject—During the war of
    1812—President of Conference—“High-minded”—Useful—Acceptable to
    the people—Desired independence by the Canadians—How he was
    treated—His labors—Brave—Witty—“Fatherless children”—“Impudent
    scoundrel”—Muscular—“Methodists’ Bull”—“Magistrate’s Goat”—Ryan
    seeks separation—Breakenridge—Conduct of the American Conference—
    Ryan’s agitation—Effect upon the Bishops—First Canada Conference—
    At Hollowell—Desire for independence—Reasons, cogent—Fruit of
    Ryan’s doings—The way the Conference treated Ryan—Withdraws—No
    faith in the United States Conference—Ryan sincere—“Canadian
    Wesleyans”—The motives of the United States Conference
    questionable—The wrong done Ryan—Second Canada Conference—Case,
    first Superintendent—Visit of Bishop Asbury—Account by Henry Bœhm—
    Asbury an Englishman—During the rebellion—A Bishop—His journey to
    Canada—Crossing the St. Lawrence—Traveling in Canada—An upset—“A
    decent people”—His opinion of the country—The Bishop ill—At
    Kingston—Bœhm at Embury’s—A field meeting—Riding all night—
    Crossing to Sackett’s harbor—Nearly wrecked.


                      SOME ACCOUNT OF HENRY RYAN.

A sketch of the early ministers who preached around the Bay Quinté,
would be incomplete without a somewhat extended notice of Elder Ryan,
after whom was called, a certain number of non-contented Methodists,
_Ryanites_.

Henry Ryan, an Irishman, “of a bold energetic nature, with a powerful
voice,” commenced preaching in 1800. He was for five years stationed in
the States. In the year 1805, he, with the Rev. Wm. Case, was appointed
to the Bay Quinté circuit. It was they who arranged and conducted the
first camp meeting. Carroll, writing of that period, says, “there was no
society (of Methodists) then in the Town of Kingston, and its
inhabitants were very irreligious. The market house was the only chapel
of the Methodists, Case and his colleague (Ryan) made a bold push to
arouse the people. Sometimes they went together, Ryan was a powerful
singer too. They would ride into the town, put their horses at an inn,
lock arms, and go singing down the streets a stirring ode, beginning
with ‘Come let us march to Zion’s hill.’ By the time they had reached
the market-place, they usually had collected a large assembly. When
together, Ryan usually preached, and Case exhorted. Ryan’s stentorian
voice resounded through the town, and was heard across the adjacent
waters. They suffered no particular opposition excepting a little
annoyance from some of the baser sort, who sometimes tried to trip them
off the butcher’s block, which constituted their rostrum; set fire to
their hair, and then blew out their candle if it were in the night
season.” Proof was subsequently given that this preaching was not
without effect.

Mr. Ryan continued ten years at the Bay Quinté, and then three years in
the west at Long Point and Niagara. In 1810, he was presiding Elder. His
duties, as such, was to visit every part of the Province, from Detroit
to Cornwall. “Allowing for his returns home, he traveled about 1000
miles each quarter in the year, or 4000 miles a year. And what was the
worldly gain? The presiding Elder was allowed $80 for himself, $60 for
his wife, and what provisions he would need for his family. His entire
allowance might have been £60 a year. Such was the remuneration, and
such the labors, of the presiding Elder” of the Methodists fifty-three
years ago—(Playter).

Henry Ryan continued a presiding Elder, for many years, in the whole of
Upper Canada, a few years in Lower Canada, and then when the Bay of
Quinté district was set apart by division, he was appointed Elder to it.
But in 1834, for some reason, Mr. Ryan was superseded in office. The
reason of this can only be guessed. He was an Irishman by birth, and
although sent to Canada by an American body, he seems to have been more
a British subject, a Canadian, than American. During the war of 1812, he
remained in Canada attending to his duties, with three other faithful
men, Rhodes, Whitehead, and Pringle. More than that, as presiding Elder,
he assumed the oversight of the preachers at the close of the first
year. Others had been stationed in Canada who were British subjects, but
they ceased before the war had closed, to discharge their duties. The
Americans feared to come, or, having come, were warned off by
proclamation. Those who continued in the ministerial field met under the
presidency of Ryan. In the year of the commencement of the war, the
conference was to have met at Niagara, in Upper Canada; but war was
declared by the United States a month previous, and instead of venturing
into the country where their fellow countrymen were about to carry the
midnight torch, they turned aside to another place to hold their
conference. “None of the brethren laboring on the Canada side went over.
It is probable, although we are not certain, that they met at the place
appointed, where some sort of deliberations would take place.” The Rev.
John Ryerson says Mr. Ryan “held a conference, and held three
conferences during the war, the principal business of which was
employing preachers, and appointing them to their different fields of
labor.” The Rev. Ezra Adams says, “the second conference was held at
Matilda,” and “in 1814, it was held at the Bay of Quinté, at Second or
Fourth Town”—Carroll. Mr. Ryan was impulsive and authoritative, at least
the ministers thought so, and the rule of “Harry Ryan” was called
“high-handed.” The end of it all was that, although he was useful and
liked by the people, his ministerial brethren in Canada did not like
him, and the conference seemed glad to supersede one, who no doubt
already manifested his desire that the Canadian Methodists should become
independent of the Americans. In view of the political state of affairs,
the objection felt by the government to have American preachers giving
religious instruction to Canadians,—in view of the course pursued by
Ryan during the war of 1812—in view of his whole career up to this time,
the belief is forced upon the mind that it was not only when Ryan had
been superseded that he began to agitate for a separation. His labors
during the war were severe and continuous, says a preacher of the times,
“He used to travel from Montreal to Sandwich, to accomplish which he
kept two horses in the Niagara district, and one for the upper part of
the Province, and another for the lower. As his income was very small,
he eked out the sum necessary to support his family by peddling a
manufacture of his own in his extensive journeys, and by hauling with
his double team in winter time, on his return from Lower Canada, loads
of Government stores or general merchandise. Mr. Ryan, by his loyalty,
gained the confidence and admiration of all friends of British
supremacy, and by his abundant and heroic labors, the affections of the
God-fearing part of the community.” Much more might be said in the same
vein, but probably enough has been said to establish his claim to the
sympathy of every Bay of Quinté inhabitant, where he so long labored and
where most of his subsequent followers lived. It may be added that he
was brave and witty, and had a ready answer for every bantering remark.
Some wicked fellows are said to have asked him if he had heard the news?
What news? Why, that the devil is dead. Then said he, looking around on
the company, he has left a great many fatherless children. On another
occasion, on entering a public house, a low fellow, knowing him to be,
from his costume, a minister, remarked aloud, placing his hand in his
pocket, “There comes a Methodist preacher; I must take care of my
money.” Ryan promptly said, “You are an impudent scoundrel.” “Take
care,” said the man, “I cannot swallow that.” “Then chew it till you
can,” was the fearless reply.—(Carroll). At camp meetings, when it came
to pass that individuals came to create disturbance, and when there was
no police to take care of rowdies, Mr. Ryan has been known to display
his muscular power by actually throwing the guilty individuals over the
enclosure to the camp ground.

Mr. Ryan preached occasionally at Vandusens’ tavern in Adolphustown.
After one of his thundering sermons, a neighboring squire who was a
daily visitor at the tavern, and who had recently attempted to cut his
own throat, wrote upon the wall of the bar-room, “Elder Ryan, the
Methodist bull, preaches hell and damnation till the pulpit is full;”
whereupon some one wrote below it, “Bryan C——d, the magistrate goat,
barely escaped hell and damnation by cutting his throat.”

Mr. Ryan, upon his return from the General Conference in 1844, commenced
an agitation for independence of the Canadian Methodists, and from Port
Hope Creek to the Ottawa, he continued to urge the necessity of such an
end.

“While not much liked by the preachers, Ryan was very popular among the
people,” especially along the Bay Quinté. Captain Breakenridge, a local
preacher, living on the St. Lawrence, joined him, in holding
conventions, and in procuring largely signed petitions, praying for
separation. Ryan and Breakenridge, went to the General Conference,
bearing these petitions, and were not received. But these petitions were
the commencement of the separation, which it was quite time should take
place for the well being of both parties. Concessions were made—a Canada
conference was formed through the instrumentality of Elder Ryan; but
under the superintendency of the United States conference. This did not
satisfy Ryan, and his followers in the Bay Quinté circuit. Meetings were
held at which it was resolved they would “_break off_” from the American
Church without permission. For four months Ryan energetically appealed
to the people. To allay this the Bishop had to come and say to the
Canadians, that if they wished independence, the next general
conference, which would meet in 1828, would no doubt grant it. The
following year the first Canada conference was held at the village of
Hollowell, (Picton). It was opened on the 25th August. There were thirty
preachers present, and they continued in session five days. The
agitation initiated by Ryan, had done its work, “a general desire
existed, that the Canada body should become an independent body, not
later than the general conference of 1828,” and a memorial was prepared
to be submitted to that body. After requesting to be set apart an
independent body, the following reason, with others was given. “The
state of society requires it. The first settlers having claimed the
protection of His Britannic Majesty in the revolutionary war, were
driven from their former possessions to endure great hardships in a
remote wilderness. Time, however, and a friendly intercourse, had worn
down their asperity and prejudice, when the late unhappy war revived
their former feelings; affording what they considered, new and grievous
occasion for disgust against their invading neighbors. The prejudices
thus excited would probably subside if their ministry were to become
residents in this country, as would be the case in the event of becoming
a separate body.” The fact that government regarded with dislike the
connection was adverted to, also that they were not allowed to solemnize
matrimony. Such was the fruit of Elder Ryan’s proceedings, and to him
belongs great credit, however much his motives may have been impugned.
It has been acknowledged that he was disliked by the preachers, and this
dislike was manifested this year by sending him as a missionary to the
Indians. No wonder he was dissatisfied. Not because he was placed in a
humble position, after acting nearly a quarter of a century as presiding
Elder; but because of the animus of those who did it. And moreover, he
entertained the belief that the general conference did not intend to
give independence. The next year Ryan was placed among the superannuated
ministers, and thus remained two years; the next year 1827, he withdrew,
and resumed the agitation for independence. He had no faith in the
United States conference, the cry was raised, Loyal Methodism against
Republican Methodism. In this Ryan was countenanced by Government and
the English Church, and Playter says, Dr. Strachan sent him £50 to carry
on the work of separation.

The whole previous life of Ryan, leads us to believe that he was sincere
and honest in his movements and statements, but it is said he was
greatly mistaken. The people generally said, wait till we see what the
general conference does. The preachers have said they will give us
independence, pause till we see. The result of the conference was as had
been promised; while already Ryan had separated, and, with a limited
number of followers, mostly along the bay and St. Lawrence, had formed a
new body with the name of _Canadian Wesleyan Methodist Church_. But it
will always remain a question whether the general conference would have
conceded the independence had it not been well known that Ryan would
take almost all if they were not made free. It is not an unknown thing
for a person who has worked for some public good to be robbed of the
credit in a surreptitious manner. Ryan was deceived, and his kind,
though impulsive nature resented the wrong done him. Though his name has
been placed under a shadow by those who were indebted to him, yet his
memory is even yet green and sweet in the hearts of some of the old
settlers. Well might Elder Ryan, select as his text at the time, “I have
raised up children and they have rebelled.”

The general conference assembled at Pittsburgh, 1st May, 1828. The
memorial from the Canada conference was duly considered, and whatever
may have been the reasons, they granted in the most kindly spirit, the
decided request of the Canadian Methodists. Ryan, it is said when he
heard of it, “looked astonished, trembled and could scarcely utter a
word.”

The second Canada conference met at Ernesttown, the 2nd October, 1828,
in Switzer’s chapel. “Bishop Hedding came for the last time, and
presided over the conference. No United States Bishop, no Bishop at all,
has ever presided since.” This year, Andrew Pringle, the first native
Methodist preacher, was placed on the superannuated list. After due
deliberation the conference resolved to organize into an independent
body, and adopted the discipline of the Methodist Episcopal Church, as
the basis of their own. The Rev. Wm. Case was appointed General
Superintendent until the next conference.

It is not possible, nor would it be proper to give a connected history
of Methodism, or any other religious denomination. But the aim of the
writer is to supply facts relative to those who have lived and acted a
part in connection with the early history of the bay, with such other
facts as will throw light upon the matter. With this object in view, we
will here introduce, in conclusion, a brief notice of the visit of
Bishop Asbury to Canada in 1811. The account is from the pen of the Rev.
Henry Bœhm, with remarks by Mr. Carroll. Reading this account, it called
to our mind the account given to us by Father Bœhm, in 1854, while
sojourning at Staten Island, New York, where we had the great pleasure
of frequently meeting him and of enjoying the hospitality of his genial
family. Mr. Bœhm was the traveling companion of Bishop Asbury when he
visited Canada.

Bishop Asbury, the cotemporary of the Wesleys, being one whom Wesley
ordained to preach, he came to America in 1771, as a missionary, being
25 years old. Of all the English preachers in the revolting colonies, he
alone remained during the revolutionary war, and was under the necessity
of concealing himself in Delaware. Created a Bishop by Dr. Coke, in
1785, he continued for many years in the oversight of the Methodist
Church in America and in Canada. But although Methodism was planted in
Canada in 1792, it was not until the year mentioned that a Bishop found
his way to the remote settlements of Canada. Bishop Asbury, however, had
for years a desire to see Canada. Two years before he came he wrote, “I
shall see Canada before I die,” says Bœhm.

“We had a severe time on our journey. We crossed Lake Champlain, and Mr.
Asbury preached in a bar-room in Plattsburgh. The roads through the
woods, over rocks, down gulleys, over stumps, and through the mud, were
indescribable. They were enough to jolt a hale bishop to death, let
alone a poor, infirm old man, near the grave. On entering the village
(of St. Regis) as Mr. Asbury was leading his horse across a bridge made
of poles, the animal got his foot between them, and sunk into the mud
and water. Away went the saddle-bags; the books and clothes were wet,
and the horse was fast. We got a pole under him to pry him out; at the
same time the horse made a leap, and came out safe and sound. We crossed
the St. Lawrence in romantic style. We hired four Indians to paddle us
over. They lashed three canoes together, and put our horses in them,
their fore feet in one canoe, their hind feet in another. It was a
singular load; three canoes, three passengers, the bishop, Smith and
myself, three horses and four Indians. They were to take us over for
three dollars. It was nearly three miles across to where we landed”—“did
not reach the other side till late in the evening.” The Indians claimed
another dollar, because three could not be easily divided between four,
this was “cheerfully paid.” “We arrived in Canada on July 1st, 1811,
landing at Cornwall, and about midnight reached the hospitable house of
Evan Roise, who hailed the bishop’s arrival with joy, and gave him and
his companions a welcome worthy of patriarchal times.” “We found it warm
in Canada, and the Bishop suffered greatly. Here Henry Ryan, Presiding
Elder of Upper Canada, met us. The next day Bishop Asbury preached, the
day after the Bishop preached again and there was a love-feast, and the
Lord’s Supper.” Proceeding up the River St. Lawrence, arrived at the
eastern line of Matilda, the Bishop rode in Brother Glassford’s close
carriage, which he called a ‘calash,’ and he inquired how they would get
out if it upset. He had hardly asked the question before over went the
carriage, and the venerable Bishop was upset, but fortunately no bones
were broken; the saplings alongside the road broke the fall. On Friday
the Bishop preached in Matilda chapel, in what was called the German
settlement. I followed, preaching in German. The Bishop was delighted
with the people, he wrote, “here is a decent loving people. I called
upon Father Dulmage, and Brother Heck.” We tarried over night with David
Breackenridge. He married and baptised a great many people, and attended
many funerals. In 1804 he preached the funeral sermon of Mrs. Heck, who
died suddenly, and it is said she claimed to be the person who stirred
Philip Embury to preach the Gospel. On Saturday we rode twelve miles
before breakfast to Father Boyce’s, where we attended Quarterly Meeting.
Bishop Asbury preached a thrilling sermon. “The Bishop greatly admired
the country through which we rode. He says ‘Our ride has brought us
through one of the finest countries I have seen. The timber is of noble
size; the cattle are well shaped, and well looking; the crops are
abundant on a most fruitful soil. Surely this is a land that God, the
Lord hath blessed.’” (Such was the testimony of one who had traveled all
over the United States, concerning a country eighty years younger than
the older States of the Union. Such the testimony respecting the
pioneers of the country who twenty-five years previous came thereto into
an unbroken wilderness—respecting the men the Americans had driven away
and stigmatized by the application of the most degrading names). “On
Monday we proceeded to Gananoque Falls, to Colonel Stone’s. Father
Asbury was very lame from inflammatory rheumatism. “He suffered like a
martyr. On Tuesday we visited Brother Elias Dulmage, a very kind family,
and Bishop Asbury preached in the first Town Church” (Kingston Church).
E. Dulmage, one of the Palatines, lived afterward a long time as
jail-keeper.”—(Carroll). The Bishop was so poorly he could not proceed
on his journey, and was obliged to lie up and rest. He remained at
Brother Dulmage’s, where he found a very kind home, and I went with
Henry Ryan to his Quarterly Meeting, in Fourth or Adolphustown, Bay of
Quinté. On Friday we rode to Brother John Embury, Hay Bay. He was a
nephew of Philip Embury, the Apostle of American Methodism. On the
Lord’s day we had a glorious love-feast, and at the Lord’s Supper He was
made known to us in the breaking of bread. In a beautiful grove, under
the shade of trees planted by God’s own hand, I preached to two thousand
people, John Reynold’s, afterward Bishop Reynolds, of Belleville, and
Henry Ryan exhorted. (Exhorting after sermon was a common practice among
the Methodists in those days). Mr. Bœhm had to return to Kingston the
same night, in order that the Bishop might get to the Conference to be
held in the States immediately. To do so they rode all night—35 miles.
“To our great joy we found Father Asbury better”—“he had sent around and
got a congregation to whom he preached in the chapel. He also met the
Society and baptized two children. We were in Canada just a fortnight.
The Bishop was treated everywhere as the angel of the churches. The
Bishop preached six times in Canada, besides numerous lectures which he
delivered to societies.” The Bishop and Mr. Bœhm set out on the Monday
for Sackett’s Harbour, in a small sail boat. There was a heavy storm,
and they were nearly wrecked. On the water all night without a cabin.
Spent a fearful night, and reached Sackett’s Harbour the next afternoon.




                             CHAPTER XXXII.

  CONTENTS—McDonnell—First R. Catholic Bishop—A “Memorandum”—
    Birthplace—In Spain—A Priest—In Scotland—Glengary Fencibles—
    Ireland, 1798—To Canada—Bishop—Death in Scotland—Body removed to
    Canada—Funeral obsequies—Buried at Kingston—Had influence—Member
    of Canadian Legislative Council—Pastoral visitations, 1806—A loyal
    man—A Pioneer in his Church—The Bishop’s Address, 1836—Refuting
    mal-charges—Number of the R. C. Clergy in 1804—From Lake Superior
    to Lower Canada—Traveling horseback—Sometimes on foot—Hardships—
    Not a Politician—Expending private means—Faithful services—
    Acknowledged—Roman Catholic U. E. Loyalists—First Church in
    Ernesttown—McDonnell at Belleville—Rev. M. Brennan—First Church in
    Belleville—What we have aimed at—The advantages to the English
    Church—The Reserves—In Lower Canada—Dr. Mountain—Number of English
    Clergymen, 1793—A Bishop—Monopoly initiated—Intolerance and
    Exclusion swept away—An early habit at Divine service.


                 THE ROMAN CATHOLICS—BISHOP MCDONNELL.

We are much indebted to J. P. McDonnell, Esq., of Belleville, for a
“Memorandum of his grand-parent, the Rev. Alex McDonnell, first Bishop
of Upper Canada.”

“He was born in the year 1760, in Glengary, in Scotland, educated for
the Priesthood at Valladolid College, in the Kingdom of Spain; for, at
this time no person professing the Roman Catholic faith could be allowed
to be educated in any part of the British empire. He was ordained Priest
before the year 1790. Then came back to Scotland, his native country,
and officiated as a Priest in Badenoch, a small district in North
Scotland, also in the city of Glasgow; afterwards joined, in 1798, the
Glengary Fencibles, then for duty in Ireland, under the command of Lord
McDonnell, of Glengary, who was Colonel of said Fencible Regiment. He
came to Canada in the year 1804; was consecrated first Bishop of Upper
Canada in the year 1822, titled as the Bishop of Kingston.” He died in
Dumfriesshire, a County bordering on England and Scotland, in the year
1840. His body was laid in St. Mary’s Church, Edinborough, until removed
to Canada, in 1862. His remains was taken from the cars at the station
at Lancaster, and carried to St. Raphael’s Cathedral; in which Church he
had spent some of his most useful days, administering the consolations
of his religion to his numerous co-religionists throughout the Province
of Upper Canada. His remains were escorted by thousands of people, of
all denominations, from St. Raphael’s Church to St. Andrew’s Church, and
thence to Cornwall depot, in order to convey his remains to Kingston,
the head of his See; where his remains now lie in the vaults of the
Cathedral of that ancient city, in which he, as Bishop, officiated for
years, a favorite of both Protestants and Catholics. I may here remark,
that no other man, either clergyman or lay, ever had more influence with
the Government, either Imperial or Colonial than Bishop McDonnell. In
fact he established the Catholic Church in Western Canada. All the lands
that the church now possesses were procured by his exertions. The Bishop
was a member of the Legislative Council for years in connection with the
Venerable Bishop Strachan, of Toronto. About the year 1806, he passed on
his way from Toronto, then York, to Kingston; celebrated mass at his
relation’s, Col. Archibald Chisholm, whose descendants are now living on
Lot. Nos. 8 and 9, 1st Con., Thurlow, adjoining the Town of Belleville—
carried his vestments on his back most of the way from Toronto to
Kingston; and he took passage in a birch canoe from his friend’s, Col.
Chisholm, to another relation, Col. McDonnell, (McDonald’s Cove,) on his
way to Kingston.

“Although his religion was then proscribed by the British Government,
and he was compelled to go to a foreign country to be educated, no more
loyal man to the British Crown lived; no other man ever conduced more to
the upholding of British supremacy in North America than he, and helped
to consolidate the same.”

We are also indebted to Mr. McDonnell for other valuable documents
concerning the Bishop, who may be regarded the father of his Church in
Upper Canada. At least, he was the pioneer of that denomination in the
Bay region. To a great extent, his history is the early history of his
Church. The worthy prelate will speak for himself, when at the advanced
age of seventy-four, and he spoke under circumstances which precluded
the possibility of any statement accidentally creeping in, which could
not be fully substantiated.

Referring to an address of the House of Assembly, 1836, in which his
character had been aspersed, and his motives assailed, he, in a letter
to Sir Francis Bond Head, asks “the liberty of making some remarks on a
few passages” thereof, and, among other things, says, “As to the charges
brought against myself, I feel very little affected by them, having the
consolation to think that fifty years spent in the faithful discharge of
my duty to God and to my country, have established my character upon a
foundation too solid to be shaken by the malicious calumnies of two
notorious slanderers.” To the charge that he had neglected his spiritual
functions to devote his time and talents to politics, he, by plain
declaration, refutes their “malicious charge,” stating the following
facts, which relate to the country from the year he entered it, 1804. He
says, “There were then but two Catholic clergymen in the whole of Upper
Canada. One of these clergymen soon deserted his post; and the other
resided in the Township of Sandwich, in the Western District, and never
went beyond the limits of his mission; so that upon entering upon my
pastoral duties, I had the whole of the Province beside in charge, and
without any assistance for the space of ten years. During that period, I
had to travel over the country, from Lake Superior to the Province line
of Lower Canada, to the discharge of my pastoral functions, carrying the
sacred vestments sometimes on horseback, sometimes on my back, and
sometimes in Indian birch canoes, living with savages—without any other
shelter or comfort, but what their fires and their fares, and the
branches of the trees afforded; crossing the great lakes and rivers, and
even descending the rapids of the St. Lawrence in their dangerous and
wretched crafts. Nor were the hardships and privations which I endured
among the new settlers and emigrants less than what I had to encounter
among the savages themselves, in their miserable shanties; exposed on
all sides to the weather, and destitute of every comfort. In this way I
have been spending my time and my health year after year, since I have
been in Upper Canada, and not clinging to a seat in the Legislative
Council and devoting my time to political strife, as my accusers are
pleased to assert. The erection of five and thirty Churches and Chapels,
great and small, although many of them are in an unfinished state, built
by my exertion; and the zealous services of two and twenty clergymen,
the major part of whom have been educated at my own expense, afford a
substantial proof that I have not neglected my spiritual functions, or
the care of the souls under my charge; and if that be not sufficient, I
can produce satisfactory documents to prove that I have expended, since
I have been in this Province, no less than thirteen thousand pounds, of
my own private means, beside what I received from other quarters, in
building Churches, Chapels, Presbyteries, and School-houses, in rearing
young men for the Church, and in promoting general education. With a
full knowledge of those facts, established beyond the possibility of a
contradiction, my accusers can have but little regard for the truth,
when they tax me with neglecting my spiritual functions and the care of
souls. The framers of the address to His Excellency knew perfectly well
that I never had, or enjoyed, a situation, or place of profit or
emolument, except the salary which my sovereign was pleased to bestow
upon me, in reward of forty-two years faithful services to my country,
having been instrumental in getting two corps of my flock raised and
embodied in defence of their country in critical times, viz., the first
Glengary Fencible Regiment, was raised by my influence, as a Catholic
corps, during the Irish rebellion, whose dangers and fatigues I shared
in that distracted country, and contributed in no small degree to
repress the rapacity of the soldiers, and bring back the deluded people
to a sense of their duty to their sovereign and submission to the laws.
Ample and honorable testimonials of their services and my conduct may be
found in the Government office of Toronto. The second Glengary Fencible
Regiment raised in the Province, when the Government of the United
States of America invaded, and expected to make a conquest of Canada,
was planned by me, and partly raised by my influence. My zeal in the
service of my country, and my exertions in the defence of this Province,
were acknowledged by his late Majesty, through Lord Bathurst, then
Secretary of State for the Colonies. My salary was then increased, and a
seat was assigned for me in the Legislative Council, as a distinguished
mark of my sovereign’s favor, an honor I should consider it a disgrace
to resign, although I can hardly expect ever to sit in the Council, nor
do I believe that Lord Glenelg, who knows something of me, would expect
that I should show so much imbecility in my latter days, as to
relinquish a mark of honor conferred upon me by my sovereign, to gratify
the vindictive malice of a few unprincipled radicals. So far, however,
from repining at the cruel and continued persecutions of my enemies, I
pray God to give me patience to suffer, for justice sake, and to forgive
them their unjust and unmerited conduct towards me. I have the honor to
be Sir,—Your most obedient and very humble servant,—(Signed)—Alex.
McDonnell. To T. Joseph, Esq., Sec’y to His Excellency, Sir Francis Bond
Head, &c., &c., &c.”

There were a number of Roman Catholics among the U. E. Loyalists. Among
them were the Chisholms on the front of Thurlow, to whose house Mr.
McDonnell came to preach as he made his annual round. I am told by an
old settler, that a very old Roman Catholic Church existed in Ernesttown
west, a short distance from Bath. Probably Mr. McDonnell travelled all
around the Bay, visiting members of his Church. There were several in
Marysburgh. He was the first to preach in Belleville, when it had become
a village. But the Rev Michael Brennan, who still lives, and is highly
respected by all classes, was the first priest located in Belleville; he
arrived in 1829. The frame of a building which had been erected for a
Freemason’s Lodge, was moved to the lot which had been received from
Government, and was converted into a Church. The present Church was
commenced in 1837, and completed in 1839.

We have now adverted to the several early clergymen of the different
denominations in the young colony of Upper Canada, and have dwelt upon
those facts, and related those events, which appertain to the work we
have in hand. We have essayed to simply write the truth, without
reference to the interests of any denomination, either by false, or high
coloring, or suppression of facts.

From what we have recorded, it is plain that the Church of England stood
the best chance of becoming the religion of Upper Canada. The seventh
part of the lands were reserved for the clergy, and it was determined to
erect an Ecclesiastical establishment in the Province. In Lower Canada
the Roman Catholics had been secured by Act of Imperial Parliament. In
Upper Canada it was resolved that the English Church should occupy a
similar position. The Rev. Dr. Jehoshaphat Mountain was sent out from
England in 1793, having been consecrated the first Bishop of Quebec, to
take charge of the English establishment in all Canada. There were then
in both Canadas five clergymen of the church. The monopoly thus
instituted continued for many years, and other denominations could not
even hold land upon which to build a place of worship. But time swept
all intolerance and exclusiveness away. In the year 1828, was passed “An
act for the Relief of Religious Societies” of the Province, by which it
was authorized “That whenever any religious congregation or society of
Presbyterians, Lutherans, Calvinists, Methodists, Congregationalists,
Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, Menonists, Tunkers, or Moravians,
shall have an occasion to take a conveyance of land, it shall be lawful
for them to appoint trustees,” which body should hold perpetual
succession, &c. But it was also enacted that no one Society should hold
more than five acres.

This subject will be concluded by the following, the writer of which we
fail to remember. It is within our own recollection when this habit
still existed:

An early writer, a visitor to the Province of Canada, speaking about
religious denominations says, “The worshipping assemblies appear grave
and devout, except that in some of them it is customary for certain
persons to go out and come in frequently in time of service, to the
disturbance of others, and the interruption of that silence and
solemnity, which are enjoyed by politeness, no less than a sense of
religion. This indecorous practice prevails among several
denominations.”




                            CHAPTER XXXIII.

  CONTENTS—First Sabbath teaching—Hannah Bell, 1769—School
    established, 1781—Raikes—Wesley—First in United States—First in
    Canada—Cattrick, Moon—Common in 1824—First in Belleville—Turnbull—
    Cooper—Marshall—Prizes, who won them—Mr. Turnbull’s death—
    Intemperance—First Temperance Societies—Change of custom—Rum—
    Increasing intemperance—The tastes of the Pioneers—Temperance, not
    teetotalism—First Society in Canada—Drinks at Raising and Bees—
    Society at Hollowell.


                            SABBATH SCHOOLS.

The earliest attempt known to teach children upon the Sabbath was in
1769, made by a young lady, a Methodist, by the name of Hannah Bell, in
England, who was instrumental in training many children in the knowledge
of the Holy Scriptures. In 1781, while another Methodist young woman
(afterward the wife of the celebrated lay preacher, Samuel Bradburn) was
conversing in Gloucester with Robert Raikes, a benevolent citizen of
that town, and publisher of the _Gloucester Journal_, he pointed to
groups of neglected children in the street, and asked: “What can we do
for them?” She answered: “Let us teach them to read and take them to
church!” “He immediately proceeded to try the suggestion, and the
philanthropist and his female friend attended the first company of
Sunday-scholars to the church, exposed to the comments and laughter of
the populace as they passed along the street with their ragged
procession. Such was the origin of our present Sunday-school, an
institution which has perhaps done more for the church and the social
improvement of Protestant communities, than any other agency of modern
times, the pulpit excepted. Raikes, and his humble assistant, conducted
the experiment without ostentation. Not till November 3, 1783, did he
refer to it in his public journal. In 1784, he published in that paper
an account of his plan. This sketch immediately arrested the attention
of Wesley, who inserted the entire article in the January number of the
_American Magazine_ for 1785, and exhorted his people to adopt the new
institution.”

In 1786, they were begun in the United States by the Methodist Bishop,
Francis Asbury, in Virginia. In 1790, the Methodist conference “resolved
on establishing Sunday-schools for poor children, white and black,”
since which time they have been in operation.

The first notice found of a Sabbath-school in Upper Canada, is in June,
1817, when a Rev. Mr. Cattrick proposed at Kingston to organize one. A
communication from Wm. Moon, in the _Gazette_, expresses great pleasure
thereat, and Mr. Moon offers for the purpose his school-room, and
likewise his services. In 1824, Sunday-schools were common in the old
settlements, and were valued and encouraged by all classes of people.
Not only did private benevolence contribute to the schools, but the
Upper Canada Parliament granted £150, for the “use and encouragement of
Sunday-schools,” and of indigent and remote settlements, in the purchase
of books and tracts—(Playter). A Sabbath-school was established in
Belleville about 1826, by John Turnbull, Dr. Marshall, and Dr. Cooper
who taught in the school. Some religious society granted books and
tracts to schools. Four prizes were granted for good attendance and
behaviour, consisting of two Bibles and two Testaments. They were
awarded, the first to J. H. Meacham, who is now Postmaster of
Belleville; the second to his sister, Anna Meacham, the third to Matilda
McNabb, the fourth to Albert Taylor. While these pages are going through
the press, we receive the sad intelligence that John Turnbull, Esq.,
last living of the three mentioned, has passed away at the beginning of
this new year, 1869, after a life of well-merited respect, and honor.
The writer feels he has lost a friend.

INTEMPERANCE.—Total abstinence or teetotalism was unknown when Upper
Canada was first settled. The first temperance society ever organized
was at Moreau, Saratoga, County, New York, in 1808.

To taste and drink a glass of wine or grog, was not regarded as a sin by
any one of that day. To the soldiers and sailors grog was dealt out as
regularly every day as rations. Rum was the liquor more generally used,
being imported from Jamaica, and infinitely purer than the rum sold
to-day. It has to be recorded that at a comparatively early date,
breweries and distilleries were erected, first in one township then in
another, so that after a few years the native liquor was much cheaper
than rum, and then followed the natural result—namely, increasing
intemperance. It is not difficult to understand that the old soldier
would like his regular glass of grog. In the long and tedious journeys
made by boat, when food perhaps was very limited in quantity, the
conveniently carried bottle would take its place, and extraordinary
labor and severe exposure would be endured by the agency of unnatural
stimulus. The absence of teetotal principles, the customs of the day;
want of food; frequent and severe trials and exposures, would lead even
the best of men to partake of spirituous liquors. As we see it to-day,
so it was then, abuse arose from moderate use, and those who had no
control over the appetite, or who loved to forget the bitterness of the
day by inebriation, would avail themselves of the opportunity to indulge
to excess. The mind naturally craves a stimulant. If this desire be not
fed by legitimate food, it is too likely to appropriate the unnatural.
The excitement of war had passed away; but had left in its wake the
seeds of longing in the breast of the old soldier. The educated man shut
out from the world, had but little to satisfy the usually active mind.
With some, the remembrance of old scenes—of old homesteads, and their
belongings, were forgotten in the stupefying cup. When all these facts
are considered, is there not abundant reason to wonder that intemperance
did not prevail more extensively. But it is a question after all,
whether the loyalists became more addicted to the cup after they
settled, than when at the old homes. Those who have charged the old
settlers with the vice of drinking, have forgotten to look at them in
comparison with other countries at that day, instead of the light set up
at a later period.

But while the pioneers preserved themselves from unusual indulgence, it
is to be regretted that their children too often forsook the path of
soberness, and in losing their right minds, lost the old farm made
valuable by their fathers’ toil. It was often a repetition of what
occasionally occurred when the soldiers were disbanded. They would often
sell a location ticket, or two or three acres of land for a quart of
rum; the sons would sell the fruit of a father’s hard work of a life
time.

One of the first temperance societies formed in Canada was in
Adolphustown, on the 4th January, 1830. On this occasion the Rev. Job
Deacon, of the Church of England, delivered an address, after which a
respectable majority and three out of five magistrates present, adopted
resolutions condemning the use of ardent spirits, and unitedly
determining not to use or furnish drink for raisings, bees, and harvest
work. At the same meeting a temperance society was formed and a
constitution adopted under the title of “The Adolphustown Union Sabbath
School Temperance Society.” They pledged themselves not to use ardent
spirits for one year.

According to the Hollowell _Free Press_, a temperance society was formed
at Hollowell, in 1829; for it is announced that the “Second Anniversary”
will be held 3rd June, 1831. It is announced April 12, 1831, that a
temperance meeting will be held in the Methodist Chapel, when addresses
will be delivered by Dr. A. Austin. The officers elected for the ensuing
year are Asa Worden, Esq., M.P.P., President; Dr. Austin, Vice
President; P. V. Elmore, Secretary and Treasurer.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV.

  CONTENTS—The Six Nations—Faithful English Allies—Society for the
    Propagation of Gospel—First missionary to Iroquois—John Thomas,
    first convert—Visit of Chiefs to England—Their names—Their
    portraits—Attention to them—Asking for instructor—Queen Anne—
    Communion Service—During the Rebellion—Burying the Plate—
    Recovered—Division of the articles—Sacrilege of the Rebels—
    Re-printing Prayer Book—Mr. Stuart, missionary—The women and
    children—At Lachine—Attachment to Mr. Stuart—Touching instance—Mr.
    Stuart’s Indian sister—Church at Tyendinaga—School teacher to the
    Mohawk—John Bininger—First teacher—The Bininger family—The
    Moravian Society—Count Zinzendorf—Moravian church at New York—
    First minister, Abraham Bininger—Friend of Embury—An old account
    book—John Bininger journeying to Canada—Living at Bay Quinté—
    Removes to Mohawk village—Missionary spirit—Abraham Bininger’s
    letters—The directions—Children pleasing parents—“Galloping
    thoughts”—Christianity—Canadian Moravian missionaries—Moravian
    loyalists—What was sent from New York—“Best Treasure”—The “Dear
    Flock”—David Zieshager at the Thames—J. Bininger acceptable to
    Mohawk—Abraham Bininger desires to visit Canada—Death of Mrs.
    Bininger—“Tender mother”—Bininger and Wesley—“Garitson”—“Losee”—
    “Dunon”—Reconciled to Methodists—Pitying Losee—Losee leaving
    Canada—Ceases to be teacher—Appointing a successor—William Bell—
    The salary—The Mohawks don’t attend school—An improvement—The
    cattle may not go in school-house—The school discontinued.


              THE SIX NATIONS—CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY.

From the first occupation of New York by the English, the Six Nations
had almost always been their faithful allies. This devotion did not
remain unnoticed. Returns were made not only of a temporal nature, but
in respect to things spiritual. So early as 1702 the Society for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, the next year after its
organization, sent a Missionary (Rev. Mr. Andrews) to the Mohawk Valley.
Under his direction in 1714, the Church of England Common Prayers was
translated into their tongue. The first convert to Christianity was
christened John Thomas, who died in 1727, aged 119.

It is said the English in their determination to secure the alliance of
the Iroquois against the French prevailed upon certain chiefs to visit
the Court of Queen Anne, in 1710, thinking that the greatness and
splendour of England, would firmly fix their attachment.

There were four of them who crossed the water, and who were treated with
distinction. Their names were “_Te Yee Neen Ho Ga Prow_, and _Sa Ga Yean
Qua Proh Ton_, of the Maquas; _Elow Oh Roam_, and _Oh Nee Yeath Ton No
Prow_, of the River Sachem.” Portraits were taken of these four kings
and placed in the British Museum. When presented to the Queen they made
an elaborate speech, in which they spoke of their desire to see their
“great Queen;” the long tedious French war in which they had taken a
part; they urged the necessity of reducing Canada, and closed by
expressing a wish that their “great Queen will be pleased to send over
some person to instruct” them in a knowledge of the Saviour.
Consequently the Queen caused to be sent to the Mohawk church just
erected among them, a valuable sacramental service of plate, and a
communion cloth. This royal gift was ever held in the most fervent
esteem by the tribe. The part taken by the noble Iroquois during the
cruel rebellion of 1776–83 is elsewhere detailed; but in this connection
is to be noticed an incident of a touching nature. The rebel commander
of a blood-thirsty gang, stimulated by promises of the land which they
were sent to despoil, came upon the tribe at an unexpected moment. The
valuable—the costly—the revered gift from the Queen was in danger of
being seized by the lawless horde which was approaching. Not forgetting
them—not unmindful of things sacred, some of the chief members of the
tribe decided to conceal them by burying them in the earth, which was
accordingly done, the plate being wrapped in the communion cloth. These
doubly valuable articles remained buried until the close of the war,
when they were recovered. The plate had suffered no injury, but the
cloth had been almost destroyed by the damp earth. These precious relics
were divided between those who settled upon the Grand River, and the
smaller branch that remained at the Bay. They are to this day used on
sacramental occasions. Upon each of the articles, sacred to memory, and
sacredly employed, is cut the following words:

“The Gift of Her Majesty Queen Anne by the Grace of God of Great
Britain, France and Ireland, of Her Plantations in North America, Queen
of Her Indian Chappel of the Mohawk.”

When the lawless rebels came into their settlement, they destroyed the
translated Prayer book. The Mohawks, apprehensive that it would be lost,
asked the Governor (Haldimand) to have an edition published. This was
granted by printing a limited number in 1780 at Quebec. In 1787 a third
edition was published in London, a copy of which before us, supplies
these facts. In connection with it there is also a translation of the
Gospel according to St. Mark by Brant. It is stated in the Preface that
a translation of some other parts of the New Testament may soon be
expected from Brant. But such never appeared.

The missionary employed at the commencement of the rebellion, by the
Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, was the Rev.
John Stuart. In 1770, he was appointed to the Mission at Fort Hunter. He
soon prepared a Mohawk translation of the Gospel by Mark, an exposition
of the Church catechism, and a compendious History of the Bible. He was
undisturbed in his labors, until after the Declaration of Independence,
though “he constantly performed divine service without omitting prayers
for the King.”

The women and children of the Indians when hurried away from their homes
repaired to Lachine, where they mostly remained until the end of the
war. The particulars of the history of their missionary is elsewhere
given. There was a sincere attachment between him and the tribe, an
instance of which is supplied by the conduct of a sister of Captain
Johns. Mrs. Stuart had an infant child which was deprived of its natural
food. The Indian woman weaned her own child that she might thereby be
able to supply the missionary’s child with food. This child was Charles
O’Kill Stuart. When he became the Venerable Archdeacon, he did not
forget the act of motherly kindness bestowed upon him. The faithful
breast upon which he had nestled, had long since closed its heaving by
death; but the daughter whom she had put away from the breast still
lived. Dr. Stuart visited the Indian woods every year, and invariably
went to see his sister, as he called her.

Early steps were taken to have built a church in which they might
worship. The Rev. John Stuart had his home in Kingston, yet he often
visited the Indians.

The first church was erected on Grand River by Brant in 1786, and as
nearly as we can learn the plain wooden building at the settlement upon
the Bay was, at the same time, or shortly after erected.

The Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, not only
employed the Rev. Mr. Stuart, as a missionary, to labor with the
Mohawks, but likewise set apart a sum of £30, as a salary to a teacher
to instruct the children of the Indians upon Bay Quinté. Mr. Stuart
lived at Kingston, however, and could but visit the Indian village
occasionally. But a catechist was employed by him to supply spiritual
instruction. Mr. Stuart also had the appointing of a school teacher. The
precise time when this school was opened, it is impossible to determine.
The first reference we find to it is in a letter, (one of many kindly
entrusted to us by Mrs. Bininger of Belleville) written by John
Bininger, then living in Adolphustown, to his father, the Rev. Abraham
Bininger of Camden, New York, Moravian missionary. The letter is dated
18th September, 1792, and says, “being at Kingston, I heard as it were
accidentally, that the Rev. Mr. John Stuart wanted, on behalf of the
society in England, to hire a teacher for the Mohawks up this bay,
accordingly, I made an offer of my services.” This may have been the
commencement of the school. Mr. Stuart, not long after, accepted the
offer, and John Bininger says he gave his employers notice that he
should leave them. We learn that he was at that time, or had been a
short time before, engaged as a book-keeper in Kingston. He was detained
for two months before his employers would release him, immediately after
which he removed to the Mohawk village.

Before proceeding with the record of the Mohawk school, we shall ask the
reader to listen to a few of the facts in the history of the Bininger
family.

The Moravian Society was founded by Count Zinzendorf. He visited New
York in 1741, and seven years later, 1748, a Moravian Church was
established in New York. The first or principal Moravian minister was
Abraham Bininger, a native of Switzerland, from the same town where the
immortal William Tell lived.—(Wakeley.) He was the intimate friend of
Embury and the other early Methodists in America.

Of the sons of the Rev. A. Bininger we have only to notice John. Before
us is an old account book in which is found the following memorandum:
“1791, May 30th, Moved from Camden in Salem, Washington County; June
2nd, Arrived at St. John’s, Canada; June 8th, Arrived at Lachine for
Kingston; 24th, arrived at Kingston, Upper Canada; July 2nd, Arrived at
John Carscallian’s, Fredricksburgh, Bay Kanty; October 2nd, Moved from
Fredricksburgh to Adolphustown, 1792; November 13th, Moved from
Adolphustown to Mohawk Village.” A letter written by John Bininger to
his father, is in a fine distinct hand, and indicates both learning and
piety, and that he was actuated, in taking the situation of teacher to
the Mohawks, by a missionary spirit. His father wrote to him from time
to time; the letters are dated at Camden, and usually refer to family
affairs; but each has a large portion devoted to Christian advice,
simply and touchingly, and sometimes quaintly given. They are signed
Abraham and Martha. The first letter is addressed to “Caterockqua,” and
the request is made upon the corner of the letter to “please forward
this with care and speed,” “also to the care of Mr. John Carscallian, or
Lieutenant Carscallian.” The rest of the letters are addressed to
Adolphustown, and the Mohawk Village, “Bay Quinté.”

In one letter he says “Remember children never please parents more than
when they are willing to be guided by them; self-guiding is always the
beginning of temptation, and next comes a fall that we must smart for
it; we are to work out our own salvation (not with high galloping
thoughts) but with fear and trembling.” In this way every letter beams
with pure and simple Christianity. After his children’s personal
well-being, he is concerned about the Moravian missionaries in Canada,
and also a considerable number of Moravian Loyalists who had settled
upon the Bay Quinté, after whom he frequently inquires. In one letter he
says “remember me to all my friends, in particular to old Mr.
Carscallian and wife.” One letter says, “We send you with Mr. McCabe a
lag. cheese, weight five pounds and three-quarters, about half-a-pint of
apple seed, from Urana’s saving. I also send you part of my best
treasure, the _Daily Word and Doctrinal Texts_, for the year 1792. The
collection of choice hymns and sixteen discourses of my very dear
friend, Count Zinzendorf.” He says, “I would heartily beg to make
Inquiry and friendship with the brethren among the Indians. They are
settled in the British lines, I don’t know the name of the place.” Again
he expresses a wish that he should inquire for the brethren’s
settlement, and “make a correspondence with them,” to think it his “duty
to assist them in the furtherance of the Gospel, both on account of
yourself and on account of your old father. If you can get any
intelligence pray let me know, I am often concerned in my mind for the
dear flock that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. I think if any
gentleman in your parts can give information, it is the Reverend Mr.
Stuart, a minister of the Church of England, he is a gentleman that I
have great esteem for, I know he will give you all the intelligence he
possibly can.” Subsequently, 1794, he wishes his son to correspond with
the brethren at the river La Trenche (the Thames). As a result of this
request, we see a letter received from David Zeisherger, dated at River
Thames, 20th July, 1794, eighty miles from Detroit.

John Bininger was acceptable to the Mohawks of the Bay, as an
instructor. His father writes 5th January, 1794, “It was a real
satisfaction to me to see Mr. Hekenalder in New York, and more so when I
heard the good character of the Indians of your place living among
them.” Writing February 23rd, he says, “was I able to undergo the
hardships, I would certainly join with you and tell the poor Indians of
God their Saviour, that would be the highest and happiest employ for
me.” In August, he says “I would have ventured the hardships of the
journey, but mother and Isaac wont approve of it, they think I am too
old and feeble. I know that if I was with you I should have more
contentment than I have here.”

The last communication we have is dated February, 1804, in which the
good old Moravian says to his children, John and Phœbe, that their “dear
tender mother went happy to our dear Saviour;” at the funeral was so
many, he wondered how so many could collect.

The Rev. Abraham Bininger was intimate with Wesley, whom he accompanied
to Virginia. He also was familiar with Philip Embury, and Mr. “Garitson”
who baptized his grand-child. The first two Methodist preachers in
Canada were well known to him. Several letters, back and forth, are “per
favor of Losee.” In one letter he says, “Don forget to remember my love
and regards to Mr. Dunon (Dunham) and Mr. Loese.” The postscript of
another letter says, “Isaac intends to send a young heifer, two pound of
tea, a gammon, and a pise of smokt beef. Mother sends her love to Dunon
and Mr. Loese.” A letter dated April 12th, 1792, says John Switzers’ son
“was baptized by Mr. Garitson. Mr. Garitson is well approved of in these
parts. I heartily wish, as much as I love him, that he were in your
parts. I am of late more reconciled to the Methodists than I was before,
I see they really are a blessing to many poor souls.”

Writing 2nd August, 1794, he says “I heartily pity Mr. Losee for
withdrawing his hand, he is now to be treated with patience and
tenderness. I have sent last part of a discourse which I translated from
the brethren’s writing. I did it chiefly on account of Mr. Losee, if you
think proper send him a copy with a tender greet from me.” John
Bininger, writing January 12, 1795, remarks, Mr. Losee is just setting
out for the States.

Mr. John Bininger ceased to be teacher to the Mohawks sometime in the
latter part of 1795, or first part of 1796.

There are several letters before us, written by Mr. Stuart, in reference
to the appointment of a successor to Mr. Bininger, the first one is
directed to “Mr. William Bell, at the head of the Bay of Quinté,” and
dated at Kingston, September 26, 1796. He says “I received your letter
respecting the Mohawk school; I can give you no positive answer at
present: because I have agreed, conditionally with a school-master at
Montreal, that is, if he comes up, he is to have the school; I expect
daily to hear from him, although I do not think he will accept of the
employment. Some time ago Mr. Ferguson mentioned you as one who would
probably undertake that charge. I told Captain John that if the person
from Montreal disappointed me I would talk with you on the subject. The
salary is £30 sterling, with a house to live in, and some other
advantages which depend wholly on the pleasure of the Mohawks—but the
teacher must be a man, and not a woman, however well qualified.” The
teacher from Montreal did not come, and Mr. Bell was appointed. The
following seems to have been a copy of Mr. Bell’s first call for
payment, the half-yearly instalment.

“Mohawk Village, Bay of Quinté, July 5, 1797—Exchange for £15 sterling.

Sir,—At thirty days sight of this first of exchange, please to pay to
Mr. Robert McCauley, or order, the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, being
half-year’s salary, from the 15th day of November, 1796, to the 15th day
of May, 1797, due from the Society, without further advice, from, Sir,
&c., (Signed), William Bell, school-master to the Mohawks. To Calvert
Chapman, Esq., Treasurer to the Society for the Propagation of the
Gospel in Foreign Parts—Duke Street, Westminster.”

The Mohawks, it seems, did not appreciate the advantages which the
establishment of a school among them was intended to afford, and Mr.
Stuart is found writing as follows: “Kingston, August 18, 1799—Sir,—
Unless the Mohawks will send such a number of their children to school
as will justify me in continuing a school-master, in duty to myself, as
acting for the Society, I shall be under the necessity of discontinuing
the payment of your salary after the expiration of the present year.
This information I think proper to give you, that you may govern
yourself accordingly. I am, Sir,” &c., (Signed), John Stuart.

But writing again, March 16, 1800, Mr. Stuart says, “I am happy to hear
that the school is now furnished with a dozen or more scholars, and it
is expected you will be very strict in your discipline, and see that
prayers are read night and morning; that the children are taught the
Lord’s Prayer, and the Commandments—that children may not be sent home
even if their parents do not send wood at the stated times; that the
cattle may not be allowed to go into the school, but that it be kept
clean, and the wood belonging to it may not be used unless in school
hours.”

Writing again, September 11, 1801, Mr. Stuart says, “I have waited with
patience to see whether the Mohawks would send their children more
regularly to school, but if the accounts I receive are true, the money
is expended to no purpose. I am told that there has not been a scholar
in school since last spring. And, as I never found that the fault was on
your side, I cannot, in conscience, allow the salary of the Society to
be paid for nothing. Therefore, unless Capt. John and the chief men of
the village will promise that the school shall be furnished with at
least six scholars, I must dismiss you from their service—as soon as you
receive this notification. I hope you will see the reasonableness of
this determination of mine, and you may show this letter to Capt. John
and the Mohawks, by which they will see that the continuance or
discontinuance of the school depends wholly on themselves.”

The final letter upon the subject is dated “Kingston, 26th August,
1802,” and says, “I have not yet received any letter from the Society;
but, for the reasons I mentioned to you, I think it will be expedient to
let the Mohawk school cease, at least for some time. I therefore notify
you that after your present quarter is ended you will not expect a
continuance of the salary.” (Signed), “John Stuart.” “To William Bell,
school-master to the Mohawks, Bay of Quinté.”




                             CHAPTER XXXV.

  CONTENTS—The first Church at Tyendinaga grows old—A Council—Ask for
    Assistance—Gov. Bagot—Laying first stone of new Church—The
    Inscription—The Ceremony—The new Church—Their Singing—The
    surrounding Scenery—John Hall’s Tomb—Pagan Indians—Red Jacket—His
    Speech—Reflection upon Christians—Indians had nothing to do with
    murdering the Saviour.


                         BUILDING A NEW CHURCH.

Their original edifice of wood, having served its purpose, and being in
a state of decay; it was deemed necessary to have erected a new and more
substantial building. They, consequently, held a Council, at which the
Chief made the following speech, after hearing all the ways and means
discussed—“If we attempt to build this church by ourselves, it will
never be done. Let us, therefore, ask our father, the Governor, to build
it for us, and it will be done at once.” Reference here was made, not to
the necessary funds, for they were to be derived from the sale of Indian
lands; but to the experience requisite to carry out the project. Sir
Charles Bagot, the Governor, was accordingly petitioned. “The first
stone was laid by S. P. Jarvis, Esq., Chief Superintendent of Indians in
Canada; and the Archdeacon of Kingston, the truly venerable G. O.
Stuart, conducted the usual service; which was preceded by a procession
of the Indians, who, singing a hymn, led the way from the wharf.” “The
following inscription was placed in this stone:

                                    TO

                       THE GLORY OF GOD OUR SAVIOUR

               THE REMNANT OF THE TRIBE OF KAN-YE-AKE-HAKA,

            IN TOKEN OF THEIR PRESERVATION BY THE DIVINE MERCY

                          THROUGH JESUS CHRIST,

  In the sixth year of Our Mother Queen Victoria: Sir Charles Theophilus
    Metcalf, G.C.B., being Governor General of British North America;

  THE RIGHT REV. J. STRACHAN, D.D., AND LL.D., Being Bishop of Toronto:

                                   AND
 THE REV. SALTERN GIVINS, BEING IN THE THIRTEENTH YEAR OF HIS INCUMBENCY.

              The old wooden fabric having answered its end,

                           THIS CORNER STONE OF

                       CHRIST’S CHURCH TYENDINAGA,

                                 WAS LAID

 In the presence of the Venerable George O’Kill Stuart, LL.D., Archdeacon
                               of Kingston;
    By Samuel Peter Jarvis, Chief Superintendent of Indian Affairs in
            Canada, assisted by various Members of the Church,

                    ON TUESDAY MAY 30TH, A. D., 1843.

                              &c., &c., &c.

A hymn was sung by the Indians, and Indian children of the school. The
Rev. Wm. Macauley, of Picton, delivered an address, which was followed
by a prayer from the Rev. Mr. Deacon.”—(_Sir Richard Henry
Bonnycastle._)

This edifice, with four lancet windows on each side, presents to the eye
a very pleasing appearance upon approaching it. While the interior may
not altogether appear so attractive, it is sufficiently interesting.
There is the elevated desk, and the more elevated pulpit; and upon the
wall, over the altar, are the ten commandments, in the Mohawk tongue.
Here is grandly united the Mother Church, and the devoted piety of the
once great Mohawk nation. Opposite the altar is a gallery, across the
end of the building, in which is an organ. Therefrom proceeds, Sunday
after Sunday, rich notes of tuneful melody, blending with the stout
voices of the singers. From this church ascends, have we not reason to
believe the adoration of hearts warmed into spiritual life by the pure
principles of Christianity.

The view from the church upon the surrounding scenery is very pleasant,
and, in the quietness of a summer day, one may linger gazing and
meditating upon the past history of the race whose dead slumber hard by.
The visitor’s attention will be directed to a flat tomb, of blue stone,
inclosed by a low stone wall, overgrown with shrubs. Upon the face of
the tomb are the words:

“This tomb, erected to the memory of John Hall, Ochechusleah, by the
Mohawks, in grateful remembrance of his Christian labors amongst them.
During thirty years, he served as a Mohawk Catechist, in this
settlement, under the Society for Propagating the Gospel, adorning the
doctrine of God, his Saviour, and enjoying the respect of all who knew
him. He died, generally regretted, June, 1848, aged 60 years.” This
stone also covers the remains of “Eloner, the exemplary wife of the
Catechist, who died in the Lord, May 7, 1840, aged 50.”

While the Mohawks always manifested a desire to learn the truth, as
taught by Christians, there were some of the Six Nations who believed
not, and steadfastly turned their backs upon the missionaries of the
Cross. Among these stood prominent the Seneca chief Sagnoaha, or Red
Jacket, one well known as an eloquent Sachem in all the Councils of his
people. A Seneca council was held at Buffalo Creek, in May, 1811, when
Red Jacket answered the desire of a missionary that they should become
Christians, as follows:—

“Brother!—We listened to the talk you delivered to us from the council
of black coats in New York. We have fully considered your talk, and the
offers you have made us. We now return our answer, which we wish you
also to understand. In making up our minds we have looked back to
remember what has been done in our days, and what our fathers have told
us was done in old times.

“Brother!—Great numbers of black coats have been among the Indians. With
sweet voices and smiling faces, they offered to teach them the religion
of the white people. Our brethren in the East listened to them. They
turn from the religion of their fathers, and look up the religion of the
white people. What good has it done? Are they more friendly, one to
another, than we are? No, Brother! They are a divided people; we are
united. They quarrel about religion; we live in love and friendship.
Besides, they drink strong waters, and they have learned how to cheat
and how to practice all the other vices of the white people, without
imitating their virtues. Brother!—If you wish us well, keep away; don’t
disturb us. Brother!—We do not worship the Great Spirit as the white
people do, but we believe that the forms of worship are indifferent to
the Great Spirit. It is the homage of sincere hearts that pleases him,
and we worship him in that manner.” “Brother! For these reasons we
cannot receive your offers. We have other things to do, and beg you will
make your minds easy, without troubling us, lest our heads should be too
much loaded, and by and by burst.” At another time, he is reported to
have said to one conversing with him upon the subject of Christianity,
that the Indians were not responsible for the death of Christ.
“Brother,” said he “if you white people murdered the Saviour, make it up
yourselves. We had nothing to do with it. If he had come among us, we
should have treated him better.”




                             CHAPTER XXXVI.

  CONTENTS—Mississauga Indians—Father Picquet’s opinion—Remnant of a
    large tribe—Their Land—Sold to Government—Rev. Wm. Case—John
    Sunday—A drunkard—Peter Jones—Baptising Indians—At a camp-meeting—
    Their department—Extract from Playter—William Beaver—Conversions—
    Jacob Peter—Severe upon white Christians—Their worship—The Father
    of Canadian missions—Scheme to teach Indians—Grape Island—Leasing
    islands—The parties—“Dated at Belleville”—Constructing a village—
    The lumber—How obtained—Encamping on Grape Island—The method of
    instruction—The number—Agriculture—Their singing—School house—The
    teacher—Instructions of women—Miss Barnes—Property of Indians—Cost
    of improvements—A visit to Government—Asking for land—“Big
    Island”—Other favors—Peter Jacobs at New York—Extracts from
    Playter—Number of Indian converts, 1829—River Credit Indians—
    Indians removed to Alnwick.


       THE MISSISSAUGA INDIANS—THEIR CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY.

We have learned that the French missionary, Father Picquet did not
entertain a very high opinion, at least he professed not to, of the
moral character of the Mississaugas, and their susceptibility to the
influence of Christian religion. We will now see what was accomplished
by the agency of the Rev. William Case. We refer to that branch at
present called the Mississaugas of Alnwick, and formerly known as the
Mississaugas of the Bay of Quinté. They were the remnant of the powerful
tribe, which ceded a large tract in the Johnstown, Midland and Newcastle
districts to the Government. This block contained 2,748,000 acres, and
was surrendered in 1822, for an annuity of £642 10s.

In 1825 the Rev. William Case visited the Bay. Among the first to come
under the influence of religion, from the preaching of the Methodists
was John Sunday. The writer has conversed with many, who remember Sunday
as a very filthy drunkard. Peter Jones and John Crane, Mohawks who had
been converted to Methodism at the Grand River, visited Belleville.
Peter Jones with simple eloquence, soon reached the hearts of the
Mississaugas. The writer’s father has heard Peter Jones preach to them
in Indian near the banks of the Moira, just by No. 1 school-house in
Belleville. In the spring of 1826 Case baptized 22 Indian converts,
while 50 more seemed under the influence of religion. In June, a
camp-meeting was held in Adolphustown, the Mississaugas attended.
Special accommodation was afforded them. Their arrival is thus
graphically given by Playter, and it supplies an excellent idea of
Indian character in connection with religion.

A message came that the Mississauga fleet was in sight. A few repaired
to the shore to welcome and conduct the Indians to the ground. The bark
canoes contained men, women and children, with cooking utensils,
blankets, guns, spears, provisions, and bark for covering their wigwams.
The men took each a canoe reversed on his head, or the guns and spears;
each squaw a bundle of blankets or bark. The men marched first, the
women in the rear, and in file they moved to the encampment, headed by
two preachers. The congregation seeing the Indians passing through the
gate, and so equipped, was astonished. Reflecting on the former
condition and the present state of these natives of the woods, gratitude
and joy filled every bosom. God was praised for the salvation of the
heathen. After the natives had laid down the burdens, they all silently
prayed for the blessing of the Great Spirit, to the surprise and
increased delight of the pious whites. The Indians next built their
camp, in the oblong form, with poles, canoes, and bark. The adults
numbered 41, of whom 28 had given evidence of a converted state, and the
children were 17: in all 58. The natives had private meetings by
themselves, and the whites by themselves; but in preaching time, the
Indians sat on the right of the preaching stand. At the close of each
sermon, William Beaver, an Indian exhorter, translated the main points
for the Indians, the other Indian exhorters, Sunday, Moses, and Jacob
Peter spoke to their people on different occasions. Beaver’s first
exhortation was on Friday, and produced a great effect on the natives.

On Sunday Beaver spoke to his people with great fluency. Upon being
asked what he had been saying, “I tell ‘em,” said he, “they must all
turn away from sin; that the Great Spirit will give ‘em new eyes to see,
new ears to hear good things; new heart to understand, and sing, and
pray; all new! I tell ‘em squaws, they must wash ‘em blankets clean,
must cook ‘em victuals clean, like white women; they must live in peace,
worship God, and love one another. Then,” with a natural motion of the
hand and arm, as if to level an uneven surface, he added, “The Good
Spirit make the ground all smooth before you.”

“On Monday, the Lord’s supper was given to the Indians and the whites,
of the Indians 21 were also baptized, with ten of their children. The
whole number of the baptized in this tribe was now 43, 21 children. As
yet these Indians knew but one hymn, “O for a thousand tongues to sing,
my great Redeemer’s praise,” and one tune. This hymn they sung, over and
over, as if always new, and always good.”

It has been the custom, of not alone the United States, but some in our
midst, to regard the Indians as altogether degraded below the whites in
intelligence, in natural honesty, and in appreciation of right and
wrong. At the camp-meeting above referred to, there was a convert by
name of Jacob Peter. He is described as “a sprightly youth of 18 years.”
At some subsequent date during the same year, the Indians held a
prayer-meeting at the village of Demorestville. Mr. Demorest being
present with other white inhabitants, to witness the Indian’s devotion,
requested Jacob to speak a little to them in English; which he thus did:

“You white people have the Gospel a great many years. You have the Bible
too: suppose you read sometimes—but you very wicked. Suppose some very
good people: but great many wicked. You get drunk—you tell lies—you
break the Sabbath.” Then pointing to his brethren, he added, “But these
Indians, they hear the word only a little while—they can’t read the
Bible—but they become good right away. They no more get drunk—no more
tell lies—they keep the Sabbath day. To us Indians, seems very strange
that you have missionary so many years, and you so many rogues yet. The
Indians have missionary only a little while, and we all turn
Christians.”

“The whites little expected so bold a reproof from a youth belonging to
a race which is generally despised.”—(Playter).

Camp-meetings were peculiarly calculated to impress the Indians with
solemn thoughts. These children of the forest deemed the shade of trees
a fit and true place in which to worship the true God, just as seemed to
the first settlers who had for so long a time had their homes within the
quiet glades. And no more inconsiderate step could have been taken than
that pursued by Governor Maitland, who, at the instigation of others,
forbade the converted Indians at the River Credit to attend
camp-meetings. The conversion of the Mississaugas at Belleville, and the
Credit, soon became known to the other branches of the tribe scattered
throughout Canada, and in time the whole nation was under the influence
of Methodist teaching. Their change of life was as well marked as it has
been lasting.

The Rev. William Case, “The father of Canadian Missions,” determined to
permanently settle the tribe, to teach them the quiet pursuits of
agriculture, and their children the rudiments of education, as well as
of Christian knowledge. To this end the plan was adopted, of leasing two
islands, situated in Big Bay, which belonged to the tribe, and establish
thereupon the converted Indians. The parties to whom the tribe granted
the lease for 999 years, for the nominal sum of five shillings, were
“John Reynolds, Benjamin Ketcheson, Penuel G. Selden, James Bickford,
and William Ross.” The Chiefs, Warriors, and Indians conferring the
lease, and who signed the indenture, were “John Sunday, William Beaver,
John Simpson, Nelson Snake, Mitchell Snake, Jacob Musguashcum, Joseph
Skunk, Paul Yawaseeng, Jacob Nawgnashcum, John Salt, Isaac Skunk,
William Ross, Patto Skunk, Jacob Sheepegang, James Snake.” It was
“signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of Tobias Bleaker, and
Peter Jones.” Dated Belleville, 16th October, 1826. The islands thus
leased were Huff’s Island, then known as “Logrim’s,” containing about
fifty acres, and Grape Island with eleven acres.

Steps were promptly taken to carry out the object aimed at by the
projectors, and arrangements were made to construct a village upon Grape
Island. The lumber for the buildings was obtained by cutting hemlock saw
logs upon the rear part of Tyendinaga, by the river Moira, under the
direction of Surveyor Emerson, which were floated down to Jonas
Canniff’s saw mill, and there sawed into suitable pieces. These were
again floated down in small rafts to the island. During the ensuing
winter, the buildings not being as yet erected, a large number encamped
upon Grape Island, while the rest went hunting, as usual. Instructions
commenced immediately. Preachers visited them from time to time, and two
interpreters. William Beaver and Jacob Peter taught them the Lord’s
Prayer and Ten Commandments. In January the hunting party returned, and
“a meeting, lasting several days, was held in the chapel in Belleville,
to instruct them also.” “The tribe mustered about 130 souls, and the
Society embraced every adult, about ninety persons.”

A branch of the tribe living in the rear of Kingston, forty in number,
came in May, the following Spring, and joined those at the island, and
became converts. In this month the buildings were commenced, and some
land ploughed and planted. The condition of the people was every day
improving. As many as 130 would assemble for worship. Their voices were
melodious, and delightful was the singing. A school and meeting-house
was built in July, 30 feet by 25 feet. William Smith was the first
school-teacher, having thirty scholars in the day school, and fifty in
the Sabbath school. The farming operations were under the
superintendence of R. Phelps. The girls and women were instructed in
knitting, sewing, making straw hats, and other work, by Miss E. Barnes.

“The public property of the Indians comprised a yoke of oxen, three
cows, a set of farming tools, and material for houses, as lumber, nails
and glass,—contributions of the benevolent. The improvements of the year
were expected to cost £250, to be met by benevolence in the United
States and Canada. In October, the meeting-house was seated, in
connection with which was a room provided for a study and bed for the
teacher. The bodies of eleven log houses were put up; eight had shingled
roofs, and they were enclosed before winter.”—(Playter).

Soon after, a deputation from Grape Island visited York, with a
deputation from Rice Lake, and the Credit Indians, to seek an audience
with the Government. A council was held with the Government officers on
the 30th January, 1828. The speeches were interpreted by Peter Jones.
John Sunday, after referring to their conversion, and having settled by
the Bay Quinté, said, “that when they considered the future welfare of
their children, they found that the island they claimed would not afford
them sufficient wood and pasture for any length of time, and that they
had now come to ask their great father, the governor, for a piece of
land lying near them.” “He then proceeded to ask the Government in what
situation Big Island was considered; whether or not it belonged to the
Indians? and, if it did, they asked their father to make those who had
settled on it without their consent, pay them a proper rent, as they had
hitherto turned them off with two bushels of potatoes for 200 acres of
land. In the last place, he asked permission of their great father to
cut some timber on the King’s land for their buildings.”—(Peter Jones).

In April of this year, Mr. Case, with John Sunday and Peter Jacobs,
attended the anniversary of the Missionary Society in New York. The
manifestation of Christianity displayed by these sons of the forest
touched the hearts of the people present, and led to a considerable
augmentation of the contributions previously supplied by private
individuals. They visited other parts of the United States, and returned
to the bay, May 12, “accompanied by two pious ladies, Miss Barnes, and
Miss Hubbard.” “The ladies came with the benevolent design of assisting
the Indians in religion, industry, and education.”

“In the tour Mr. Case received many presents of useful articles for the
Indians; and among the rest ticking for straw beds. This was divided
among twenty families, and made the first beds they ever slept upon.”
Among the conversions of this year, was an Indian woman, practising
witchcraft, as the people believe, and a Roman Catholic.

The people were not only persevering in religious duties, but made
progress in industry. Mr. Case collected the Indians together one
evening, to show what they had manufactured in two weeks. They exhibited
172 axe handles, 6 scoop shovels, 57 ladles, 4 trays, 44 broom-handles,
415 brooms. “The Indians were highly commended for their industry, and
some rewards were bestowed to stimulate greater diligence.”—(Playter).

According to the Annual Report of the Missionary Society of the
Methodist Episcopal Church of the United States, there were “two hundred
and twenty natives under the Christian instruction of one missionary,
one hundred and twenty of whom are regular communicants, and fifty
children are taught in the schools.” Lorenzo Dow visited Grape Island,
and writing July 29, 1829, says, “viewing the neatness and uniformity of
the village—the conduct of the children even in the streets—and not a
drunkard to be found in their borders. Surely what a lesson for the
whites!”

The other communities of the Mississaugas that came under the religious
teaching of the Methodists are the River Credit Indians, the Rice Lake
Indians, and those at Schoogog, Simcoe, and the Thames River.

When the Indians from the Bay Quinté, and from Kingston, left Grape
Island, they removed to Alnwick. A Report on Indian Affairs, of 1858,
says, “they have now a block of land of 2000 acres divided into 25 acre
farms.”




                              DIVISION VI
                    EARLY EDUCATION IN UPPER CANADA.




                            CHAPTER XXXVII.

  CONTENTS—Education among the Loyalists—Effect of the War—No
    opportunity for Education—A few Educated—At Bath—A common belief—
    What was requisite for farming—Learning at home—The School
    Teachers—Their qualifications—Rev. Mr. Stuart as a Teacher—Academy
    at Kingston—First Canadian D.D.—Mr. Clark, Teacher, 1786—Donevan—
    Garrison Schools—Cockerell—Myers—Blaney—Michael—Atkins—Kingston,
    1795—Lyons—Mrs. Cranahan—In Adolphustown—Morden—Faulkiner—The
    School Books—Evening Schools—McDougall—O’Reiley—McCormick—
    Flogging—Salisbury—James—Potter—Wright—Watkins—Gibson—Smith—
    Whelan—Articles of Agreement—Recollections—Boarding round—American
    Teachers—School Books—The Letter Z.


                    THE FIRST SCHOOLS AND TEACHERS.

The majority of the refugees possessed but limited education. There were
a very small number whose education was even excellent; but the greater
portion of Loyalists from the revolting Colonies, had not enjoyed
opportunities for even a common education. The state of society, for
many years, precluded the teaching of youth. During the civil war, the
chances for learning had been exceedingly slender. Apart from this,
there did not exist, a hundred years ago, the same desire to acquire
learning which now prevails. The disbanded soldiers and refugees, even
some of the half-pay officers, were void of education, which, even in
the back woods, is a source of pure enjoyment. There was, however, an
English seminary at Quebec, and at Montreal, at which a few were
educated during the war; for instance, Clark, who was a naval
store-keeper at Carleton Island, had his children there at school. At
the village of Kingston, there were a certain number of educated
persons; but around the Bay there was not much to boast of. As their
habitations were sparse, it was difficult for a sufficient number to
unite to form good schools. Among the old, sturdy farmers, who
themselves had no learning, and who had got along without much, if any
learning, and had no books to read, there obtained a belief that it was
not only unnecessary, but likely to have a bad effect upon the young,
disqualifying them for the plain duties of husbandry. If one could read,
sign his own name, and cast interest, it was looked upon as quite
sufficient for a farmer. But gradually there sprung up an increased
desire to acquire education, and a willingness to supply the means
therefor. In most places, the children were gladly sent to school. And,
moreover, in some cases, elder persons, without learning, married to one
possessed of it, would spend their long winter evenings in learning from
a willing partner, by the flickering fire light. Says Ex-Sheriff Ruttan,
then living at Adolphustown, “As there were no schools at that period,
what knowledge I acquired was from my mother, who would, of an evening,
relate events of the American rebellion, and the happy lives people once
led under British laws and protection previous to the outbreak.” “In a
few years, as the neighborhood improved, school teaching was introduced
by a few individuals, whose individual infirmities prevented them from
hard manual labor.” We find it stated that the first school teachers
were discharged soldiers, and generally Irish.

The Rev. John Stuart, subsequently. D.D., (See first clergyman) was the
first teacher in Upper Canada. So early as 1785, the year he settled at
Cataraqui, as he called the place, he says, in a letter written to an
old friend in the States, “The greatest inconvenience I feel here, is
there being no school for our boys; but, we are now applying to the
Legislature for assistance to erect an academy and have reason to expect
success; If I succeed in this, I shall die here contented.” “In May,
1786, he opened an academy at Kingston;” writing in 1788, he remarks, “I
have an excellent school for my children,” that is the children of
Kingston.—(Memoirs of Dr. Stuart). The degree of D.D., which was
conferred upon Mr. Stuart, in 1799, by his Alma Mater, at the University
of Pennsylvania, was the first University degree of any kind conferred
upon a Canadian, probably to any one of the present Dominion of Canada.

While the Rev. Mr. Stuart was engaged with the first school in Kingston,
Mr. Clarke was likewise employed in teaching upon the shores of the Bay,
probably in Ernesttown or Fredericksburgh. “We learn from Major Clark,
now residing in Edwardsburgh, that his father taught the first regular
school in Dundas. He arrived with his family in Montreal, in the year
1786, and proceeded to the Bay Quinté. He remained two years at the Bay,
employed in teaching. In 1788, he came to Matilda, at the instance of
Captain Frazer, who, at his own expense, purchased a farm for him, at
the cost of one hundred dollars. A few of the neighbors assisted in the
erection of a school house, in which Mr. Clark taught for several years.
He was a native of Perthshire, Scotland.”—(_History of Dundas_).

One of the first teachers at Kingston, was one Donevan.

As a general thing, all the British garrisons had, what was called, a
garrison school, and many of the children at first derived the rudiments
of education from these; that is, those living convenient to the forts.
The teachers of these army schools, no doubt, were of questionable
fitness, probably possessing but a minimum of knowledge, next to actual
ignorance. However, there may have been exceptions. Possibly, where a
chaplain was attached to a garrison, he taught, or superintended.

Col. Clark, of Dalhousie, says, “The first rudiments of my humble
education I acquired at the garrison school, at Old Fort, Niagara. When
we came to the British side of the river, I went to various schools. The
best among them was a Richard Cockerell, an Englishman, from the United
States, who left the country during the rebellion.” He also speaks of
D’Anovan of Kingston, as a teacher, and likewise Myers, Blaney, Mr.
Michael, Irish, and another, a Scotchman. This was before 1800.

A memorandum by Robert Clark, of Napanee, says, “My boys commenced going
to school to Mr. Daniel Allen Atkins, 18th January, 1791.”

Rochefoucault says, in 1795, speaking of Kingston, “In this district are
some schools, but they are few in number. The children are instructed in
reading and writing, and pay each a dollar a month. One of the masters,
superior to the rest, in point of knowledge, taught Latin; but he has
left the school, without being succeeded by another instructor of the
same learning.”

“In the year 1788, a pious young man, called Lyons, an exhorter in the
Methodist Episcopal Church, came to Canada, and engaged in teaching a
school in Adolphustown,” “upon Hay Bay or fourth concession.”—
(_Playter._) Ex-Sheriff Ruttan tells us, that “At seven years of age,
(1799), he was one of those who patronized Mrs. Cranahan, who opened a
Sylvan Seminary for the young idea, (in Adolphustown); from thence, I
went to Jonathan Clark’s, and then tried Thomas Morden, lastly William
Faulkiner, a relative of the Hagermans. You may suppose that these
graduations to Parnassus, was carried into effect, because a large
amount of knowledge could be obtained. Not so; for Dilworth’s Spelling
Book, and the New Testament, were the only books possessed by these
academies. About five miles distant, was another teacher, whose name I
forget; after his day’s work was done in the bush, but particularly in
the winter, he was ready to receive his pupils. This evening school was
for those in search of knowledge. My two elder brothers availed
themselves of this opportunity, and always went on snow shoes, which
they deposited at the door.” It looks very much as if courting may have
been intimately associated with these nightly researches for knowledge.
Mr. Ruttan adds, “And exciting occasions sometimes happened by
moonlight, when the girls joined the cavalcade.” At this school as well,
the only books were Dilworth, and the Testament; unless it were the
girl’s “looks.” “Those primeval days I remember with great pleasure.”
“At fourteen, (1806), my education was finished.” We learn that at an
early period there was one McDougall, who taught school in a log house
upon the south shore of Hay Bay. Says Mr. Henry VanDusen, one of the
first natives of Upper Canada, “The first who exercised the prerogative
of the school room in Adolphustown were the two sons of Edward O’Reily,
and McCormick, both of whom are well remembered by all who were favored
with their instruction—from the unmerciful floggings received.”

About the year 1803, one Salisbury taught school on the High Shore,
Sophiasburgh. The first teacher upon the Marsh Front, near Grassy Point,
was John James. At the mouth of Myers’ Creek, in 1807 or 8, James Potter
taught school; but, prior to that, a man by the name of Leslie taught.
About this time, there was also a Rev. Mr. Wright, a Presbyterian, who
taught school near Mrs. Simpson’s. He preached occasionally. In 1810, in
a little frame school house, near the present market, (Belleville,)
taught one John Watkins. One of the first school masters up the Moira,
fifth concession of Thurlow, was one Gibson. Mrs. Perry, born in
Ernesttown, remembers her first, and her principal school-teacher. His
name was Smith, and he taught in the second concession of Ernesttown in
1806. He had a large school, the children coming from all the
neighborhood, including the best families.

During the war of 1812, Mr. Whelan taught at Kingston, in the public
school. The school house stood near the block house. It is stated,
January, 1817, that he had been a teacher for ten years.

Before us, is a document, dated at Hollowell, Oct. 28, 1819. It is—
“Articles of agreement between R—— L——, of the one part, and we, the
undersigned, of the other part: that is to say: that R—— L—— doth engage
to keep a regular school, for the term of seven months from the first
day of November next, at the rate of two pounds ten shillings per month;
and he further doth agree to teach reading, writing, and arithmetic; to
keep regular hours, keep good order in school, as far as his abilities
will allow, see that the children go orderly from school to their
respective homes. And we, the undersigned, doth agree to pay R—— L—— the
sum above named of ten dollars per month for the time above mentioned;
and further, doth agree to find a comfortable house for the school, and
supply the same with wood fitted for the fire. And further, to wash,
mend, lodge, and victual him for the time of keeping said school. School
to be under charge and inspection of the following trustees: William
Clark, Peter Leavens, and Daniel Leavens.”

To which is subjoined, quaintly, in Mr. L.’s hand writing:

“It is to be understood that the said R—— L—— has performed his business
rightly till he is discharged,—(Signed)      R—— L——.”

Below are the names of the subscribers, and the number of scholars each
will send.

The practice already referred to, of setting apart for school teachers
such members of the family as were physically incapable of doing hard
manual labor, without any regard to their natural or acquired
capabilities, was of Yankee origin, and continued in many places for
many years. The writer had, among his early teachers, one who boarded
round from family to family, whose sole qualification to teach consisted
in his lameness. This prostitution of a noble calling, had the effect of
preventing men of education for a long time, from engaging in the duties
of this profession.

In different places, young men would engage for three or four months, in
winter, to teach school; but, with the return of spring, they would
return to the labor of the field and woods. After a while, young women
could be found who would teach in the concession school house all the
summer, to which the younger children would go.

Some of the first school teachers were from the old country, and some
from the American States. The latter would naturally desire to have used
American school books, and, as they were the most conveniently procured,
they were introduced, and continued to be in use for many years. At
least, by some schools, Dr. Noah Webster’s spelling book was among the
first to be used; and the writer commenced his rudimentary education in
that book. It followed, from the presence of American teachers and
school books, that peculiarities of American spelling and pronunciation
were taught to the children of Canada. For instance, take the letter Z.
This letter of the English alphabet is, according to original authority
pronounced _zed_; but Webster taught that it had not a compound sound,
and should be pronounced _ze_. This matter was brought before the
public, by a letter over the signature of “Harris,” which appeared in
the _Kingston Herald_, in 1846. After adducing abundance of authority,
he concludes that “the instructor of youth, who, when engaged in
teaching the elements of the English language, direct them to call that
letter _ze_, instead of _zed_, are teaching them error.”




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII.

  CONTENTS—Mr. Stuart’s school—Simcoe—State Church and College—Grammar
    Schools—Hon. R. Hamilton—Chalmers—Strachan—Comes to Canada—
    Educational history—Arrival at Kingston—The pupils—Fees—Removes to
    Cornwall—Pupils follow—Strachan, a Canadian—Marries—Interview with
    Bishop Strachan—His disappointment—A stranger—What he forsook—300
    pupils—Their success—Stay at Cornwall—Appointments at York—A
    lecturer—At Kingston—Member of Legislative Council—Politician—
    Clergy Reserves—Founds King’s College—The thirty-nine articles—
    Monopoly swept away—Voluntaryism—Founds Trinity College—Bishop
    Strachan in 1866—What he had accomplished—Those he tutored—Setting
    up a high standard—“Reckoner”—Sincerity—Legislation, 1797—Address
    to the King—Grammar Schools—Grant, 1798—Board of Education—
    Endowment Of King’s College—Its constitution—Changes—Upper Canada
    College—Endowment—“A spirit of improvement”—Gourlay—The second
    academy—At Ernesttown—The trustees—Bidwell—Charges—Contradicted—
    Rival school—Bidwell’s son—Conspicuous character—Bidwell’s death—
    Son removes to Toronto—Academy building, a barrack—Literary spirit
    of Bath—Never revived—York.


     HIGHER EDUCATION—FOUNDATION OF UNIVERSITIES—STRACHAN—BIDWELL.

Up to the time that Upper Canada was set apart from the Province of
Quebec, as a distinct Province, and even until 1799, when Dr. Strachan
came to Kingston, the Rev. Mr. Stuart continued to be the only teacher
who imparted anything like a solid education. But his scholars consisted
mainly of boys not far advanced. No doubt many of them, however,
received from him the elements of a sound, and even classical education.

Governor Simcoe, soon after assuming office, impressed with the
importance of higher education, even for an infant colony, took early
steps to procure from the mother-country a competent person to place at
the head of a College he had determined to establish in connection with
a State Church. His scheme of education to further that object, was to
establish a system of grammar schools, and a University as the head.

The Hon. Robert Hamilton, of Queenston, had at this time a brother
living in Scotland, and it was through him that an offer was made first
to the celebrated Dr. Chalmers. But not desiring to come, although he
had not yet attained to his greatness, he mentioned the name of his
friend Strachan, to whom the offer was then made. Mr. Strachan decided
to come. Thus it was the veteran school-teacher, the divine, the founder
of Universities, who but recently passed away, was led to Canada to
become the occupant of one of the most conspicuous places in the
Province of Upper Canada. So intimately is the name of Dr. Strachan
associated with the history of education, as well as with the
Episcopalian Church, that it becomes necessary to supply here a somewhat
lengthened account of his educational history. He arrived at Kingston
the last day of the year, 1799, having sailed from Greenock the latter
part of August, and having been over four months on the way. But when
Strachan arrived, Simcoe had been recalled, and his scheme was at least,
in abeyance.

Col. Clark says that “a school was established at Kingston, 1800, by the
Hon. R. Cartwright for his sons, having Mr. Strachan for teacher, who
had the privilege of taking ten additional scholars at £10 each per
annum.” Among these ten were the late Chief Justice Robinson, Chief
Justice Macaulay, the Hon. George Markland, Bishop Bethune, the
successor of Dr. Strachan; the Rev. W. Macaulay, Picton; Captain
England, Royal Engineers; Justice McLean, Col. John Clark, and the two
sons of Hamilton, James and Samuel. These, with four sons of Richard
Cartwright, formed Mr. Strachan’s first school for the higher branches
of education.

Mr. Strachan continued to teach in Kingston for three years, when he
removed his school to Cornwall.

All of his pupils at Kingston, except John Clark, of Niagara, followed
him to that place, and continued for years under his instruction.

The high standard of education now set up by Mr. Strachan had a
beneficial effect. He trained here for usefulness and distinction, some
of the first men of the Province. In addition to those mentioned as
distinguished pupils, was Christopher Hagarman. Here Mr. Strachan, it
may be said, became a thorough Canadian, and began to identify himself
with the higher interests of the country. He shortly after married a
lady of Cornwall, Miss Woods, who lived to within a few years of the
Bishop’s death.

Dr. Strachan, in conversation with the writer, referred to the time of
his coming to Canada with no little feeling. He evidently felt the
disappointment arising from the departure of Governor Simcoe very
keenly, which left him quite to his own resources in the new country,
far from his home which he had forsaken, in view of certain promises of
advancement, congenial to his taste. He was, to use his own words, “a
lonely stranger in a foreign land, without resources or a single
acquaintance.” But in coming to speak of his pupils, of which there had
been about 300, and whose course in life he had been permitted to see;
whose success he had been proud to note, he spoke of them with all the
kindness and regard of a parent. He dwelt upon the character and high
position to which so many had attained, especially the late Chief
Justice Robinson. Speaking of himself, he said his “early life was of
too busy a nature to allow him to keep a journal.” And we find it stated
that he had to support a mother and two sisters.

Mr. Strachan continued at Cornwall nine years, teaching, when he removed
to York. The Government recognised his ability, and to increase the
sphere of his usefulness, and to establish a Provincial College, he was
requested to remove to the capital of Upper Canada, and had offered to
him every advantage, pecuniary and otherwise. In these early efforts to
establish higher education, says the Rev. Mr. Smart, whose testimony is
important, too much praise cannot be given to Dr. Strachan.

Although Mr. Strachan had removed to Cornwall, Kingston was occasionally
favored by his presence as a public lecturer, as the following notice
which appeared in the _Gazette_, December, 1810, will show:

“Mr. Strachan’s annual course of popular lectures on Natural Philosophy,
will commence on the second Monday in January, the course consisting of
thirty-six lectures, to be completed in two months. Tickets of
admission, four guineas; students taught at any of the District Schools
of Upper Canada, entitled to tickets for one guinea. This money to be
appropriated to the purchase of scientific books, for the use of those
who attend the lectures.”

In 1818 Dr. Strachan was appointed a member of the Legislative Council,
and also of the Executive Council. In these positions he was a
consistent worker to secure the establishment of a State Church; and for
the twenty-two years he took part in the politics of Upper Canada he
ceased not to work for the cause, and the preservation of the Clergy
Reserves. Dr. Strachan never forgot the original purpose which brought
him to Canada, the foundation of Grammar Schools and a University. In
1827, after using the influence which his political position allowed him
to secure this object, he procured a royal charter for a University
which he named King’s College after his _Alma Mater_. This institution
was intended for the exclusive benefit of those who would subscribe to
the Thirty-nine Articles. For nearly twenty years this University
continued under the control of the Church of England. But the spirit
which obtained in the public mind of Canada was hostile to this
monopoly, and the time came when the University he had founded became
more truly a national one. Although at this time an old man, when it
might have been supposed he would yield to the adverse influence which
had overcome his college, he never thought of resting satisfied, but, in
direct opposition to the principle against voluntaryism, for which his
life had been so far spent, he set about laying the foundation of
another University, and the Trinity College of Toronto is a second
monument to his untiring energy and success; a monument which renders
another unnecessary to commemorate him.

We penned the following remarks in 1866: This widely known worthy still
animates the church he has been mainly instrumental in erecting to a
high and ever influential position in Canada, and whose untiring
energies, guided by a brilliant intellect and a noble purpose, has made
him the parent of higher education in the Province. The result of his
doings—the traces of his vigorous mind, the repletion of his noble life
may be seen, not alone upon the page of Episcopalian Church History; but
in all the departments of Provincial life—in the halls of learning, in
the recorded charges from the Bench, by the mouth of those he educated;
in the speeches of many of Canada’s earliest and foremost statesmen. For
it was he tutored the mind of a McLean, a Hagerman, a Robinson, of the
Sherwoods, Jones, besides a large number of others who have acted a
conspicuous part in the history of the country. While the trees of the
forest yet overshadowed the muddy soil where Toronto now proudly rears
her graceful spires and domes, and while the wild duck found a safe
resting place in the bay, now thickly dotted with crafts of every size,
Dr. Strachan by pen, and by word of mouth, was setting up a high
standard of learning; and by worthy means, was stimulating the minds of
the future men of Canada to attain that high mark. Read the easy flowing
words that appeared in the Kingston _Gazette_, over “Reckoner,” and it
will strike one that if he took the _Spectator_ as a model, he
abundantly succeeded in imitating the immortal Addison. His school at
Cornwall was pre-eminently good, “he had the welfare of those committed
to him at heart, (says the Rev. Mr. Smart,) as well as the youth of the
country generally.”

Five years after the erection of Upper Canada into a distinct Province,
1797, steps were taken by the two Houses of Parliament to establish
schools for the higher branches of learning. A joint address was
presented to His Majesty, Geo. III., asking that he “would be graciously
pleased to direct his Government in this Province, to appropriate a
certain portion of the waste lands of the Crown, as a fund for the
establishment and support of a respectable Grammar School in each
District thereof; and also a College, or University, for the instruction
of youth in the different branches of liberal knowledge.” The Imperial
Government replied, enquiring in what manner, and to what extent, “a
portion of the Crown lands might be appropriated and rendered productive
towards the formation of a fund for the above purposes.” The Executive
Council of Canada recommended “that an appropriation of 500,000 acres,
or ten townships, after deducting the Crown and Clergy sevenths, would
be a sufficient fund for the establishment and maintenance of the royal
foundation of four Grammar Schools and one University.” It was also
suggested, that the Grammar Schools be established at Cornwall,
Kingston, Newark (Niagara), and Sandwich, and the University at York. It
is not known what action was taken on this recommendation.—(Lillie).
But, in 1798, “a grant was made of 549,000 acres of land in different
parts of the Province, to carry out the design of the Grammar Schools
and University.” “Of the above land endowment, 190,573 acres were, up to
the year 1826, assigned to (or disposed of by) a public body, known as
the Board of Education, the proceeds having been applied to the support
of Common and Grammar Schools.” The residue of the grant, amounting to
358,427 acres, appears to have been regarded as properly constituting
that portion of the royal gift which had been intended for the support
of the contemplated University.

Through the influence and exertion of Dr. Strachan, the University of
King’s College was established by Royal Charter of Incorporation, 15th
March, 1827, with an endowment of “225,000 acres of crown land, and
£1,000 for sixteen years.” The Council or Governors were to consist of
the Chancellor, President, and seven Professors or Graduates of the
institution. All were to be members of the Church of England. This
exclusive feature of the College continued to exist until 1843, when the
charter was modified whereby parties were eligible to hold office by a
declaration of their “belief in the authenticity and Divine
incorporation of the Old and New Testaments, and in the doctrine of the
Trinity.” Various changes were made by Legislative enactment until the
present institution became established, in 1853, when the faculties of
Law and Medicine were abolished, the name changed from King’s College to
University College, and the University and College made two distinct
institutions.

The Royal Grammar School was merged into Upper Canada College in 1829,
and this institution was opened the following year. “In the years 1832,
1834, and 1835, it received endowments of land, amounting, in all, to
63,268 acres, irrespective of two valuable blocks in York—on one of
which the present College buildings stand.” “The College further
received an allowance from Government of £200 sterling, in 1830; £500 in
1831; and £1,000 sterling per annum since.”


                     ACADEMY AT ERNESTTOWN—BIDWELL.

While to Dr. Strachan belongs the honor of establishing the first school
whereat a liberal education might be obtained the efforts and labors of
others must not be forgotten. Shortly after the commencement of the
present century, there arose, perhaps as a result of the teaching of
Strachan, a greater desire for advanced learning. Says a writer in 1811,
“A spirit of improvement is evidently spreading, the value of education,
as well as the want of it, is felt. Gentlemen of competent means appear
to be sensible of the importance of giving their children academical
learning, and ambitious to do it without sending them abroad for the
purpose. Among other indications of progress in literary ambition, I
cannot forbear referring to the academy lately erected in Ernesttown, by
the subscription of public-spirited inhabitants of that, and the
neighbouring townships, who appear to be convinced that the cultivation
of liberal arts and sciences is naturally connected with an improvement
of manners and morals, and a general melioration of the state of
society.”

The academy above referred to was the second school of importance
established in Upper Canada. It was also situated upon the shores of the
Bay of Quinté. The following is from the _Kingston Gazette_:

“ERNESTTOWN ACADEMY.—The subscribers hereby inform the friends of
learning that an Academical School, under the superintendence of an
experienced preceptor, is opened in Ernesttown, near the church, for the
instruction of youth in English reading, speaking, grammar and
composition, the learned languages, penmanship, arithmetic, geography,
and other branches of Liberal Education. Scholars attending from a
distance may be boarded in good families on reasonable terms, and for
fifteen shillings a year can have the use of a valuable library. School
Trustees: Robert McDowel, Benjamin Fairfield, William Fairfield, Solomon
Johns, William Wilcox, Samuel Neilson, George Baker.—Ernesttown, 11th
March, 1811.”

The person selected for teacher was Mr. Barnabas Bidwell, who had a few
years previously come to Canada from the State of Massachusetts, where
he had been, according to a writer in the _Kingston Gazette_,
Attorney-General of that State. The same writer made charges of a
serious nature against Mr. Bidwell, as to the cause of his leaving his
country; but one of the above committee vindicated Mr. Bidwell’s
character; by asserting that although Mr. B. had been “unfortunate in
business, and became embarrassed, he was honest, and had left property
to pay his debts when he left—that he had been a tutor at the first
college in America—that he avoided politics and devoted himself to
literary pursuits.” It was about the commencement of the present
century, when Mr Bidwell came to Bath to live.

Probably the academy at Bath was regarded somewhat as a rival to the
school existing at Cornwall.

Barnabas Bidwell remained at Bath about eight years when he removed to
Kingston, with his son, Marshal Bidwell, who became a lawyer, and a very
conspicuous character in Canada. B. Bidwell died at Kingston, July 26,
1833, aged 70. His son removed to York in 1830, where he practised his
profession until the eventful year of 1837.

The academy, at the commencement of the war of 1812, was in a prosperous
state, but very soon all was changed,—the school was broken up, and the
building converted into a barrack. The close of the war unfortunately
saw no return of the old state of things, the teacher was gone, and the
students scattered, “having resorted to other places of education, many
of them out of the province. The building is now, (1822), occupied as a
house of public worship, and a common school. It is to be hoped,
however, that the taste for literary improvement may be revived, and
this seminary be re-established.” But these hopes were never realized.
The literary glory of Bath had departed. The capital of York was now to
become a centre to which would gravitate the more learned, and where
would be established the seats of learning. The limited, though earnest
rivalry which had existed between Kingston and Bath, was to be on a more
important scale, between the ancient capital, Kingston, and the more
promising one of York.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX.

  CONTENTS—Extract from Cooper—Educational institutions—Kingston—
    Queen’s College—Own’s Real Estate—Regiopolis College—Roman
    Catholic—Grammar School—Attendance—School houses—Library—Separate
    Schools—Private Schools—The Quaker School—William Penn—Upon the
    Hudson—Near Bloomfield—Origin of school—Gurnay—His offer—
    Management of school—The teaching—Mrs. Crombie’s schools—Picton
    Ladies’ Academy—McMullen, proprietor—Teachers—Gentlemen’s
    department—Popular—The art of printing—In America—Book publishing—
    First in America—Books among the loyalists—Few—Passed around—
    Ferguson’s books—The Bible—Libraries at Kingston and Bath—
    Legislation—In Lower Canada—Reading room at Hallowell—Reserves for
    Education—Upper Canada in respect to education—Praiseworthy—Common
    School System Bill introduced 1841—Amended, 1846—Dr. Ryerson’s
    system—Unsurpassed.


                      HIGHER EDUCATION, CONTINUED.

The subjoined statement we extract from Cooper, which was written in
1856. We have no doubt the last twelve years has been attended with a
steady increase in the importance of the Educational institutions of
Kingston.

“EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS.—There are in Kingston two colleges, Queen’s
College and Regiopolis; the County Grammar School, 11 Common Schools, 2
separate R. C. Schools, one School connected with the Nunnery, or
Sisters of Charity, with numerous good private schools for boys, private
schools for girls, infant schools and other minor educational
establishments, such as evening schools, classes for teaching
continental languages, &c., in all between 20 and 30.

“QUEEN’S COLLEGE.—Queen’s College is an educational institution of very
considerable importance, and from it have issued graduates in arts,
divinity and medicine, of no despicable attainments. It was incorporated
by Royal Charter in 1842, and is under the management of a Board of
Trustees and Senate. It has a Principal and four Professors in Arts and
Divinity, besides six Medical Professors. It confers Scholarships of the
aggregate value of £200, the highest being worth £12 10s. It numbers
during the present year, 47 medical students, 30 in Arts, 10 in
Divinity, connected with it is a Preparatory School, where great pains
are taken to prepare pupils for matriculation at the college. A good
library, containing some 3,000 volumes belongs to the College. A series
of meteorological observations are taken by the graduates, with the able
supervision of the Rev. Professor James Williamson, under whose
assiduous attention this branch of knowledge, so much neglected in
Canada has been carefully fostered.

“This institution owns valuable real estate, and is aided by an annual
grant from the Legislature of £750, and £250 to the medical branch.

“REGIOPOLIS COLLEGE is a Roman Catholic Seminary of learning; it has
three Professorships, the duties of which are discharged by Roman
Catholic clergymen. Beyond its own walls, and its own community, it is
little known as an educational institution.

“THE COUNTY GRAMMAR SCHOOL is supported as those in other counties, that
is, by a grant from Government of £100 per annum, and the tuition fees
of pupils. It possessed formerly a small endowment; this for the present
has been consumed in creating a fund for the liquidation of some debt on
the school-house, a plain substantial building in a healthy and elevated
part of the town; it is under the control of a Board of Trustees,
appointed by the County Council, and is managed by a head-master and
under-master. It is one of the three Grammar Schools first established
in the Province, and created by Royal Charter—the other two being at
Cornwall and Niagara.

“THE COMMON SCHOOLS are, as in other places, under the management of the
department of education, and the local control of a Board of Trustees,
and local Superintendent. There is a great want of proper and sufficient
school-houses, a want which it is anticipated will soon be supplied, the
Board having in contemplation, the immediate erection of proper
buildings. The free school system has been adopted here; the
difficulties usually attendant on its establishment have not been
altogether escaped—the public seeming loth to tax themselves to any
extent, for the purpose of general education. A marked increase in the
attendance at the city schools has taken place during the last two
years, and there are now taught as large a number of children in the
common schools of Kingston as in any other Canadian city, in proportion
to its population: the standard of education may or may not be as high
as in Toronto, Hamilton or Brockville, but if it is more elementary, it
is not less sound. In free public schools, such as now established, it
is perhaps as well not to aim at a higher standard than is here attained
to. When good school-houses are erected, it will doubtlessly be found
necessary to adopt the Central School system, on the model of that so
successfully carried out in Hamilton, Perth and St. Catharines, and
perhaps elsewhere. When such is the case the present schools will rank
high as primary schools, whilst the central schools will have to compete
with other similar institutions in the province, and will not likely be
behind them in character and value; these changes are in contemplation,
and will before long be carried into effect. The people of Kingston do
not fail to appreciate the benefits of sound education of its
inhabitants in elevating the position of a city. A public library,
containing some 2,000 volumes, has been established in connection with
the city schools.

“THE ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS are under the management of a
separate Board of Trustees; they are supported as are the Common
Schools, by a Legislative grant, proportionate to the average attendance
of pupils, and by a rate settled by the Board, collected from all
rate-payers; in the case of the Separate Schools, from the parents of
pupils and supporters of the schools, who are exempt from all other
taxation for school purposes. The rate in their case is usually very
low. The wealthier supporters of the schools, with a praiseworthy zeal,
voluntarily contribute largely to the required fund. Among the private
schools are many excellent academies for both boys and girls, which
afford both ornamental acquirements and substantial, classical and
commercial education.”

QUAKER SCHOOLS.—The noted and good William Penn founded a school for the
children of the Friends at an early date. Subsequently a Quaker Boarding
School was established upon the banks of the Hudson, near Poughkeepsie.

Toward the latter part of 1841, a school for the children of the Quaker
denomination, was opened near the pleasant village of Bloomfield, about
4 miles from Picton. The origin of the school we believe, was pretty
much as follows: An English gentleman, John Joseph Gurney, brother to
Elizabeth Fry, a member of the Quaker Society, and we believe a
minister, was travelling in Canada, and discovering the wants of that
denomination, with respect to education, offered to bestow a certain
sum, (£500), on condition that another specified sum were raised, a
suitable place bought, and buildings prepared. His offer being accepted,
and at this juncture, Mr. Armstrong being desirous of selling his farm
of 100 acres, with a good brick house just completed, the present site
of the school was procured. In addition to the means thus obtained there
was also a limited sum held by the society, it is said a bequest, for
educational purposes. Additional buildings were erected, and the school
duly opened. The first teachers were Americans. The school was managed
by a committee chosen annually by the Society, until the latter part of
1865, when it was leased to Mr. W. Valentine, to whom we are partially
indebted for the foregoing facts. The school continues under the
supervision of a managing committee, appointed by the Society. Its
capacity does not extend further than to receive 30 pupils of each sex,
who are taught the usual branches of a good English education, and
sometimes the rudiments of the classics and the modern languages.

In 1836, Mrs. Crombie and her sister Miss Bradshaw opened a “Female
Academy” in Picton, which promised to give “substantial and ornamental
accomplishments.”

The Picton Ladies’ Academy was opened in December, 1847, by the Rev. D.
McMullen, as sole proprietor. It was continued by him until May, 1851,
when Miss Creighton rented the premises and took charge of the school.
It continued under her management nine months, when it finally was
closed. The first teachers were the late Mrs. N. F. English, and Miss
Eliza Austin. Afterwards Miss M. E. Adams was preceptress, and Miss
Ployle was teacher.

A male department was established by Mr. McMullen, with the hope of
having it connected with the Grammar School. But this was not done. The
principal of the school was C. M. C. Cameron, now Dr. Cameron of Port
Hope, and a graduate of Victoria College. He was assisted by Mr. Samuel
W. Harding; the school existed but one year. Both of these schools were
well attended, and were deservedly popular. When closed it was generally
regarded as a public loss, by those most capable of judging.


                 UPPER CANADA ACADEMY—VICTORIA COLLEGE.

We have accorded to Dr. Strachan a prominent and foremost position in
connection with the subject of higher education. We considered it a duty
as well as a pleasure, to thus honor one whose praise was in all the
land when he ceased to live. But the fountain of education opened by him
did not flow, shall we say, was not intended to flow to the masses. Dr.
Strachan’s educational establishment was rather created for a select
circle, for an expected Canadian aristocracy. It remained for others to
originate a stream of learning that should water the whole land, and
come within the reach of every Canadian family—that should give
intellectual life to the whole of the country, irrespective of creed or
origin. To the Wesleyan Methodists belongs the greater honor of
establishing an institution of higher learning, whose doors were opened
to all, and within which any one might obtain learning without
hindrance, no matter what his belief. While religious oversight was to
be extended, no peculiar dogma was to be enforced, no sectarian
principle was to be inculcated.

In the month of August, 1830, when the Wesleyan Conference met upon the
Bay Quinté, the Rev. Wm. Case, being General Superintendent, and Rev.
James (now Dr.) Richardson, Secretary, and while Cobourg was yet
embraced within the Bay Quinté District, the following Resolution was
adopted by that body:

“That a Committee of nine be chosen by ballot, consisting of three from
each District, to fix the location of the Seminary, according to some
general instructions to be given them by the Conference.” The committee
consisted of “J. Ryerson, T. Whitehead, S. Belton, David Wright, J.
Beatty, Wm. Ryerson, Thos. Madden, Wm. Brown, James Richardson.”

The following Constitution for the Upper Canada Academy, was adopted:

“1. That nine Trustees be appointed, three of whom shall go into office
annually.

“2. That a Board of Visitors, consisting of five, be chosen annually by
the Conference. That these two bodies should jointly form a Board to
appoint the Principal and Teachers, and govern, and generally
superintend the institution.”

The Conference, in the Pastoral Address, asked for the liberal support
of the members, in the establishment of the proposed Academy. A general
agent was appointed, and active steps taken to carry out the object. It
is noteworthy, that the call thus made to the farmers, many of whom were
yet struggling for the necessaries of life, was promptly and nobly
responded to. Agents continued to be appointed from year to year, and in
the Conference address of 1835, it is said, “We are happy to be able to
say that the buildings for the Upper Canada Academy are nearly
completed. We trust the Institution will soon be open for the reception
of pupils.” There had been delay “for want of funds.” Arrangements were
making to accommodate one hundred and seventy pupils, with board and
lodging. In 1836, it is found stated, that “the Conference and the
friends of general education, and of Wesleyan Methodists in Canada, have
at length, by their unremitting efforts, succeeded in preparing the
Upper Canada Academy for the reception of pupils, and we expect, in a
few days to see it in operation.” In 1837, we find that Matthew Ritchey,
A. M., was the Principal of the U. C. Academy. If we mistake not, the
Rev. Egerton Ryerson had previously been named to fill the office. At
all events, we have every reason to believe that this distinguished
Canadian educationist was chiefly instrumental in securing the
foundation of an abiding institution, probably, indeed, was the
originator of the scheme. He not only stimulated others to work; but
obtained from Government a grant, so often begrudged. He also, as a
representative to the British Conference, was the means of procuring a
donation of one hundred pounds’ worth of books, beside other
contributions. In 1840, the Rev. Mr. Ritchey ceased to be Principal.
During his time of service, it is stated, the Academy increasingly
progressed in efficiency and in increase of pupils. Mr. Ritchey’s
successor, in 1841, was the Rev. Jesse Hurlburt, A. B. Daniel C.
VanNorman was Professor of Mathematics, a post to which he had been
appointed a year previous.

The year 1842 saw the Upper Canada Academy changed into the Victoria
College, by Provincial Legislative enactment, possessing the usual
powers and privileges of a University. The Rev. Egerton Ryerson was made
Principal; Jesse Hurlburt, A. M., and D. C. VanNorman, Professors; and
James Spencer, English Teacher. Dr. Ryerson continued Principal until
1845. In 1845, Alexander MacNab, A. M., was appointed Acting Principal,
and in 1847 he became Principal, and held the position until 1850.

In 1851, the Rev. S. S. Nelles, A. M., was elected to the office which
he now continues to hold with so much credit and dignity, having been
instrumental in materially advancing the reputation of the previously
well known College.


                       BOOKS, LIBRARIES—PRINTING.

The art of printing was not old when the colonies of France and Great
Britain were planted in America. The discovery of this art, with the
avenue which the discovery of America, opened for the pent up millions
of Europe, wrought out the most striking changes which ever marked the
history of the human race. It struck the final blow to the spirit of
feudalism, while America supplied an asylum for those who found not full
freedom of conscience and an opportunity to rise in the scale of human
existence.

Book publishing being once introduced into England, rapidly became of
vast magnitude, and thus everywhere scattered the food essential for the
human mind. It was in the year 1639 that printing was introduced into
America; but it was sixty-two years before it became of any account,
during which time the business was mostly in Philadelphia. Altogether
there were but four presses in the country. The first book printed in
America was made in 1640. It was a reprint of the Psalm Book, and
afterwards passed through many editions, while it was reprinted in
England in eighteen editions, and twenty-two in Scotland, being seventy
in all.

Whatever may have been the state of education in the British Colonies,
and the general desire to read books at the time of the rebellion, it is
quite certain that the hasty manner in which many left their homes, the
long distance to travel, and necessity of carrying quantities of
provision which took all the strength of the refugees, precluded the
possibility of carrying many, or any books to the wilderness of Canada.
Even after the peace the long distance to come, and the frequent
impoverished condition of the settler, allowed not the desire, if such
existed, to fetch books for instruction and mental enjoyment. However,
there were some brought by them, but mostly by the officers recently out
from the old country. During the first ten years the books among the
settlers were very few; but these few were circulated from one township
to another—from one person to another, who had the desire to, and could,
read. We have in our possession, a letter from John Ferguson to Mr.
Bell, who was then, 1789, at Kingston, in which the latter is requested
to tell Mr. Markland, that he, Mr. Ferguson, had sent him from the
Eighth Township, by the bearer, the History of France. The same person
writing from Fredericksburgh in 1791, desires to have sent from Sidney
to him, “some books, viz.: five volumes of the History of England, by
Horn, and the two volumes of Andrew’s History of France.”

But while few, or no books of a secular nature, were brought by the
settler, a large number, true to their conscience, carried a copy of the
Bible, even many of the disbanded soldiers had one, especially the
Lutherans. These were often in the German, or Dutch language. Some of
these venerable and sacred relics we have seen; one in German, which
belonged to Bongard of Marysburgh.

For many years Kingston took the lead in everything that pertains to
education. The history of the _Kingston Gazette_ shows that, not only
did the leading men of the place give the patronage necessary to
establish and maintain a newspaper, independent of Government support,
and give interest to the columns of the paper by contributions; but
there is evidence of early and successful efforts to form a public
library. Reference is made to the Social library established in this
village (Kingston) in 1813, when the Rev. Mr. Langhorn presented to it a
valuable collection of books, (see the first clergyman). This library
had probably been in existence for some years. Another library was
established at Bath prior to this time. Gourlay says, in 1811, “books
are procured in considerable numbers, social libraries are introduced in
various places.” And, no doubt, the High School at Cornwall, under Mr.
Strachan, had attached to it a select library.

The _Kingston Gazette_ announces, August 1, 1815, that “A small
circulating library” has been opened at the _Gazette_ office, “on the
most reasonable terms.”

In 1816, an act was passed “to appropriate a sum of money for providing
a library for the use of the Legislative Council and House of Assembly
of this Province.” The sum granted was £800 to purchase books and maps.

While the growth of Upper Canada was attended by a corresponding
increase of private and public libraries, Lower Canada, there is reason
to believe, was maintaining the character it had acquired under its
original rulers, for educational privileges and individual efforts to
create centres of learning.

We find the statement “that the library of F. Fleming, Esq., Montreal,
comprising 12,000 volumes, sold by auction, September 8, 1833, was the
largest ever offered for sale on the American continent.”

In the _Hallowell Free Press_, 15th February, 1831, is the following:
“Library notice.”—“A meeting of the inhabitants of the village of
Hallowell is requested to-morrow evening, at Strikers’ Inn, at seven
o’clock, to take into consideration the propriety of establishing a
Reading-room in the village.” The next issue of the Journal says, “we
are glad to see our friends have established a reading-room.”

“At an early period of British dominion in America, blocks of wild land
were set apart, to make provision, by a future day, for public
institutions. Since the revolution, the United States have followed out,
in part, this practice, by allotting lands for schools, and in Canada,
whole townships have been appropriated for the same purpose.” While this
forethought respecting schools indicated a proper desire to secure
educational interests, it must be observed that the reserves, like those
of the Crown and Clergy, very materially prevented the opening up of the
country by settlers, and kept apart the settlers, over a wide field, and
thus preventing advancement in civilization.

Looking back at the history of legislation, relative to education, one
is struck with the fact that much, very much, was done by the young
colony of Upper Canada. The establishment of the Common Schools
especially, which first took place 1816, has been regarded as most wise,
and the grants of money most praiseworthy.

The present Common School system of Upper Canada was introduced in 1841.
The Bill was brought forward by the Hon. S. B. Harrison. The fundamental
principle, being the allotment of money to each county, on condition of
its raising an equal amount by local assessment. This act was amended
and improved in 1843, by the Hon. Francis Hincks, and in 1846, by the
Hon. W. H. Draper. In 1849, the Hon. J. H. Cameron introduced an act,
establishing schools in cities and towns. In the year following, these
two acts were incorporated into one, with further improvements.

The Common School system, as we find it to day, is, in a great measure,
the production of Dr. Ryerson’s long continued and intelligent labor.
Borrowing the machinery from the State of New York, and the mode of
support from Massachusetts, taking the Irish national school-books for
instruction, and making use of the Normal School system of Germany, he
has, by the addition of what was necessary, built up a system of Common
School education in the Province of Ontario, that cannot be surpassed,
if equalled, in the whole world.




                              CHAPTER XL.

  CONTENTS—First Newspapers, 1457—Year 66—English Newspapers—In
    America—In Canada—‘Gazette’—Founder—Papers in 1753—Quebec
    ‘Herald’—Montreal ‘Gazette’—‘Le Temps’—Quebec ‘Mercury’—Canadien
    ‘Courant’—‘Royal Gazette’—First in Newfoundland—‘U. C. Gazette’—
    First Paper—Subscribers—Upper Canada ‘Guardian’—Wilcox—Mr. Thorpe—
    Opposition—Libel—Elected to Parliament—York Jail—Leader—In 1812—
    Deserted—York ‘Gazette’—Kingston ‘Gazette’—Only Paper—News sixty
    years ago—In Midland District—Rev. Mr. Miles—Pioneer of
    Journalism—His Birthplace—Learns the Printing Business—Mower—
    Montreal ‘Gazette’—Kendall—Partnership—To Kingston in 1810—The
    Printing Office—Kingston ‘Gazette’—Mr. Miles sells out—The concern
    purchased—Mr. Miles asked to be Editor—Their kindness—Gratitude—
    Second Volume—Extract from ‘Gazette’—The Price—Kingston
    ‘Chronicle’—Upper Canada ‘Herald’—‘Canadian Watchman’—Mr. Miles at
    Prescott—Returns to Kingston—Enters the Ministry—Loyal Subject—In
    1812—On Duty—Archdeacon Stuart—Col. Cartwright—Contributors to
    ‘Gazette’—Our Thanks—A Watch—Faithfulness—“A Good Chance”—
    Subscribers at York—Kingston ‘Spectator’—‘Patriot’—‘Argus’—
    ‘Commercial Advertizer’—‘British Whig’—‘Chronicle’ and ‘News’—
    First Daily in Upper Canada—Paper Boxes—Brockville ‘Recorder’—A
    Reform paper—McLeod—Grenville ‘Gazette’—Prescott ‘Telegraph’—
    ‘Christian Guardian’—Reform Journals.


                   THE FIRST NEWSPAPERS IN THE WORLD.

The first newspaper published in the world, says Galignani, bears the
name of Neuremberg, 1457. But according to Tacitus, newspapers, under
the name of _diurna_, circulated among the Romans so early as the year
66. The first English newspaper was issued in 1622, and the first French
in 1631. The first in America was the _Newsletter_, published at Boston,
1704. It was discontinued in 1776. The first published in New York, was
by Wm. Bradford, in 1773. In 1775, there were but thirty-seven in the
British colonies. By 1801, there were in the United States 203, and in
1810, 358. The first newspaper in Canada was the Quebec _Gazette_, first
issued in 1776. Although now upwards of a hundred years old, it
continues to live an active and useful life. The founder of it, Mr.
Brown, brought his press from Philadelphia in 1763. By his heirs it was
sold to Mr. Nelson, who left the establishment by his will to his
brother, the late Hon. John Wilson, long the experienced and able editor
of the paper. There were, in 1763, not more than twenty newspapers in
the breadth and length of the then American colonies; and the Quebec
_Gazette_ is the oldest in the British North American Provinces. For
nearly thirty years it remained without a competitor; but about 1788 the
Quebec _Herald_ was started, which had but a brief existence. About the
same time, the old Montreal _Gazette_ was established by one Mesplet,
and was published in French; but was soon discontinued until 1794. About
the same date _Le Temps_ newspaper was published at Quebec, in French
and English, and was of short life. The Quebec _Mercury_, published in
English, by Thomas Cary, commenced its career in 1804, and the
_Canadien_ followed it in 1806; but was stopped by the seizure of the
press by the Government, in 1810. The _Canadien Courant_ was founded at
Montreal about 1808. The _Royal Gazette_ and _Newfoundland Advertiser_,
the first newspaper in Newfoundland, appeared in 1707. The _Upper Canada
Gazette_ or _American Oracle_, the first paper in Upper Canada, was
established by Governor Simcoe, in 1793. It was first published on the
18th April, by Gideon Tiffany. Naturally its circulation was limited, as
the population was sparse, and communication difficult. It was supported
mainly by Government. Rochefoucault says, in 1795 it was “not taken by a
single person in Kingston. But the Quebec _Gazette_ was by two.”

The second journal published in Upper Canada, was the _Upper Canada
Guardian_, in opposition to Government, at York, by Mr. Joseph Wilcox,
an Irishman, in 1807, whose history is not of the most satisfactory
nature. He had been a Sheriff in the Home District; but was displaced
for voting at an election for one Thorpe. Mr. Thorpe had been sent out
from England as one of the Justices of the King’s Bench. Notwithstanding
this position, he became a candidate for member of Parliament; but,
being opposed by the Government, he was defeated. Subsequently he was
recalled by the Secretary of State, at the request of Governor Gore.
Wilcox, having lost his office, commenced publishing the _Guardian_, and
was very bitter in his opposition to the Government. He was prosecuted
for libel, but was acquitted, and becoming popular, was elected to
Parliament. Having used language considered unbecoming or seditious, he
was arrested, and confined in York jail, a miserable log building, “in a
filthy cell fit for a pig.” Subsequently, he became the leader of the
opposition, and had a majority in the House; for a time becoming more
and more an object of Ministerial dislike. At the commencement of the
war of 1812, he gave up his paper, and shouldered his musket. He fought
at Queenston against the Americans; but afterward deserted, taking with
him a body of Canadian militia, and became a Colonel in the American
army. He was killed, finally, at Fort Erie, by a musket ball, when
planting a guard during the seige.

Mr. Miles remarks that “When he came to Kingston, in 1810, there was but
one paper published in York, by the Government, called the _York
Gazette_, printed by Cameron and Bennet; and one at Newark, by Joseph
Wilcox.” These were the only papers then printed in Upper Canada; but
the one at Newark was discontinued in 1812, and the other was destroyed
when York was taken by the Americans, in April, 1813. The Kingston
_Gazette_ was the only paper then printed in Upper Canada, till 1816,
when the Government _Gazette_ was again commenced. The Rev. Mr. Carroll
says of the _York Gazette_, the number “for November 13, 1801, now lies
before the writer, a coarse, flimsy, two-leaved paper, of octavo size;
department of news is pretty large, but “news much older than their
ale.” On this, November 13, they have, wonderful to say! New York dates
so late as October the 23rd; Charleston, of October the 1st;
Philadelphia and Boston, of October the 19th; and a greater exploit
still, Halifax dates of Oct. 19, &c.”

We are indebted to the Rev. Stephen Miles, of Camden East, for the facts
relating to the establishment of the first newspaper in the Midland
District, indeed the first between Montreal and York, at Kingston. Mr.
Miles is not only the sole pioneer of journalism in Upper Canada, now
living, but he is the faithful _parent of the fourth estate in the
province_, and probably the oldest journalist now living in America or
Europe. The history of such an one cannot but be interesting, while it
is especially appropriate to the work upon our hands. Mr. Miles,
although a native of Vermont, is of English and Welsh extraction. Born
October 19, 1789, he was brought up on the farm until 1805, when he was
placed as an apprentice to the printing business, at Windsor, Ver., in
the office of Nahum Mower. In the spring of 1807, Mr. Mower moved his
printing materials to Montreal, Lower Canada, to which place Mr. Miles
accompanied him. “At that time there was only one printing establishment
in Montreal, under the management of Mr. Edward Edwards, who was also
the Postmaster there; the paper printed was the _Montreal Gazette_, of
small demy-size, two columns on a page, one in French the other in
English. Mr. Mower commenced printing the _Canadian Courant_, in
Montreal, about the middle of May, 1807. Mr. Mower, says Mr. Miles,
giving me three months of my time, my apprenticeship expired on the 19th
July, 1810.” Not long after “I made arrangements in connection with an
excellent young man Charles Kendall, who had worked as a journeyman, to
go to Kingston, Upper Canada, and commence publishing a paper.”
Accordingly having purchased our material from Mr. Mower, we left
Montreal 1st September, 1810, in the old fashioned Canadian batteau (17
in number) and arrived at a wharf in Kingston just the west side of
where the barracks now are, on the morning of the 13th. We took an
excellent breakfast at a tavern opposite, and at once set about to
procure a suitable room for a printing office. Upon the 25th September,
the first number of the _Kingston Gazette_, was published under the
names of “Mower and Kendall,” Mr. Miles not being of age. At this time
there were five papers in Lower Canada. The following March, Mr. Miles
sold out his share to Mr. Kendall, who finished the first volume. At the
close of the year, Mr. Kendall wishing to retire, disposed of the office
and contents “to the late Hon. Richard Cartwright, the Hon. Allen
McLean, Thomas Markland, Esq., Lawrence Herchimer, Esq., Peter Smith,
Esq., and John Kerby, Esq.” These gentlemen saw the necessity of having
a public journal in Kingston, and became the proprietors. They
immediately wrote to secure the services of Mr. Miles, to conduct the
office, and even desired him to take it off their hands. Mr. Miles
promptly came “expecting that the proprietors would wish to be
publishers as well, and that I should attend only to the mechanical
part, but it was their unanimous wish that I should take the whole
concern off their hands, continue to print the paper, and do the best I
could with it.” Mr. Miles speaks feelingly of the kindness of these
gentlemen who would accept no other terms than that he should take
possession and pay them when convenient, “and by God’s blessing all were
promptly paid.” These kind friends, says Mr. Miles, “have all passed
into the spirit world, and the prayer of my heart is, that God may
greatly bless their posterity.” “After some unavoidable delay, the
second volume of the Gazette was commenced by me, and printed and
published in my name, till December 31, 1818.” Before proceeding with
Mr. Miles’ history, as a journalist, we will copy from the volumes which
he has kindly placed at our service, such items as are appropriate.

“KINGSTON, Tuesday, November 19, 1811.—The establishment of the Kingston
Gazette, being now in the possession of the subscriber, he takes the
earliest opportunity of re-commencing its publication, as he intends
that it shall be conducted in the same impartial manner as heretofore
practiced by his predecessors, he confidently expects and solicits the
patronage and support of its former patrons, and of the public in
general. He will not intrude upon the patience of his readers by making
a multiplicity of promises, but will merely observe that he asks the
patronage of the public no longer than he shall be deserving of it.
Former correspondents of the Gazette, and gentlemen of science
generally, are respectfully invited to favor us with their
communications.—(Signed)—S. Miles.

“Printed and published by Stephen Miles, a few doors east of Walker’s
hotel. Price fifteen shillings per annum, five shillings in advance,
five shillings in six months, and five shillings at the end of year.
Exclusive of postage.”

In the beginning of 1819, John Alexander Pringle, and John Macaulay,
Esquires, to whom Mr. Miles had sold his printing establishment,
commenced publishing the _Kingston Chronicle_, Mr. Miles having charge
of the mechanical part for nearly three years.

In February or March, 1819, the _Upper Canada Herald_, owned and edited
by Hugh C. Thompson, Esq., was first issued. In 1822 Mr. Miles took
charge of the work of printing of this Journal, and continued in charge
until the spring of 1828.

On the 15th of May, the same year, Mr. Miles commenced printing on his
own account the “_Kingston Gazette and Religious Advocate_,” in quarto
form, which he continued till August 6, 1830. Again, Mr. M. took charge
of printing for Ezra S. Ely, who commenced August 13, the _Canadian
Watchman_, and continued it for one year. In December 1831, Mr. Miles
moved to Prescott; and on the 3rd June, 1832, commenced printing the
first paper in that place, and continued till April 1833. In July he
disposed of his establishment and returned to Kingston, and engaged as
printer of the _Kingston Chronicle_, which was now published by
McFarlane & Co., with whom he remained till December, 1835. This ended
Mr. Miles’ career as a printer and publisher; and he then entered upon
the calling of a Wesleyan minister.

Mr. Miles although a native of the States was a truly loyal subject, and
proved himself such during the war of 1812. The Gazette of May 5, 1813,
says “our attendance at _military_ duty prevented the publishing of the
Gazette yesterday.” This was the time when Kingston was threatened by
the Americans, and every man turned out as a volunteer. Mr. Miles tells
of the occasion, that he saw, among those shouldering the musket in the
market place, the late Arch Deacon Stuart. Mr. Miles belonged to Captain
Markland’s company. “Col. Cartwright seeing him, called him and desired
him to go to his office and he would be sent for when wanted.” The
principal contributors to the Gazette were Col. Cartwright, who wrote a
good deal, sometimes over Falkiner, Barnabas Bidwell, Christopher
Hagerman, generally Poetry, while a student with McLean, Solomon John,
who kept a book store; and particularly Rev. Mr. Strachan, over
_Reckoner_.

We cannot leave Mr. Miles without expressing here our sincere thanks and
regard for the interest, trouble, and encouragement he has favored us
with, nor can we forgo recording the following. Says he, “the only watch
I ever owned I purchased in Montreal, on the 1st January 1810, price
$20. It has travelled with me in all my journeyings from that day to the
present time, and still keeps good time. It was made at Liverpool.” A
faithful man and a faithful watch; both for time, one for eternity.

About the year 1816 the _Gazette_ had the following, under the caption
of “_A good chance_:”

“A sober, honest, persevering man, would find it to his advantage to
undertake the circulation of the _Kingston Gazette_, weekly, on the
following route: say, to start from Kingston every Wednesday morning, go
through the village of Ernesttown, from thence to Adolphustown, and
cross either at Vanalstines or Baker’s Ferry, and so on through
Hallowell, &c., to the Carrying place; cross the River Trent, and return
to Kingston by the York post road. The advantages to be derived from an
undertaking of this kind, exclusive of the papers, we are persuaded
would be many; and any honest, persevering man, who could produce good
recommendations as to his sobriety, &c., and will give security for
punctual payment once a quarter, will make a good bargain by applying to
the publisher of the _Kingston Gazette_. There is not a doubt but that
four or five hundred papers might be distributed on this route to great
advantage.” We learn from another source, that at an early period there
was one Shubal Huff, who went around the Bay every fortnight, carrying
the _Kingston Gazette_ with other papers, pamphlets, &c., and also tea
and sugar.

The following indicates the character of the times when the _Gazette_
was established. It is a notice from the _Gazette_:

“Subscribers to the _Kingston Gazette_, in the neighbourhood of York,
will please apply at the store of Q. St. George, where their papers will
be delivered once a fortnight. Payments made to him in grain, &c., will
be acceptable. He will also receive subscriptions.” (Signed), Mower &
Kendall.

In addition to the papers already mentioned, there was the _Kingston
Spectator_, issued about 1830, and lasting three or four years. The
_Patriot_ was commenced in 1829, by T. Dalton. Subsequently there was
the _Argus_, _Commercial Advertiser_, and _Churchman_. The _British
Whig_ was started in 1832, by Dr. Barker, and is still published. _The
Chronicle and News_ began in 1830, is also still published. The _British
Whig_ was the first Daily published in Upper Canada.

For many years the subscribers to the _Gazette_ and other papers were
indebted to footmen who traveled through the more thickly settled parts
of the settlement, which were generally along the front. But after a
time there were scattered along in the second or more remote
concessions, subscribers to whom the footman could not go. These
individuals would often place boxes upon the path followed by the
carrier, into which could be dropped the paper, and letters as well.
These boxes were attached to a tree and made water-tight, and the owner
would go for his paper at his convenience.

One of the first newspapers in Upper Canada, east of Kingston, was the
_Recorder_. Says Adiel Sherwood, Esq., in a letter to the writer, it was
“the first and only paper of note, of early date in this district. It
was first got up in 1820 by one Beach, who continued but a short time
when he sold out to William Buel, Esq., and about 1848 Mr. Buel sold out
to the present proprietor and editor, D. Wylie, Esq. It was got up as
Reform paper, and has ever continued as such.”

The following is extracted from an American paper:

“In 1818, D. McLeod, a retired soldier,” who had fought at Badajoz, and
other places in the campaign under Wellington, and at Queenston, Upper
Canada, Chrysler’s Farm, Lundy’s Lane, and then under General Picton, at
Waterloo, “purchased a farm in Augusta, a few miles back of Prescott,
moved on it, and commenced the business of farming; not succeeding well
in his new avocation, he removed to Prescott and opened a classical
school, at which the late Preston King received his rudimentary Greek
lessons, and subsequently accepted the appointment of Clerk of the new
court of Commissioners, for the collection of debts. He purchased a
printing establishment and commenced the publication of a paper at
Prescott, called the _Grenville Gazette_, taking a decided stand against
the “Tory Compact” administration, and continued a zealous advocate of
reform until the insurrection broke out in December, 1837, when he was
forced to leave the country, when his press, type, and the various
paraphernalia of the printing office were seized by the Tories. A mob of
Tories visited his house, after he left the place, at midnight, to the
terror of his unprotected family, seized, and carried off his books,
letters, and other papers, and his elegant sword, as the trophies of
their midnight raid. He was chosen by the insurgents as their
major-general, and acted in that capacity during the continuance of the
insurrection. At this time large rewards were offered for his arrest on
each side of the line, on the Canadian side, for his rebellion against
that government; on the United States side for an alleged violation of
the Neutrality Laws,” in being supposed the leader of the party of men
who captured and burned the Canadian Steamer, “Sir Robert Peel,” Well’s
Island.

McLeod settled in Cleveland, Ohio, and is yet alive, being upwards of
eighty-four years of age. The Cleveland _Herald_, from which we learn
the above, records the celebration of “General D. McLeod’s fiftieth
anniversary of his marriage.”

The _Prescott Telegraph_, “The first number” said an exchange “published
by Messrs. Merrell & Miles, (1831) is now lying before us. From the
appearance of the first number, and the known ability of the
proprietors, we anticipate that the _Telegraph_ will be a valuable
acquisition to the best of newspapers in this Province, and also to the
principles of reform.”

The _Christian Guardian_ was established in the year 1829. Rev. E.
Ryerson being the Editor.

The following were so-called “Reform” papers: The _Colonial Advocate_,
by McKenzie, The _Canadian Watchman_, The _Brockville Recorder_, and The
_Hamilton Free Press_, &c.




                              CHAPTER XLI.

  CONTENTS—First paper between Kingston and York—Hallowell Free Press—
    The Editor—“Recluse”—Fruitless efforts—Proprietor—Wooden press—Of
    Iron—Free Press, Independent—The Traveller—Press removed to
    Cobourg—Prince Edward Gazette—Picton Gazette—Picton Sun—Picton
    Times—New Nation—Cobourg Star—Anglo-Canadian at Belleville—The
    Editor—Price—The Phœnix—Slicer—Canadian Wesleyan—Hastings Times—
    The Reformer—The Intelligencer—George Benjamin—The Victoria
    Chronicle—Hastings Chronicle—Extract from Playter—Colonial
    Advocate—Upper Canada Herald—Barker’s Magazine—Victoria Magazine—
    Joseph Wilson—Mrs. Moodie—Sheriff Moodie—Pioneer in Canadian
    literature—Extract from Morgan—Literary Garland—“Roughing it in
    the bush”—Eclectic Magazine—Wilson’s experiment—Wilson’s Canada
    Casket—The Bee at Napanee—Emporium—The Standard—The Reformer—North
    America—Ledger—Weekly Express—Christian Casket—Trenton Advocate—
    British Ensign—The Canadian Gem—Maple Leaf—Papers in 1853—Canadian
    papers superior to Americans—Death at Boston—Berczy—Canadian
    idioms—Accent—Good English—Superstition—Home education—Fireside
    stories—Traditions.


                         NEWSPAPERS—CONTINUED.

The first newspaper published between Kingston and York, was the
_Hallowell Free Press_, of demy size, the first number of which was
issued 28th December, 1830, by Joseph Wilson, Esq., now of Belleville;
W. A. Welles, Esq., editor, a gentleman from Utica, New York. Attempts
had been made at Cobourg, Port Hope, as well as at Hallowell, prior to
this, to establish papers, prospectus having been acknowledged by the
_Kingston Gazette_. A letter in the first number of the _Free Press_,
signed “Recluse,” says, “a number of attempts have been made to publish
a journal in this county, proposals circulated, subscriptions obtained
to a considerable amount, and the expectations of the public wrought up
to the highest degree, yet every attempt hitherto made, has proved
abortive, except the present; repeated imposition has, no doubt, had a
tendency to create in the public mind, a spirit of indifference and
apathy respecting newspapers.”

Mr. Wilson had his press of wood, made by one Scripture, of Colborne.
Although a very indifferent affair, it was used for a year, when Mr.
Wilson procured an iron press from New York. Probably one of the first
iron printing presses in the Province. The _Free Press_ was continued
for five years. Mr. Welles was editor for a short time only. This
journal was evidently intended for the public weal. No one can read the
first issues of the paper without being convinced that the proprietor
was intent upon rendering service to the public. He allied himself to no
party: the contending political aspirants of the day, had equal access
to the columns of the _Press_, and could thereby challenge unbiased
attention. “_The Traveller, or Prince Edward Gazette_,” published every
Friday, by Cecil Mortimer, Editor and Proprietor, “John Silver,
Printer,” 12s. 6d., per annum, in advance. Commenced April, 1836, and
continued about four years, when the printing press was removed to
Cobourg. In 1840, the _Prince Edward Gazette_ appeared, J. Dornan,
Publisher. It was continued under this name by Rev. Mr. Playter. In
1847, and in 1849, Mr. Thomas Donnelly became Editor and Proprietor,
changing the name to the _Picton Gazette_, which name it still bears.
Mr. Donnelly was succeeded as editor in 1853, by Maurice Moore, and he
again by S. M. Conger, in 1856, who still continues to publish this old
and popular journal. The _Picton Sun_, established in 1841, by Mr. J.
Douglas, who was succeeded in 1845, by J. McDonald, and he again in
1849, by Mr. Striker, who removed it to Cobourg in 1853. The following
year Dr. Gillespie and R. Boyle commenced the _Picton Times_, which
still continues to be published by Mr. Boyle. The _North American_
removed from Newburgh in 1861, published by McMullen Brothers. The _New
Nation_ succeeded it in 1865.

The _Anglo Canadian_ was established in Belleville in February, 1831. It
was “printed and published by Alexander T. W. Williamson, Editor, and W.
A. Welles. Printed at four dollars per annum, payable in advance.” A
copy of this paper is before us, and is very respectable as to size and
quality, and is readable. This was the first journal published in
Belleville. The _Phœnix_ arose from the ashes of the _Anglo-Canadian_.
It was first issued in the early part of July, 1831, “published every
Tuesday by T. Slicer, Editor and Proprietor, at his office, Water
Street, Belleville, U. C., 20s. per annum—if sent by mail, 22s. 6d.,
payable half-yearly.” A few copies before us resemble, in appearance,
its predecessor, the _Anglo-Canadian_. In one of the early copies is a
prospectus of the _Canadian Wesleyan_, the subscribers to the
announcement are “H. Ryan,” and “J. Jackson,” dated Hamilton, August,
1831.—(See first clergyman, H. Ryan).

The last number of the _Phœnix_ issued July 3, 1832, and which was
“published by William A. Welles, for the Proprietors,” says, “As the
present number completes the year, it is intended to give the paper a
new name; which, though less classical, may be considered more
appropriate.” The name selected was the “_Hastings Times_,” No. 17, of
the _Times_ now before us, was published by Rollin C. Benedict, every
Saturday.

“The _Reformer_” of Cobourg, published every Friday, J. Radcliff,
Editor, was first issued, June, 1832.

“The _Intelligencer_, of Belleville,” was founded by George Benjamin, in
September, 1834, who continued its editor until 1848, when McKenzie
Bowell, Esq., now M. P., succeeded him, who remains the proprietor. Mr.
Benjamin was an Englishman, born 1799, and died 1864. He was a gentleman
of more than ordinary ability, a consistent politician, and a true
friend. He held the highest municipal offices, and was Member of
Parliament from 1856 to 1863. He had talent to adorn any position.

The _Victoria Chronicle_ was founded in 1841, by S. M. Washburn and
Sutton, who had removed from Brockville. Sutton remained partner for two
years. In 1849 the establishment was purchased from Washburn by E.
Miles, Esq., who, with T. R. Mason, Esq., continues proprietor. The name
was changed many years ago from _Victoria_ to _Hastings Chronicle_.

A Magazine of _cheap miscellany_ was issued monthly, by Seth Washburn,
&c., Belleville, 1847 & 8.

Playter, writing of the year 1824, says, “books, periodicals, and
newspapers were scantily supplied to, and not much desired by the people
as yet, the country was not old enough to give much encouragement and
support to literature. Still, in the Methodist connection, the
_Magazine_, (Methodist) was tolerably well circulated, no less than
seventy subscribers were among the friends on the Bay of Quinté circuit
at once. Newspapers were on the increase; nineteen were now published in
Canada, and six of them twice a week. Quebec printed four, (of which one
was French); Stanstead one, Brockville one, Kingston two, York two,
Niagara one, Queenston one.”

The _Colonial Advocate_ was issued in the latter part of 1824, by
William Lyon McKenzie.

We have a copy of the _Upper Canada Herald_ before us, dated June 27,
1832, vol. xiv. which gives us the period at which it was started.

_Barker’s Canadian Magazine_, published at Kingston, by Edward John
Barker, M. D., commenced May, 1846.

——The _Victoria Magazine_, a monthly periodical, was issued first in
September, 1841, by Joseph Wilson, of Belleville, formerly of the
Hallowell _Free Press_. Like many a one subsequently commenced, the
_Magazine_ had but a brief existence. It continued just one year.

The editors were Sheriff Moodie, and his accomplished wife, whose
writings have gained for her a European reputation of no ordinary
standing. Mrs. Moodie may be regarded as the pioneer of Canadian
literature, and, as a long standing inhabitant of the Bay, she claims a
brief notice in these pages, to give which affords the writer but a
meagre opportunity to express his own high estimation of, and gratitude
to a personal friend, whose kind words of encouragement has so
frequently been a stimulus to action, when his energies flagged in this
undertaking.

Morgan, in his _Bibliotheca Canadensis_, a most useful compilation,
says: Mrs. Moodie is “well known in Canada and Great Britain for her
works, and as an extensive contributor to the periodical literature of
both countries. Born at Bungay, County of Suffolk, England, sixth
December, 1803. She is a member of the talented Strickland family, of
Beydon Hall, in the above County; four of her sisters, Elizabeth, Agnes,
(the best known), Jane, and Mrs. Trail, have each contributed to the
literature of the day. Both Mrs. Moodie and her sisters were educated by
their father, who is represented to have been a gentleman of education,
refined taste, and some wealth. Mrs. M. was only in her thirteenth year,
when her father died. As early as her fifteenth year, she began to write
for the press generally, for annuals and for periodicals, contributing
short poems and tales for children. About 1820, she produced her first
work of any pretension—a juvenile tale, which was well received by the
public and the press. In the following year she married Mr. Moodie, a
half-pay officer from the 21st Fusileers, and, in 1832, emigrated with
her husband, to Canada. They bought a farm near Port Hope, which,
however, they only held for a short time, removing to the back woods,
ten miles north of Peterborough, where they settled. There they remained
for a period of eight years, experiencing all the trials, mishaps and
troubles incident to early settlers, and which are so graphically
narrated and depicted by Mrs. M. in her “_Roughing it in the Bush_.” In
1839, Mr. Moodie was appointed Sheriff of Hastings, (an office from
which he retired a few years since,) and, with his wife, took up his
residence at Belleville, where they have since lived. During the
existence of the _Literary Garland_, (Montreal), Mrs. M. was the
principal contributor of fiction to its pages. For some years she edited
the _Victoria Magazine_, (Belleville). Her contributions to these and
other annuals, magazines, and newspapers, would fill many volumes.”

The work for which Mrs. Moodie became more especially famous, was
“_Roughing it in the Bush_;” but other volumes are exceedingly
interesting, as “_Flora Lindsay_,” “_Mark Hurdlestone_,” “_Geoffry
Moreton_,” or the “_Faithless Guardian_,” and “_Life in the Clearings_.”

“John Wedderburn Dunbar Moodie, formerly Lieutenant in the 21st Reg. of
Fusileers,” saw action in Holland, where he was wounded; he was a writer
for the _United Service Journal_, _Literary Garland_, (Montreal), and
author of “_Ten Years in Africa_,” and “_Scenes and Adventures as a
Soldier and Settler, during half a Century_.”

The _Victoria Magazine_ was succeeded by the _Eclectic Magazine_, Joseph
Wilson being Editor and Proprietor. This monthly was also continued only
one year. Mr. Wilson now commenced a “family paper called _Wilson’s
Experiment_,” and soon after, in connection with it, _Wilson’s Canada
Casket_. These were issued alternately every two weeks, and were
continued for two years. They had a large circulation, as Mr. Wilson
avers, at the last about 6,000. The subscribers were not only in Canada,
but in the Lower Provinces. The journals were discontinued, not because
they did not pay; but in consequence of embarrassment from other causes.

The _Bee_ was the first newspaper published in Napanee, in 1851, by the
Rev. G. D. Greenleaf, Editor and Proprietor. It was a small sheet, and
semi-political, at one dollar per year. It was printed on a press of the
owner’s own construction, and continued two years, when it was succeeded
by the _Emporium_, published by the same person, at the same office. It
was somewhat larger than the _Bee_, and was two dollars a year. Its
existence extended but little over a year.

The _Standard_ was the third journal established at Napanee, 1853, by a
joint-stock company. It was in the interest of the Conservatives. Its
first editor was Dr. McLean, formerly of Kingston. Subsequently, the
paper came under the management of Alexander Campbell, Esq., and
continued for a few years. It then passed into the hands of Mr. A.
Henry. It is still published by Henry and Brother.

The next paper, after the _Standard_, to be issued was the _Reformer_,
by Carman and Dunham. There have subsequently been published the _North
American_, _The Ledger_, and the _Weekly Express_. Besides the above,
there was published, in 1854, continuing for two years, _The Christian
Casket_, by E. A Dunham.

Trenton first possessed a newspaper in 1854. It was published and edited
by Alexander Begg, and its name was the _Trenton Advocate_. The first
number was issued March 4, 1854. About a year, afterward, the paper
changed owners, and took the name of _British Ensign_. It was continued
about two years longer.

We have before us several copies of _The Canadian Gem_ and _Family
Visitor_, published at Cobourg; and edited by Joseph H. Leonard, 1848.
It is very readable, and exhibits no little enterprise. Also, we have
_The Maple Leaf_; published at Montreal by R. W. Loy, 1853. Mr. Loy died
not long after its issue. This also contains many interesting articles
of a local and general nature.

In 1853, 158 papers are mentioned in the _Canada Directory_, of which,
114 are issued in Upper Canada. At the present time the number has much
increased. Respecting the newspapers of Canada, Mr. Buckingham, who
visited Canada in 1840, says that they are generally superior to those
of the Provincial towns of the United States.

The following cannot fail to be of interest:

A Boston paper says, “Died—In the early part of the year 1813, Wm.
Berczy, Esq., aged 68; a distinguished inhabitant of the Province of
Upper Canada, and highly respected for his literary acquirements. In the
decease of this gentleman, society must sustain an irreparable loss, and
the republic of letters will have cause to mourn the death of a man,
eminent for genius and talent.”

CANADIAN IDIOMS.—The loyalist settlers of Upper Canada were mainly of
American birth, and those speaking English, differed in no respect in
their mode of speech from those who remained in the States. Even to this
day there is some resemblance between native Upper Canadians and the
Americans of the Midland States; though there is not, to any extent, a
likeness to the Yankee of, the New England States. While the Yankee, and
to some extent, the whole of the American people have steadily diverged
from the pure English, both with respect to accent and idiom, as well as
in the meaning attached to certain words; in Canada this tendency has
been arrested by the presence of English gentlemen, often half-pay
officers, and their families, by the officers of the Army and Navy, and
as well by the school teachers, high and low, which were often from the
old country. The accent of Canadians, and their idioms to-day, are to a
certain extent peculiar, _sui generis_, which peculiarity is constantly
increasing, even as the British American is assuming in appearance a
distinct characteristic. Taking all classes of Canadians, it may be said
that for a people far removed from the source of pure English, that is
the Court, they have a very correct mode of speaking, the criticisms of
English travelers to the contrary, notwithstanding. As education becomes
more diffused among the masses there will ensue a very decided
improvement in the mode of speaking among Canadians. Listening to the
children at any school, composed of the children of Englishmen,
Scotchmen, Irishmen, Americans, and even of Germans, it is impossible to
detect any marked difference in their accent, or way of expressing
themselves.

SUPERSTITION.—Although a few of the settlers had books to read, many had
none. And as there were no school teachers very many children grew up
without being able to read, or at most very little, and entirely unable
to write, unless it might be their name. The writer has been struck with
the difference between the composition and penmanship of many of the
settlers and that of their immediate children, the former being good,
the latter bad; while the parent could write a bold signature, and
express himself in writing a letter, intelligibly, the offspring either
could do nothing of the kind, or else made a very poor attempt. The
result of this was, that the mind, starved for want of mental food of a
wholesome nature, did not become inactive, but sought other kinds of
pabulum. They derived a certain amount of information from the legendary
tales told and retold of former days of happiness and plenty. Excluded
from the world of literature, and secluded in a forest of eternal
silence, except the tones uttered by the voice of nature, sometimes
whispering in the gentle murmurs of the sighing wind, and sometimes
thundering forth in the loudest voice,—shut up with nature they listened
to her words, and not educated to understand her meaning, they undertook
to interpret her speech, and oftentimes superstition of the deepest kind
took possession of their minds. This prevailed perhaps more especially
among the Dutch. Belief in ghosts, or “spooks” was a common thing, and
before the bright and flickering light of many a hearth fire, during the
winter nights, were told “stories” which lost nothing in their relating.
And along the Bay were many old houses, once the homes of the settler
which it was declared, was occasionally visited by the spirit of the
builder, who returned to discharge some duty which rested heavily upon
him in the spirit world, or who desired to reveal the place of
concealment of some hoarded gold which had been so safely buried in some
cranny nook.

A company of neighbours spending the evening would take their turn in
telling of what they had seen or dreamed, or heard told; and at last
when the bright sparkling fire had sunk into subdued embers, the
consciousness of having to go home through the woods, or past a grave
yard, would arouse the talkers. Shuddering at the thought, with
imagination heightened by the conversation, they would set out on their
path. It was at such times that the spirit of some recently departed one
would be seen hovering over the grave, or floating away at the approach
of footsteps. Strange voices came from the midst of the darkness, and
unnatural lights flashed in the eyes of the midnight traveler. Should no
sound or sight present themselves on the way, there was still a chance
to experience much in dreams, when revelations of the gravest import
would be made, which only had to be repeated three nights in succession
to obtain the status of absolute certainty.

The traditions and recitals made known to the children were sometimes,
not alone exaggerated, but untrue. The old soldier, or loyalist in his
great hatred to the rebels, would sometimes unduly blacken the character
of the fathers of the American Republic; for instance, the writer has
heard it several times, told as a fact, that Washington was the
illegitimate son of King George.

By some means a belief obtained, that at a place called Devil’s Hill, at
the Indian Woods, was concealed in the earth, a quantity of money, and
parties used to actually go and dig for it. There was a huge rock here
which was supposed to cover the precious metal, and a “bee” was formed,
on one occasion to overturn it, but they found nothing to reward them
for their pains.




                             DIVISION VII.
             THE TERRITORY OF UPPER CANADA—THE BAY QUINTÉ.




                             CHAPTER XLII.

  CONTENTS—The Indians—Their origin—Pre-historic Canada—Indian relics—
    Original inhabitants—Les Iroquois du nord—Original names—Peninsula
    of Upper Canada—Champlain exploring—Ascends the Ottawa—His route
    to Lake Nippissing—To Lake Huron—French River—The country—Georgian
    Bay—Lake Simcoe—Down the Trent—A grand trip—Bay Quinté, and Lake
    Ontario discovered—War demonstration—Wintering at the Bay—A
    contrast—Roundabout way—Erroneous impressions.


       CHAMPLAIN’S DISCOVERY OF THE BAY QUINTÉ, AND LAKE ONTARIO.

In this work but brief reference can be made to the general history of
the Indians. Perhaps it is hardly necessary to explain that the term
Indian, applied to the aborigines of America, took its origin from the
fact, that when the New World was discovered it was supposed to be a
part of the Indias (East Indias), the riches of which had led the
intrepid navigator to seek a more direct route thereto. And consequently
the natives were called Indians.

It does not lie within the scope of this work to speak of the several
theories which have been given with respect to the origin of the
natives, nor to advance any particular view. It is sufficient to remark
that the character of the various tribes, their features, their
traditions, and customs, all indicate most unmistakably that Asia was
the original birthplace of the aborigines of America. Of course,
reference is made only to those Indians whose representatives occupied
the continent when discovered by Columbus, and not to those who had in
some long past day held possession, who have left here and there
indications of their rude character, and primitive mode of life, and who
were swept away by the more powerful and warlike invaders—the
predecessors of the aborigines of whom we now write.

In our researches we have collected a good many Indian relics, of the
origin of which we have no record, and can only guess, while science
strives to explain. We offer no views of our own, but give the following
upon


                          PRE-HISTORIC CANADA.

From the Manchester _Guardian_. “At a meeting of the Manchester
Anthropological society, on Monday, Mr. Plant made a communication upon
some curious relics which he exhibited, of a race of pre-historic men,
for which he was indebted to Mr. J. S. Wilson, of Perrytown, Canada
West. These objects were obtained from the soil of the lands which have
been cleared of the forests and brought into cultivation. It is only in
the spring, when the snow has disappeared, that these objects are found,
the winter snow acting like a riddle to the soil, and bringing to the
surface the pebbles and broken pieces of pottery, flint, weapons, &c.
The most interesting features connected with these relics is, that the
localities where they are so frequently found are situated on the high
level ground of ancient terraces, or beach lines, which may be traced at
about 600 ft. above the sea level, all around the great Canadian lakes,
or, in fact, all around the high lands of the River St. Lawrence basin.
There are three terraces at descending levels to the present shores of
the great lakes. The highest terrace is the most ancient, and the
evidences connected with this terrace all seem to point to the
conclusion that it belongs to an age very remote, when the area now
occupied by the great fresh-water lakes was filled by an inland bay,
connected by a wide strait with the Atlantic, and was subject to the
action of glacier ice from the land, as well as flows of icebergs from
the current flowing from the north-east. The high terraces are,
therefore, of marine origin, and the pre-historic objects found in them
are indicative of a race of men whose habits were consistent with the
physical features of the land and sea; a race of hardy fishers, living
upon the whale, the walrus, the shark, and marine sources of food,
together with the reindeer and Arctic animals. Since this remote time,
the whole of the land about the lakes has risen from 600 to 1,000 feet
above the sea, slowly and evenly through a great length of time, pausing
twice sufficiently long to form two lower terraces; and at present is
forming a fourth on the shore lines of the lakes. The pre-historic
objects consist of great quantities of earthenware of rude make, quartz
arrow heads, black stone adzes and hatchets, sharp splinters of bone
worked to a point, teeth drilled and bone needles, and bowls and stems
of smoking pipes about six inches long. These last are singular and most
interesting objects, and are solely confined to the North American
continent, proving that the habit of smoking some narcotic plant has
been indulged in by mankind from the most remote ages to which the
geologist assigns the relics of pre-historic man, the age which
immediately succeeded the glacial period.”

All around the bay, as well as in other parts of Canada, may be found
here and there indications of an extinct people whose sepulchral remains
can be traced. Along the western portion particularly, are faint traces
of mounds or tumuli which have been found to contain not only human
remains; but objects of curiosity. For a more particular account of
these the reader is referred to an interesting paper in the _Canadian
Journal_ for September 1860, by T. C. Wallbridge, Esq., of Belleville.


                    THE ABORIGINES OF UPPER CANADA.

     “Dark as the frost-nipped leaves that strew the ground,
     The Indian hunter here his shelter found;
     Here cut his bow, and shaped his arrows true,
     Here built his wigwam and his bark canoe,
     Speared the quick salmon leaping up the fall,
     And slew the deer without the rifle ball;
     Here his young squaw her cradling tree would choose,
     Singing her chant to hush her swart pappoose;
     Here stain her quills, and string her trinkets rude,
     And weave her warrior’s wampum in the wood.

                                                         BRAINARD.”

For many long years, perhaps centuries, before the white man saw the
pleasant shores of the Bay, the Indian war-whoop was often heard, and
the war dance performed along its borders. We know but little of those
primal days. We cannot estimate the cruelties of barbaric warfare,
natural to the aborigines, which have been enacted. We cannot count up
the number of Indian braves who have moved upon its wood-begirded
waters, as conquerors, or as captives, nor the woman and children
carried away from their kindred—nor yet the total of the bleeding scalps
which have hung at the girdle of the returning warriors, as they pursued
the devious trail.

Early French travelers, generally Jesuits, have marked roughly the
territory, which embraces in its area, the land extending from the
Ottawa westward to Lake Huron, and from the St. Lawrence and Lake
Ontario, northward to the French River, and Lake Nippissing. This was
named the country of _Les Iroquois du Nord_, and, according to a map in
the Imperial French Library, the land north of Bay Quinté, was called in
1656, _Tout-hatar_, and the land west to Lake Huron, was named
_Conchradum_. There were, at the same time indicated at the eastern
borders, the “antient Hurons” and the “Outtawas” at the west, occupying
the peninsula of Upper Canada, the _Neutre Nation de truite_, and at the
mouth of the French river, _Mississagues_. It would seem at first, that
the inhabitants were a branch of the Iroquois, or Six Nation Indians.
But it may be that they had given to them the name Iroquois from their
peculiar mode of expression, like the Indian to the south of the lake;—
although not immediately connected. According to a map, examined by the
writer, in the Imperial library at Paris, all the land between the
Ottawa and Lake Huron was the Algonquins. A map by Champlain calls the
land north of the Bay Quinté, _Lien force cerfs_. The northern Iroquois
was divided into several tribes, each of which had a distinct name, and
lived in considerable communities, here and there. The old maps are
marked with sites of Indian villages, where, no doubt, they lived a
greater portion of their time; probably the families remained most of
the time, and also the males, except when away up the rivers to the
north, upon hunting expeditions. Among these tribes and villages was the
_Kentes_. Their village was situated at the east of Hay Bay, according
to some maps; according to others, it was placed upon the south shore of
Prince Edward, west of West Lake. Another tribe mentioned is
_Gaungouts_. And along the north shore of the Mohawk Bay near Napanee,
is marked an Indian village called _Gaunaroute_. Upon another map the
village here is called _Gameydocs_. Just above the Carrying Place, near
the harbour of Presqu Isle, is another village called _Ganaroske_, and a
second one designated _Gonetoust_. Some of the maps here alluded to,
bear date as late as 1703, while others are much earlier.

The waters of the bay and the lake adjacent, were looked upon as
valuable for fishing, and the land as abundant in game. McMullen, in his
History of Canada, speaks thus of the bay region. Referring to the year
1692, he states, “the Aborigines and French ravaged the frontiers of
Massachusetts, and revenged upon its helpless borderers the injuries
suffered by the Canadians; detachments of troops swept the favorite
hunting grounds of the Iroquois along the beautiful Bay of Quinté; and
an expedition from Montreal did considerable injury to the Mohawks in
their own country.”

The peninsula of Upper Canada was called, in 1686, _Saquinan_—(Paris
documents). The “Neutre Nation” was exterminated by the Iroquois prior
to 1650.

It is an interesting fact that Champlain arrived at Lake Ontario, or
“fresh water sea,” as he called it, being the first European to gaze
upon its broad blue waters, by the way of the Bay of Quintè. This was in
1615. Prior to that he had penetrated by way of Sorel river, and the
lake which has been named after him, and explored some part of the
territory to the south of Ontario lake; but probably was not north of
the Mohigan mountains, at least he did not then discover Lake Ontario.
His principal object at this time was to create terror of the French
arms, on behalf of the Six Nation Indians.

It was after a return from France, with a commission granting him
extensive powers in the peltry traffic, that Champlain, with the view of
protecting that trade, erected a fort on the site of Montreal. This done
he directed his attention to the country lying unexplored to the north.
Aware of Hudson’s discovery in the north, of the bay now bearing his
name, he was led to hope that by following the river Ottawa, of which
the Hurons gave him some information, to its upper waters, he would be
brought into close proximity if not actually to the bay, explored by
Hudson. He accordingly set out accompanied by one or more of the four
Recollet missionaries he had brought with him from France, and a
considerable force of Hurons, with the view of ascending the Ottawa to
its source. How far he penetrated into that rugged region, or how long a
time he expended, does not appear. But it would seem that failing in his
attempted discovery, he retraced his steps down the Upper Ottawa, until
he reached the mouth of the Mattawan river, which empties into the
Ottawa, and rises in the high lands to the west, approaching Lake
Nippissing. As nearly as can be learned, Champlain was here joined by
more warriors, who persuaded him to follow them and assist in a proposed
attack upon the Iroquois nation to the south of Lake Ontario. His course
was up the Mattawan river, through _la petite rivière_ to _lac du
Toulon_. Thence across to Trout Lake, Upper Trout Lake, and traversing
the high lands, from which the waters flow in opposite directions; some
into the valley of the Ottawa, and others towards the west, he descended
the river _La Vase_ into Lake Nippissing. Crossing this lake, he
descended the French river into the Georgian Bay. In passing it may be
observed that all the names, some of which are in French, and some in
English, have a special meaning, and were applied, at least some of
them, by the Indians. The Ottawa is so called not from the fact that the
territory through which it runs was the home of the Ottawa tribe, but,
because it was by its waters that they came to visit the French. The
Ottawa river, that is, the river by which the Ottawas came. On the other
hand the French river, which discharges into the Georgian Bay, was so
called by the Indians, because it was the river by which the French came
to their western domain. The length of French river is about 61 miles,
and is a chain of lakes, connected by short rapids. Lake Nippissing is
69 feet above Lake Huron.

It is now 253 years since this voyage of discovery was made by
Champlain, guided by the Indians. The appearance then presented to the
intrepid navigator must have been exceedingly wild and beautiful, as he
passed along the unknown way. Now swiftly gliding in the birch canoe
upon the glassy waters of a lake, now dancing down the rapids, among
rugged rocks, and green-clad islands; and anon, threading the devious
path of a _portage_, beneath the lofty arches of the wilderness, making
the first European footprints upon the virgin soil.

Deputy Surveyor-General Collins, writing to Lord Dorchester, by his
command, in 1788, speaking of the French river says: “The entrance is
composed of a considerable number of small islands and channels,” the
westernmost is the best navigable—about 250 feet wide, and has from two
to three fathoms depth of water. It is narrower a little way up, and at
about half a league from the entrance becomes exceedingly intricate, on
account of the small islands and channels, which are here so numerous in
every direction, and so much resembling each other in appearance, as to
make it extremely difficult without a guide to find the true navigable
channel, which, although deep in some places, is so narrow there is
scarce room for two canoes to pass each other. The bank in these
situations, is a steep rock, almost perpendicular, and there are very
strong currents or rapids. The term Souters, sometimes given to the
Missisauga Indians by the French, means to jump up and down, in
reference to their living upon this river, and being expert in
navigating its channels. “The country adjoining to, and near this,
(river) is a rocky desert, nothing growing but small scrubby bushes and
pine trees not thirty feet high—the same dreary prospect continues, I am
informed, all the way up to Lake Nippissing, which is recorded
twenty-five leagues.” He states that the coast from the mouth of the
river eastward is dangerous, for even canoes, although they may find
shelter among the islands which lie along most of the coast. It is
equally rocky and barren. Such was the nature of the way by which
Champlain was led.

He now directed his course southward along the wild and irregular shore
of the Georgian Bay, through the myriad islands that give beauty to that
coast. Arrived at the mouth of the Severn river, he ascended that
devious stream, and entered Sparrow Lake. Thence he crossed to Lake
_Couchiching_, which, at its southern extremity approaches to Lake
Simcoe. Crossing the portage to this Lake, he ascended the River Talbot,
in a north-east direction, and by frequent portages reached Balsam Lake.
Then, through Cameron Lake, past Fenelon Falls, and into Sturgeon Lake.
So on, by Pigeon Lake, Buck Hare Lake, Deer Lake, into Salmon Trout
Lake. Turning south, by Clear Lake, he descended the Otanabee, or
_Pamoduscoteong_, past the present site of Peterborough, and entered
Rice Lake. Again turning east, he entered the head waters of the River
Trent. Around by Heely’s Falls, down by Campbellford, then, by
Chisholm’s Rapids, he arrived at the head of the Bay of Quinté, sometime
in July, 1615.

Champlain took this route from the Ottawa, which had long before been
traveled by the Indians, at the request of the Indian warriors who
accompanied him, to make an attack upon their bitter enemy the Iroquois.

At the present day it would be a grand trip to make, by the way pursued
by Champlain, when he visited the Bay region. But how wonderfully
magnificent must it all have been to the bold, but educated French
explorer of the primeval forest.

Champlain crossed the Lake to a point not far from Oswego. Whether he
passed through the upper, or lower gap to the opposite side of the Lake,
and coasted the south shore; or whether he ascended Picton Bay and
crossed the Indian Carrying-place to East Lake, and thence into Ontario,
may be questioned. But in order to make an unexpected attack upon the
enemy, he had need to conceal his advance; hence it is reasonable to
suppose he would take the nearer route by Picton Bay, although it would
involve the crossing of the portage. This could scarcely be regarded as
a serious difficulty, as he had already passed many in the devious route
by the Ottawa.

Strange enough, that a European should discover Lake Ontario by entering
the head waters of the Trent River, and sailing through the Bay of
Quinté. Strange enough that a warlike demonstration should be made by
this route, against a foe living upon the south shore of the Lake.

Champlain, notwithstanding his caution, found his Indian foes prepared
to receive him, having well entrenched themselves, and he suffered a
serious defeat, being glad to secure a safe retreat in the Bay of Quinté
region, probably Prince Edward, after having himself received two
wounds.

Failing in his efforts to obtain a guide to conduct him down the St.
Lawrence, to his fort at Montreal, Champlain was compelled to spend the
winter months, which were by this time approaching, in the vicinity of
the Bay of Quinté. Probably six or nine months were passed by him upon
the northern shores. He did not remain all the time at the Bay, as it is
stated he visited the neighbouring Indian nations, especially the
neutral nation which occupied the peninsula between Lakes Erie and
Huron, and the head of Ontario. We can readily imagine the wide
difference between a long winter thus spent in 1615–16, mid the wild
scenes of aboriginal life by the ice-locked waters, and one spent in
this latter part of the 19th century, with the highly cultivated land,
and advanced civilization. Then, the trees of the forest, in one
unbroken denseness, was the sole home of the savage, and wild beast, and
waved in solemn mournfulness over the wintry landscape; while few other
than nature’s sounds disturbed the stillness of the wilderness. Now, the
dark forest has disappeared and human habitations of comfort and luxury
thickly stud the land. The wild beasts, as well as the original owners
of the territory, have almost disappeared. The snow of the ice-covered
bays and streams no longer remain unbroken by human foot. Sleigh roads
thickly intersect the surface, and joyous shouts of the skater break
upon the light pure air, while the gingle of sleigh bells indicate the
overflowing stream of travelers. The strings of telegraphs sigh in the
wind, instead of the tall trees’ bough. The iron horse snorts along
through the snow hills, instead of the beast from his lair. Towns and
cities rest in peaceful security, where there were thick jungles of
cedar and furs.

It was by this roundabout way that the Bay of Quinté was discovered; and
it was fifty years later when DeCourcelles, pursuing the Iroquois from
the Lower St. Lawrence ascended for the first time the river, direct
from Montreal to Lake Ontario. But during this time missionaries had
been at work among the Indians, upon the northern shores of the Lake—
(See early Missionaries).

The impressions made upon the minds of these first explorers, respecting
the Bay, seem to have been very erroneous; at least they have left maps
not only rude, but incorrect. Thus, we find upon an old map intended to
represent Lake Ontario and the Bay, with the country north of the Lake,
the Bay is made to extend northward, at right angles with the Lake, for
some distance, and then, turning westward somewhat, its extremity is
brought very near to another bay, which empties into Georgian Bay.




                             CHAPTER XLIII.

  CONTENTS—Name—Letter, Daily News—“Omega” Lines—The writer—
    Conjectures—Five Bays—Indian origin—Kentes—Villages—_Les Couis_—
    Modes of spelling—Canty—The occupants, 1783—Mississaugas—Origin—
    With the Iroquois—The _Souter_—Mississaugas, dark—At Kingston—Bay
    Quinté—Land bought—Reserves—Claim upon the islands—Wappoose
    Island—Indian agent—Indians hunting—Up the Sagonaska—Making sugar—
    Peaceable—To Kingston for presents.


  THE NAME OF BAY QUINTÉ—THE ABORIGINAL INHABITANTS OF UPPER CANADA IN
                                 1783.

There appeared in the “Daily News” of Kingston, October 20, 1856, the
following letter and verses:

  “SIR,—I send you a few lines in connection with what I believe to be
  an historical fact, though not generally known, even in the vicinity
  of the bay. When the French first took possession of Canada, or
  shortly after, they established posts at Frontenac, Niagara and
  Detroit.

  In the fall following their establishment, the men under Col.
  Quinté, who commanded at Niagara, were driven out by the Indians,
  and pursued and harassed several days, when following the lake shore
  to the west of the bay, they took the south shore of the bay and got
  to the reach. The snow was falling and ice making on the bay,
  without sufficient strength to carry them; when, nearly starved and
  exhausted, they started back two or three miles to what is known as
  Stickney’s Hill, where (an extremely cold night coming on) they
  nearly all perished, including Quinté himself. Only two of the party
  (the ice having become strong) reached Frontenac. Hence the name of
  the bay.”—(Signed,)—“Omega.”

This note was accompanied with the following lines:

                                QUINTÉ.

           On the Bay of Quinté gliding,
           O’er its smooth and tranquil breast,
           Whilst the sun is fast declining
           To its waters in the west;
           “And the gorgeous leaves of autumn,
           In their varied gold and green,
           Adds fresh glory to such beauty
           As the eye hath seldom seen.
           Yet this Bay had once its terrors,
           Ere the red men were subdued,
           And the scene that’s now so lovely,
           Was terrific, wild and rude,
           When the gallant Quinté flying
           From the savage of the west,
           On the cheerless hills lay dying,
           With fierce cold and hunger pressed:
           And his bones were left unburied,
           But his name won’t pass away,
           While there’s beauty on thy hill-side,
           Or thy waters gently play.”

                                     “STEAMER BAY OF QUINTÉ.”

Mr. T. C. Wallbridge, to whom we are indebted for the foregoing, informs
us that upon the day this was written, a learned judge (Robinson) now
dead, was a passenger from Belleville to Kingston, and the inference was
that _he_ penned the lines, which must have been based upon what he
considered facts. The same tradition has been received also, from other
sources, and many living upon the bay, regard it as true. But it becomes
our duty to question the matter. In the first place unfortunately, for
the plausibility of the statement, the name of no such French officer
can be found.

The nearest approach to the name of Quinté, held by any Frenchman known,
was that of Prince de Conti. This person was a particular friend of
Cavalier de la Salle, to whom was ceded the Seignory of Cataraqui.
“Chevalier de Tonti, went with him, proposing to share his fortunes,” in
western explorations. Now La Salle, named one of the islands near
Cataraqui, (Amherst,) after this officer, and even yet may be found
living, persons who call that island, “Isle Tanta.” Well, it might
reasonably be supposed that La Salle would wish to do honor to his
friend the Prince de Conti, and therefore named the bay after him. From
Conti, it might gradually change to Canta, or Quinté. Now, however
probable this may seem, it cannot be regarded as the origin of the name.

Again, it has been supposed to be derived from the Latin Quintanus, or
Quinta,—the _fifth_ place,—having reference to five bays, namely, the
Lower Bay, Picton Bay, Hay Bay, the Reach, and Upper Bay; or, as some
aver, it refers to five Indian stations, formerly existing in the
vicinity of the bay. But, however much may be advanced in support of the
plausibility of these theories, we think a more certain origin is
perfectly intelligible.

The word Quinté, as at present spelled and pronounced, when rightly
done, is undoubtedly a French one, being one of the few remaining
memorials of French possession; but its origin can be distinctly traced
to an Indian source.

We have seen elsewhere that the country lying north of Lake Ontario was
called the “Country of the Northern Iroquois.” To the south of the lake
was the Iroquois country proper. Among the several nations which
composed the Iroquois Confederation, was the Seneques, or commonly
called Seneca. Wentworth Greenhalgh in the “London Documents,” writing
of a journey in May, 1677, from Albany to the Indians, westward, says
“the Seneques have four towns, viz: Canagora, Tiotohalton, Canoenada,”
(how like Canada), “and Keint-he—which contained about 24 houses, and
was well furnished with corn.” In connection with this we find a
statement made in the documentary History of New York, that some of the
tribes belonging to the Iroquois proper, separated from them, and
removed to the north of the lake. Now the Indian term, “Keint-he,” be it
remembered, was written by an English explorer, and of course was
spelled in accordance with the pronunciations of the Indians. Every one
knows that the letters of the alphabet have a different sound in the
French language. If therefore, a French writer were to write the English
term Keint-he, it is not unlikely he would spell it Kanta or Kente.
Examining the old French maps, made by some of the early travelers
through Canada, but bearing date subsequent to 1677, we find marked with
distinctness, an Indian village, sometimes in one place, sometimes
another, by the name of Kente. This may be seen on quite a number of
different maps, which we have examined in various libraries in Canada,
and in the Imperial Library in Paris. It is not always spelled Kente,
sometimes it is Kante, and upon one it is Kenti, and upon a map in the
Imperial Library, Paris, it is Kento. This Indian village has its
location upon most of the maps, at the eastern extremity of Hay Bay; but
upon a few it is placed at the south shore of the peninsula of Prince
Edward; upon one map it is put at South Bay; while in another Wappoose
island, is called Isle de Quinté. Hence it is inferred, that a branch of
the Seneca tribe separated from the main body, and removed to the north
of the lake, and settled probably first at South Bay, and afterward, or
at certain seasons visited at Hay Bay, to which, in time they gave their
name—that of Kente, according to the pronunciation of the French. It was
an easy matter to convert Kente into Quinté. In other words, we find
that _K_ and _Qu_ are used indifferently among early writers of New
France; for instance, Quebec is spelled by early writers, Kebec. The
origin of the word Quinté seems to be in this way perfectly clear.

The Indian village of Kente was situated at the eastern extremity of Hay
Bay, and it seems plain that this was regarded as the head of the bay by
the French, and the waters leading to the village, was designated the
Bay Kente, or the Bay to the Kentes. The waters above the entrance to
Hay Bay were looked upon rather as the mouth of the River Trent; and as
quite another bay, to which was given a different name. This was a water
way from Lake Ontario to Lake Huron. Travelers passing along would at
times receive imperfect ideas respecting the names of the several bays
and lakes. Again, the early French explorers, and the Jesuits, in their
maps would frequently give the names, derived from the Indians, in
Latin, while later French travelers gave the names in French. The
consequence was that several different names were at times bestowed upon
the waters stretching between Lakes Huron and Ontario.

One of the old French maps, and perhaps, it may have been prepared
before the Kentes had settled upon its shores, gives to the bay the name
“Bayedes Couis,” while several islands between the south shore of Lake
Ontario, and the north, are called “_au des Couis_,” as if indicating a
line of travel. There is one larger island, called _Les Couis_.

The waters west of the Long Reach are, in several maps which have been
examined, named _Lac St. Lion_, and _Lionel_. But whether this name was
limited to the uppers waters of the bay, or applied to the Trent, with
Rice Lake, is doubtful, inasmuch as the maps represent the River Trent
as being very wide and seemingly navigable up to almost the river’s
source. Again, the name of _Quinto_ and _Quintio_ are found upon a few
maps, and are applied to Rice Lake. A map in the Imperial library, dated
1777, gives to Rice Lake, Quinto, and close by is the village of
_Tonnaonto_; and the Bay Quinté proper, is called Lake _Tento_. Another
map names it _Kentsio_. There is also a map which gives to Simcoe Lake,
the name of _Œntarion_ Lake, instead of Lake Taronto. From these
varieties of names, we discover an indistinct connection between the
words Kente and Toronto. Their origin and meaning it is impossible to
trace. Perhaps they were names used only for a short time. It is worthy
of remark, that upon an ancient map examined in the Imperial library, we
find Lake Erie called _Lac. Conty_.

The word Quinté is in one or two places spelled Quintee, and also
Quintie. The most common mode of pronunciation was that used by the
loyalists. They spelled it generally Canty, or Kenty. Such they heard it
called by the French and Indians when they came here; and, unacquainted
with the French mode of spelling, they naturally rendered it according
to the English idea; and we have found it in letters written, by the
first settlers, mostly always spelled “Canty,” or “Cante,” and
occasionally “Canta.” The last of these approaches the nearest to the
correct way of pronouncing the name; and it is a cause for regret that
some years ago there arose the belief that it ought to be called
“Quinty.” We would request the inhabitants of the bay, to return to the
old fashioned, and correct pronunciation.

The settlement upon the bay was sometimes identified with Cataraqui;
being known by the refugees, as well as by those who stayed in the
States, only by that name. Indeed, it may be said that all of Upper
Canada was, for a few years, designated by that name; the settlements at
Detroit and upon the Niagara, contiguous to the fort, being regarded as
merely military stations. For many years the name Canada, was limited to
the lower Provinces. After a few years the settlement along the bay came
to be generally called, both by the settlers, and those who knew them
abroad as that of the Bay “Canty.” The writer has in his possession a
letter dated from one of the townships upon the bay, in which reference
is made to Canada as a place quite distant and distinct from the British
settlements.

Mr. Ferguson, in a letter dated at Sidney, 23rd July, 1791, to a person
at Kingston, says, “I’ll send you a memorandum of what you’ll want from
Canada,” and he further speaks about taking an Indian to Canada. By this
we learn that the new townships were regarded as quite apart from
Canada.

Before proceeding to speak of the appearance of the bay, a space must be
given to speak more particularly of those Aborigines who occupied the
territory of the bay, and Upper Canada generally, at the time of the
revolutionary war, and from whom the British Government purchased the
land to bestow upon the U. E. Loyalists, namely, the Mississaugas.

The meaning of the word Mississauga has reference to “many outlets,” or
a place of settlement by the “fork of a stream.” The first notice we
have found of this name is upon a map in the Imperial library, dated
1620. It is applied to a lake,—_L’Missauga_, or _Buade_. The location is
not far from the source of the Mississippi River, and there is a small
stream represented as running from this lake to empty into the
Mississippi, the lake is doubtless the Itasca Lake in Minnesota. The
Indians, then inhabiting that region, was the “Eastern Sioux.” There is
no doubt some identity as to origin and meaning, between Mississippi and
Mississauga. It will be remembered, we have in the north of Upper Canada
a River Mississippi as well as River Mississauga. The Mississauga
Indians first came into notice about the middle of last century, some
time before the rebellion. They were then living east of the Georgian
Bay upon the lake and the river, both of which have derived names from
this tribe. Capt. Anderson thinks they took the name from living by this
river, which has _many outlets_. It may be regarded as a question
whether the river gave a name to the tribe, or the tribe a name to the
river.

The Mississaugas have been more generally regarded as a branch of the
Otchipewas. Father Charlevoix says, they are a branch of the Algonquins.

Towards the end of the seventeenth century, the Iroquois had quite
overrun the territory formerly designated by the French “the country of
the Northern Iroquois,” and now constituting Upper Canada. As the Six
Nations retired to their territory upon the south of Lake Ontario, the
Chippewas, or Otchwas and the Mississaugas descended to the north shore
of Ontario, the St. Lawrence, and around Bay Quinté. The exact time at
which these tribes obtained possession of the land around the Bay, and
its Islands, and other parts of Canada, is uncertain. But, long before
the settlement of Upper Canada, they were the acknowledged owners of the
soil, and Great Britain purchased from them the right of ownership. The
first record we have of surrender of land, was by the Chippewas, in
1781, to Gov. St. Clair. The Mississaugas seem to have been a neutral
nation, at least, they never appear to have taken any part in the wars
between the French and English. But we find that at a great assembly of
chiefs and warriors, at Albany, in August 17, 1746, the chief speaker of
the Six Nations, informed the English Commissioners that they had taken
the Mississaugas as a seventh nation. There certainly seems to have been
a very friendly relationship between the Iroquois and Mississaugas.

The Mississaugas were divided into several tribes, or rather, were
divided into several villages, which were scattered all along the St.
Lawrence, from the river Gananoque to the Bay Quinté, and Lake Ontario.
Thus, we find it recorded that “They were dispersed along Lake Ontario,
South of Frontenac.” This means Prince Edward particularly; but they
were as well settled in little villages at different points. Charlevoix
speaks of the Mississaugas as having a village at Niagara and upon Lake
St. Clair; most likely at the mouth of the Thames. They likewise had
villages along the upper waters of the Trent, and at the Don. Their
armorial bearing, or “totem” was the crane, crow, muskrat, and beaver.
The Kentes and Ganneyouses, two tribes of the Mississaugas, although
taking no part in the wars against the French, had practised upon them a
base act of treachery. In 1687, M. de Nonville, who was then Governor of
Canada, being at Frontenac, invited these two tribes to the fort to hold
a conference, and while there, seized forty or fifty men, with eighty
women and children, who were sent prisoners to France.

The French called the Mississauga, while living in the west, the
_Souter_, or Jumpers, because of the numerous rapids in the river
Mississauga down which their canoes were wont to _jump_.

The Mississaugas are of a darker hue than any other tribe in the
northern part of America.

The uncertainty that attaches to the Mississaugas as to origin, and the
fact that they were not given to warfare; but seemed to be at peace with
all native tribes, causes us to think that possibly they may have sprung
from the dispersed “Neutral Nation.”

At the time of the settlement of Upper Canada, the Mississaugas seem to
have been the principal, if not the sole aboriginal occupants of the
land. There are a great many “Mississauga Points” along the Bay, even at
the present day, and there was a greater number at the first, all of
which indicated the site of an Indian Village. At Cataraqui, just by the
old fort, and Tete du Pont, was a Mississauga point, so called from its
being the site of an Indian village. For years after the refugees
entered, the Indians continued to dwell here, at least during certain
periods of the year. The ground whereon a portion of the railway is
laid, used to be the scene of many an Indian dance, to the tune of other
music than the screaming of the iron horse, although no less
inharmonious. Peter Grass was wont to tell of these scenes, whereat
fearful orgies were witnessed by the lurid glare of their rude torches.
“At the time of the peace, in 1783, the Mississaugas ceded to the Crown
large tracts of land in the Johnstown, Midland and Newcastle
Districts.”—(Report).

The whole of the land contiguous to the Bay was purchased from the
“Mississaugas of the Bay Quinté.” The Indians, in relinquishing their
claims to the land, had guaranteed to them certain stipulated payments
yearly, in presents. We find it stated that “every man received two
blankets, cloth for one coat and one pair of trowsers, two shirts,
several small articles, besides a gun, ammunition, kettles, and other
things.”—(Playter).

“They claim, however, to have retained the following reserves.”
_Mississauga Point_, six miles below Belleville, about 1,200 acres;
_Grassy Point_—in Sophiasburgh—about 600 acres; _Cape Vesey_, in
Marysburgh, six miles east of Wappoose Island, 450 acres; _Bald Head_,
at Weller’s Bay, Ameliasburgh, 100 acres. “They also claim the islands
eastward from Presqu Isle to Gananoque, Nicholsons’ Island, in Lake
Ontario, 250 acres, near West Lake, Wellington; Weir’s or Tubb’s Island,
McDonald’s Island, and Sugar Island, in all about 1,000 acres. The
islands from Trenton to Kingston, and thence to Gananoque. Also, Green’s
Island, Timber Island, False Ducks, with others in Lake Ontario.”

The Commissioners considered that the Indians had claims to compensation
for their lands. As for the islands, the following extract from a letter
from Sir John Johnson to the Military Secretary, dated Lachine, 9th
October, 1797, will show their right to the Islands. “No islands were
ceded to the Crown but Grenadier Island and the Islands between it and
Kingston; two of which were granted to me, with the lands at Gananoque,
by the Governor and Council, together with the Island of Tontine above
Kingston, at the entrance of Lake Ontario.” This was Amherst Island.

The portion of the Mississaugas to which the land belonged, were those
subsequently known as the Bay Quinté, and the Kingston Indians. The same
that lived for a time at Grape Island, and who now reside at Alnwick.

“The acceptance of the surrender of the Indians in 1856, by the
Government, is an acknowledgment that these islands had never been ceded
by them.”

We thus learn that the Indian claims made to the islands and reserves in
Prince Edward, were allowed by the Government. But the Indians claimed
also that the treaty of cession, as they understood it when made, did
“not include, a portion of land bounded on the north by a line which
marks where the waters flow into the Ottawa River, and thence to the
south, some thirty miles, to the head waters of some streams which flow
towards the Lake, with a length of some sixty miles.” But this claim was
not considered as tenable.

According to the testimony of the first settlers, Wappoose Island, at
the opening of Smith’s Bay, was the abode of the Indian Chief; at least,
he came here yearly to receive the rates from the settlers who had
squatted upon it. The Indians went from this to Kingston, to get their
presents, which they obtained from one Lyons, who it is said, was the
first Indian agent there. He lived a quarter of a mile from the Market
Place.

From the several villages, placed by the water board, the Mississaugas
were accustomed to ascend up the rivers to the interior of the country
for game. Of the different rivers, the _Sagonaska_, (Moira), was,
perhaps, more generally selected. Stoco Lake was a favorite hunting and
fishing region, so named after a famous Mississauga Chief, Stougeong.
They had a lot reserved at the mouth of the river, and also lot number
four, in the second concession of Thurlow,—altogether 428 acres, which
was sold in 1816, for £107. They generally ascended about the last of
March, and returned the latter part of December. The writer can remember
to have seen their birch canoes, well laden, passing up and down the
river. Before the settlement of Belleville, they had their encampment on
the plains by the river’s mouth, but in later years they selected
grounds some way up the stream. At first the trading post, kept by
Chisholm, east of the river on the bay, was a point of attraction to
them.

The Indians would make sugar in the spring, and bring it to the settlers
in small basswood bags, which they would exchange for different
articles.

The Mississaugas being a race of naturally peaceful disposition, the
settlers never had any reason to fear them, even had the Canadian
Government, like the American, forgot to recognize the rights of the
natives, and owners of the soil. When under the influence of liquor they
might assume a mock heroic character to intimidate women and children,
in order to get something; but no attempt was ever made to disturb the
settlers along the Bay.

Every year the Indians would go to Kingston to receive their presents,
annually given by Government; sometimes there would be a hundred canoes.




                             CHAPTER XLIV.

  CONTENTS—Appearance—Mouth of Bay—Length—The Peninsula of Prince
    Edward—Width of Bay—Long Reach—Course of Bay—The High Shore—
    Division of bay—Eastern, central, western—Taking a trip—Through
    the Reach—A picture—A quiet spot—Lake on the mountain—A
    description—Montreal Gazette—Beautiful view—Rhine, Hudson—
    Contrast—Classic ground—A sketch—Birth place of celebrated
    Canadians—Hagerman—A leading spirit—Sir J. A. McDonald—
    Reflections—A log house—Relics of the past—Lesson of life—In the
    lower bay—Reminiscences—The front—Cradle of the province—Shore of
    Marysburgh—In the Western Bay—Cuthbertson—Up the bay—A battle
    ground—Devil’s Hill—Stickney’s Hill—In the depths—Prosperity—
    Geological supposition—Head of bay—The past.


                  BAY QUINTÉ CONTINUED—ITS APPEARANCE.

Perhaps there is no sheet of water in Upper Canada possessed of greater
natural beauty than this arm of Lake Ontario. At the eastern extremity
of Ontario, where it merges into the St. Lawrence, with its 1692
islands, on the northern shore, is found the entrance to the Bay Quinté.
In the early days of the settlement the name was limited to the waters
west of Indian Point, at the extremity of Prince Edward Peninsula. At
the present time the Bay Quinté is understood to include the sound
between Amherst Island, and Wolfe Island, upon the south, and the
mainland to the north. Our history is intended specially to embrace the
events connected with the settlement of this region.

The bay, commencing where the St. Lawrence begins its mighty flow,
extends in an irregular manner inland to a distance of some 70 miles,
its western extremity approaching to within a short distance of the
lake; and thus creating a lengthy peninsula, varying in breadth, the
greatest being about 25 miles; but with a neck so narrow, that the
peninsula is almost an island. The width of the bay varies, averaging
about a mile; but in some places it is two miles. Not only is the bay
irregular in its direction; but there are many indentations, some
several miles in length, which increase the irregularity, and add beauty
and variety to the scenery.

The course of the bay from the lower gap, is at first, for some 35 miles
almost due west. It then makes a turn toward the north, tending a little
to the east; while to the south is an indentation forming the Picton
Bay. This portion of the bay is called the Long Reach, and in its
length, presents some of the most striking beauties of the whole bay.
Extending to the south of the Reach is a lengthy indentation five or six
miles long, forming Hay Bay. At the northern extremity of the Long
Reach, is another small bay into which the Napanee River empties, called
the Mohawk Bay. Here the main body of water makes another turn, and
again, stretches almost directly westward, to the head of the bay. At a
distance of eight miles from Mohawk Bay there is a material widening of
the water. This portion is called Big Bay. The width does not appear so
great in consequence of the existence of islands, one of which, the Big
Island, stretches along the south shore even the whole length of Big
Bay. At the western limits of the wide part, the bay is very narrow by
reason of two opposite points, Mississauga and Ox Points, approaching to
within a half mile of each other. It is the opinion of geologists, that
the channel between these two points is of comparatively recent
formation, caused by a sinking of the land, and that the old channel was
through the marsh which divides Mississauga point from the peninsula.

The High Shore, which forms so prominent a feature in the scenery of the
bay, and the highest summit of which is at the Lake on the Mountain, is
a remarkable formation. Commencing in Marysburgh, near the East Lake by
the shore of Lake Ontario, it follows the course of Smith’s Bay
eastward, down the shore to what is called “the Rock,” thence across the
peninsula to the bay and so follows the course of the bay upward, around
Picton Bay, and thence along the eastern front of Sophiasburgh to a
point opposite Hay Bay. Here the hill leaves the bay shore and takes a
westerly course, and stretches away toward the lake, to the south of the
Carrying Place.

The Bay of Quinté may be divided into three portions—an eastern, a
western, and a central portion. The eastern and western portions, we
have seen, run east and west. The middle portion, connecting these two
together, is a reach of some twelve miles and mostly north and south,
from Picton Bay to Mohawk Bay. Undoubtedly the “Long Reach” possesses
the most attractive scenery, from the waters themselves, along the whole
sheet, from Kingston to the Carrying Place. To obtain some idea of the
scenery here presented, the reader is invited to accompany the writer,
in imagination, upon the steamer from Mill point, Tyendinaga, or the
Indian Woods, to Kingston. It is upon a bright morning in September.
Leaving the wharf at Mill Point, our boat makes a graceful sweep and
turns here prow down the bay toward the Reach. The power of the sun is
beginning to be felt, and the mist which has rested upon the waters is
gradually rising. After leaving the wharf a few minutes, an angle is
reached from which we can look up through the Big Bay almost to
Belleville, and, at the same time down the Reach, into Picton Bay. This
morning, on glancing upwards, a lovely view presents itself. The water
is like glass, from which the mist, here and there, is rising like a
sheet of the purest snow. Resting in the glassy bed are several
schooners, whose white sails and rigging are perfectly mirrored by the
unrippled surface of the water. Turning our gaze down through the Reach,
even a more beautiful sight is before us. From this stand point we seem
to be looking through, as it were, a telescope, at the distant shores of
Picton Bay. The sun’s rays have not yet reached the deep and narrow
channel, so that a thick covering of white mist hides the water,
excepting here and there, where its lovely blue may be seen, as it
reflects the azure sky. A vessel with snowy sails, seems to be resting
against the high shore, while its hull is half enshrouded in the fog. To
the right, over a point of low land, may be seen the top mast of another
vessel, which, in an indentation of the bay, is as if left upon the dry
land by a retiring flood. It has always seemed to the writer that this
is the most delightful and picturesque spot upon the bay, and he has
endeavored, in but an imperfect way, to draw to it the attention of
tourists, who may desire to see the more enchanting scenes connected
with the bay. Proceeding on our way down the Reach, the steamer stops at
Roblin’s wharf upon the right. Here, in a little dell, leading into a
peaceful valley pleasantly wooded, which leads up to the high shore, is
situated Mr. Roblin’s buildings. For a quiet place in which to live
during the summer, where one may forget the cold artificial world, it is
unequalled. To the right is the bold high shore, which protects from the
northern wind. Spread out before, is a beautiful landscape. There, is
another view of Adolphustown, with its many points, and corresponding
indentations, the home of peace and plenty. There, is the entrance to
Hay Bay, and more directly opposite, the elevated shore, well crowned
with trees, still clothed in green.

We now continue our voyage close to the precipitous rocks which form the
shore, and presently we approach the mouth of Picton Bay. Here again is
obtained a varied and delightful prospect, ere we leave this “Grand
Bay,” as it was at first called.

Issuing again from Picton Bay, our steamer glides along in the shadow of
the eastern shore, and approaches the Stone Mills, at the foot of the
lake on the mountain. The captain will wait until we have ascended, and
viewed the lake, and the magnificent prospect spread out around. But the
brief time allowed to accomplish the ascent affords no adequate chance
to take in the exceeding loveliness, and call to mind the historic
events connected with the country within view. So we shall detain the
tourist for a days’ inspection of the scene.

The Lake of the Mountain is a curiosity of no mean order. The following,
taken from the Montreal _Gazette_, published in the summer of 1834, is
worthy the place we give it:

  “The Lake of the Mountain is one of the most remarkable objects in
  the District of Prince Edward. This singular body of water is about
  five miles distant from Hallowell, (Picton). It is situated on the
  top of a lofty eminence, about one hundred and sixty feet above the
  level of the Bay of Quinté. The manner in which it is bounded is
  rather singular. In one direction it is only separated from the
  waters of the Bay below by a ledge of limestone rock, about eighty
  feet high, and by a precipitous embankment, which extends half way
  around it. In every other direction it is skirted by a ridge which
  rises to the height of 40 feet above the level of its surface. This
  Lake is about five miles in circumference. Its waters are at present
  applied to propel only a grist mill and a fulling machine. An
  artificial canal has been cut, along which the water is conveyed to
  the edge of the embankment, from whence it is conducted by a wooden
  raceway to the mills, which are situated near the margin of the bay
  below. The original outlet of the lake is at a few paces distance
  from the raceway. At this place the surplus waters formerly escaped
  through an orifice in the precipice I formerly mentioned, and after
  dashing over the rocks below, ultimately found their passage into
  the Bay.

  “When I first heard of this lake, the most incredible stories were
  related to me concerning it. The gentleman who first directed my
  attention to it, absolutely told me that it was supplied by a
  subterraneous passage from Lake Erie, that there was no inlet in the
  neighborhood, capable of affording it a supply, and lastly, that it
  was unfathomable, or that its bottom was lower than that of the
  adjoining part of the Bay of Quinté. Such information as this,
  communicated by a well-informed Barrister, did not fail to excite my
  curiosity, and I accordingly set out to examine it with feelings of
  considerable anxiety.

  “What led to the absurd idea that this lake was supplied from Lake
  Erie, I am at a loss to understand. It contains no springs, and the
  banks of that part especially from which it is viewed by strangers,
  being all so low that no inlet is visible, it might, perhaps, have
  been thought impossible to account for its source by any other
  means. The absurdity of the notion is, however, so glaring, that I
  would not spend a single moment in exposing it, had it not taken
  strong hold of the imagination of a great proportion of intelligent
  people residing in this part of the country.

  “If the Lake of the Mountain were supplied from Lake Erie, its
  waters should experience a corresponding rise and fall with those of
  Lake Erie. This, however, they do not, for last year the waters of
  Lake Erie were higher than usual, while those of the Lake of the
  Mountain were very low. Again, this year, the waters of Lake Erie
  were lower than usual, while those of the Lake of the Mountain are
  very high.

  “Further, if the Lake of the Mountain were supplied from Lake Erie,
  it should be altogether uninfluenced by any state of the weather in
  its neighborhood. This, however, is not the case, for in wet weather
  it becomes high, and in dry weather it becomes low. When I first
  visited this lake, its waters were nearly upon a level with its
  banks, and when I saw it some months afterwards, they were seven or
  eight feet above them. This was after a continuance of dry weather.

  “From all this it is evident that Lake Erie does not furnish the
  supply of the Lake of the Mountain, and that it must be looked for
  in some other quarter. Being determined to discover from whence this
  supply was derived, I proceeded along the east side of the lake for
  about a mile, upon the top of the eminence which separates it from
  the Bay of Quinté. I then entered the woods and began imperceptibly
  to ascend, until I found, by again coming in site of the lake, that
  I had reached an elevation of about forty feet above it. Continuing
  to proceed for two or three miles, I descended, in the same
  imperceptible manner, to the place from which I first set out. In
  the course of this journey, I crossed no less than five different
  water-courses, four of which were dry at the period of my first
  visit, but all of which I have since seen pouring out very
  considerable quantities of water. The fifth is a beautiful stream
  flowing into the lake over successive ledges of limestone rock,
  underneath the rich foliage of the trees by which it is overarched.
  This stream affords the chief supply to the lake, and judging from
  the appearance of its channel, it must be sometimes upwards of a
  foot deep. In the spring and fall, when the greatest quantities of
  water are discharged by it, I have distinctly heard the noise which
  it makes at a distance of two miles, and on the opposite side of the
  lake, as it dashes over the rocks. The whole of these rivulets
  proceed from two extensive swamps. That from which the largest
  arises is situated to the south west of the lake, and is about three
  or four miles in circumference.

  “The depth of the lake next claimed my attention. Having procured a
  sufficient length of line, I pushed out upon its waters in a small
  scow. For a considerable distance we distinctly perceive the bottom,
  which consists of dissolved, or rather corroded lime, so loose and
  light that with little or no exertion one may push the whole length
  of his oar into it. Continuing to look downwards upon the beautiful
  white bottom as we sail along, we start instinctively upon finding
  that we all at once lose sight of it, and that we gaze into a deep,
  dark, frightful abyss, which is formed by the sudden appearance of a
  precipitous ridge, running right across the lake. Nothing can exceed
  the amazement—terror, I had almost called it—which some people
  express on finding themselves surrounded by lofty, dark woods, and
  floating upon the surface of water as black as ink, over an abyss
  which they have been told is quite unfathomable.

  “After having sailed over the lake in every different direction, and
  taken an immense number of soundings, I found its greatest depth to
  be only ninety-one feet. The bay below I found to be eighty-two
  feet. Now as the lake is about one hundred and sixty feet above the
  level of the bay, it follows that the bottom of the lake is one
  hundred and fifty-one feet higher than that of the bay.

  “Thus, then, it appears that the Lake of the Mountain does not
  derive its supply from Lake Erie, that its source is to be found in
  its immediate neighbourhood, that it is not unfathomable, and that
  its bottom is not lower than that of the Bay of Quinté.

  “The Lake of the Mountain is however, an object of sufficient
  interest, without adding to its wonders those of a subterraneous
  communication with Lake Erie, and an unfathomable depth. There is,
  for instance, the very singular manner in which it is separated from
  the Bay of Quinté, by a wall of solid rock, and the extraordinary
  form of its basin. The fine views, too, with which the mountain
  abounds, ought to be sufficient to attract the attention of all
  those whose minds are capable of enjoying the various forms in which
  beauty may be contemplated.

  “Nothing can surpass the savage grandeur of the scene we look upon
  from the summit of the limestone rock I have so often mentioned, nor
  can a lovelier prospect be anywhere found than that which breaks
  upon the view, on first reaching the top of the mountain. To the
  north and west, we behold the Bay of Quinté, stretching far away
  into the land, and dividing itself into many beautiful inlets. There
  are too, the promising settlements and clearances all along the
  coast, which can never fail to raise and exhilarate the spirits of
  every one who wishes well to the destinies of his species. There is,
  however, one view at this lake, which, above all others, I have most
  delighted to enjoy. It is from the woods, upon the most elevated
  part of the eminence which bounds the lake to the south. From this
  we behold the deep dark waters of the lake beneath our feet, the bay
  of an hundred arms, with its smiling coast, and far away we gaze
  upon forest rising behind forest, until we are lost in the
  interminable—the dreamy distance.

  “I have visited this place when the surrounding woods shone in all
  the gorgeousness of summer sunshine. I have viewed it again by the
  pale moonlight, when the splendour and magnificence of the scene
  surpassed even what it exhibited when viewed by the broad light of
  day. The lake below, and the distant bay, appeared like sheets of
  molten silver, and every object was softened down by the mellow
  light under which they were viewed. At first the sky was perfectly
  cloudless, but, in the course of the evening, the scene gradually
  underwent a change. On the one hand, the moon shone out with a
  degree of splendour which no one can have any idea of, save they who
  have beheld her chaste countenance peering above a Canadian forest.
  On the other hand the thin, fleecy-looking clouds rapidly chased
  each other up towards the zenith. As the evening advanced, gleams of
  purple lightning at intervals streamed forth. At length one large
  cloud which seemed to be the nucleus of the whole, shot from around
  its margin successive flashes of pure white lightning, unaccompanied
  by the slightest noise of thunder. As I gazed on the brilliant
  spectacle before me, it seemed instantly to assume the shape and
  form of the bust of some gigantic being. The longer I looked at it,
  the brighter did the lightning blaze around it, and the more
  forcibly was I impressed with the resemblance. It might have seemed
  to a superstitious or highly imaginative mind, as if the great
  Spirit of nature had deigned to reveal himself, amid the grandeur
  and sublimity of a scene so congenial to his character.

We would supplement this just tribute of praise, and interesting
statement; and we venture to say, after having viewed many lovely spots
in the old and new worlds, that we know of no lovelier panoramic view
than that to be obtained from the Lake of the Mountain, not even
excepting the far-famed Hudson, and the classic Rhine. Of course we
except the rich relics of the old feudal days, which so picturesquely
adorn the mountain tops along the swift running Rhine. But even here we
are not destitute of historic reminiscences. True, we have no embattled
towers, resting on rugged summits; no castle keeps, with mysterious
dungeons, upon whose walls may be traced the letters laboriously cut by
long retained captives; no crumbling walls and half-filled moats; no
magnificent ruins of graceful architecture. We possess no Tintern Abbey
by the quiet waters, to tell of the olden time; no gloomy cloisters
where comfortable monks did dwell; nor romantic cathedral whose antique
windows admitted but dim religious light. Still, there is something to
be said of the past, in connection with our country. From our position
here we may examine the classic ground of Upper Canada, and trace the
course of settlement followed by our fathers, the pioneers.

At our feet is the bay, and seemingly so near, that one could toss a
stone into the clear blue water; and across, at the distance of a mile,
though apparently much nearer, lies the low rich land of Adolphustown.
To the right stretches, in almost a straight line, the waters of the
bay, along which may be seen the well settled shores even to Ernesttown,
and over which we get a view of the Upper Gap, where the waters of the
bay co-mingle with the more boisterous flood of Ontario. Upon this
bright autumn day the view is almost enchanting. The surface of the
waters of the several indentions, especially Hay Bay, as well as the
main channel, have imparted to them the bright blue of the sky, while
the fields of rich green and gold give variety to the scene. This rich
landscape spread out before us is really the classic ground of Upper
Canada. Within the compass of our view was for several years the western
limit of the settlement. We can see, where landed the refugee loyalists
to take possession of the land. Along that green and golden sloping
shore has slowly passed the batteaux laden with the settlers and their
limited household effects; there also has gone the Skenectady boat with
its ungainly soil, and toiling rowers. There, upon the rich land of
Fredericksburgh and Adolphustown, lived and died many of the fathers of
Canada. In the old homesteads, which there gradually arose, were born,
and spent their boyhood days, a host of sons, who, moving further west
up the bay and lake, planted the townships. From that spot sprang many
of Canada’s earliest public men, who passed their younger days among
these natural beauties which belong to the bay. Under our eye is the
birth-place of Judge Hagerman, Sheriff Ruttan, and others, who have left
a name upon the pages of Canadian history. There, upon the front of
Adolphustown stands the old Court House, where were held the first
Courts of Law of Upper Canada; there flourished the earliest lawyer of
the Province, Judge Hagerman’s father, and there pleaded McLean of
Kingston, in his robes and powdered wig. And, there yet stands the house
where lived the little boy, who, now a man, is the leading spirit in our
enlarged Canada. Upon this hill, and up and down its slopes, often
played this, the foremost man in British America, Sir John A. McDonald.
Those four townships, Kingston, Ernesttown, Fredericksburgh, and
Adolphustown, were the early homes of those who faithfully served their
country. How many thoughts are suggested as the student of history looks
abroad on this the first inhabited land of Western Canada. Many of the
present inhabitants here never heard of the noble ones, who have
struggled, and whose bones now decay in yon “U. E. burying ground,” just
across the water.

Descending the mountain, we will continue our voyage toward Kingston.
The next stopping place is Adolphustown, the history of which is given
elsewhere. We have to cross the water, and as we approach the landing,
we may see the splendid farm where lived the leader of the original
settlers, Major VanAlstine. The village of Adolphustown, once one of the
most important places in Upper Canada, is now a quiet but pleasant spot,
especially during the summer days.

Proceeding on our way, we may observe, just west of Coles’ Point, where
settled the very first person in Adolphustown, a small log house. It is
much larger than those which sparsely dotted the bay shore seventy years
ago. But it reminds one, of the first domiciles here erected. Divided
into two, one part having been first built, and the other, when a
growing family made it desirable, and means possible. This old log house
close by the shore is a lingering specimen of an almost extinct feature
of the bay. See here and there those tall poplar trees, brought in by
the early settlers from the Hudson valley, and planted in front of the
dwelling; many of them are yielding to the tooth of time. These trees
generally mark the spot where the settler erected his second home after
years of labor had prospered him. In many places they stand erect, but
with age stricken limbs, as faithful sentinels over the ashes of the old
homestead. Ashes indeed! For the crumbling chimney alone indicates where
was once the abode of the pioneer—of life’s cares and hopes, of doubt
and expectation—of all the ins and outs belonging to the home of the
pioneer. We have read to us the lesson of life; there, are the graves of
the brave old veterans and pioneers, and there, the dust of their
earthly dwellings. Ashes to ashes! Dust to dust!

In the lower bay particularly have come to pass many events of varied
import, and fraught with thrilling interest. Here, in times anterior to
the French rule in Canada, did the native tribes come to hold their
councils, to make treaties, form alliances, or declare war. Here, at the
mouth of the Cataraqui; or along the shores toward the little Cataraqui,
the French first fixed their place of meeting, and trade with the
Indians who lived afar off in the west. Over these waters have
Champlain, the French Recollets, the first discoverers, La Salle, Father
Hennepin, Chevalier de Tonti, La Barre, Denonville, Conte de Frontenac
and others, passed time after time. Over the waters here floated the
English under Bradstreet, upon the 25th August, 1750, who, at the break
of day were to besiege Fort Frontenac, and to capture it.

The close of the war in 1783, brought the disbanded soldiers and many a
refugee. Along the shores passed the whole of the Mohawk Indians on
their way to their lands. Here the Nation separated, a small party under
Captain John, passing up the Bay of Quinté, while the majority passed up
the south shore of the lake to the Grand River. For years after might
have been seen day after day, batteaux, singly, or in brigades, and at a
later date Skenectady boats, freighted with families old and young, and
with a few precious household effects, slowly and laboriously pulling
their way to their place of destined settlement. In the war of 1812, the
American fleet ventured in at the upper gap and passed along at a safe
distance from the field artillery that occupied the shore at Herchimer’s
Point. They were essaying to capture the Royal George; but this attempt
was as vain as that to overrun our province. Into these waters entered
the vessel of war, bearing the officers of Hull’s army from Detroit,
which they boastingly had declared would conquer Canada. From these
waters issued some of the first sailing vessels of Lake Ontario. Here
was likewise built the first steamboats upon the lake and bay, the
_Frontenac_ and _Charlotte_.

Upon the shores of these pleasant waters was commenced the survey of the
ten townships around the bay. Here was the starting point of settlement.
Here, for many a year, was the central point of Upper Canada. Along from
Cataraqui up to Collin’s Bay was the great front of the infant
settlement. Going up the bay, even to Adolphustown, was regarded for
several years as going far into the backwoods.

Along the north shore of the bay to Adolphustown, were enacted those
scenes which constituted the very first events of Upper Canadian
history. The front of Kingston township may, indeed be called the birth
place, and the front of Adolphustown the cradle, of the province. Every
farm along this shore has its history, which if written in the noble
spirit that animated the British American Loyalists, would command the
attention of the world. These quiet old homesteads now reposing upon the
gentle slopes in peace and plenty, tell not of the hardships of the old
soldiers and refugees, who, with ticket in hand entered to commence the
earnest work of clearing. Mainly, in the third and fourth townships, the
officers settled by the bay, while the rank and file took up lots in the
second and rear concessions. The first four townships are indeed, the
classic ground of Canada.

Nor is the south shore of the bay, Marysburgh, devoid of interest in an
historic sense. Reserving for another place a full account of the first
settlement by the Hessians, we can but glance at the fact that a band of
men without any knowledge of the English language, and unacquainted with
the first principles of pioneer life, constituted the first settlers.
There, in McDonald’s Cove landed he, after whom the name is given; and
there, amid the woods and upon the bright waters, he passed his days.

We commenced our trip and observations at Mill Point, and proceeded down
the bay. Let us return, and starting from the same place proceed to the
head of the bay, the Carrying Place. This part of the bay possesses less
of that picturesque beauty than is found in the part over which we have
passed; yet there is much to engage the attention of the tourist.

Mill Point, although a name suggestive of enterprise and of the
existence of mills; cannot be regarded with approbation, and it is to be
hoped that some appropriate name, commemorating some past event or
person, connected with the place, will be bestowed upon it. It was for
many years known as “Culbertson’s wharf.” The proper name, however, was
Cuthbertson. It was from the son of a Scotch fur trader who became
connected with the Mohawks. He lived at Kingston for many years, leaving
when he died a natural son and daughter, by a daughter of Captain John.
After his death, she and the two children removed to the Mohawk village.
It was this son who first built the wharf here, and hence the original
name.

Continuing our way up the bay, leaving to the east the pleasant inlet
stretching up to Napanee, the first thing to attract our attention is
the Parsonage and Indian Church, embowered in the beautiful forest
trees. The Parsonage first strikes our view, where resides the amiable
and worthy clergyman Mr. Anderson. In front of it is a solitary poplar
with the branches partially decayed. It marks the spot upon which the
tribe first landed, when they came to the place in 1784. Here they first
spread their tents. Somewhat to the east of this stood the first English
Church, the foundation of which can yet be traced. Near by sleeps the
remains of Captain John, the leader of the tribe, and likewise many
other warriors.

A half mile to the west of the Church, is an eminence, which tradition
points to as the battle ground between the ancient Mississaugas and the
Hurons. Further westward is Devil’s Hill, so called because a drunken
Indian declared he there had seen, one night, his Satanic Majesty, and
chased him all night. Then comes Eagle Hill, once the abode of this
Imperial bird. To the south, first lies the low island, known as Captain
John’s, bought by Cuthbertson who built the wharf, from the
Mississaugas. Then comes the north front of Sophiasburg, rich in
agricultural beauty. The first eminence by the shore is Stickney’s Hill,
once the burying place of Indians, but erroneously supposed to be the
spot where a Col. Quinté, with his army, perished from hunger and cold.
In the depths of the waters over which our boat now glides, it has been
recorded, have been seen cannon and ammunition, and other warlike
material, which Col. Quinté vainly endeavored to take across on his way
to Fort Frontenac. But the truth is, if such material have been seen,
they were the contents of a military sleigh which, while passing up
through here in the winter of 1812–13, heavily laden, broke through the
thin ice. We now enter Northport, at the eastern side of Big Bay; and
the land, on every hand, tells of comfort and thrift, and quiet peace.
Next, the wider portion of the Bay, which has received the name of Big
Bay, is passed over. To the left is Big Island, and Grape Island, where
the Rev. Mr. Case endeavoured to civilize and Christianize a community
of Mississaugas. We now pass through the Narrows, and the spires of
Belleville Churches may be seen in the distance. From Big Bay to the
Carrying Place, there is great uniformity in the appearance of the land
on either side, excepting upon the south shore at about seven miles from
the head of the Bay. Here, where is the Village of Rednersville, is a
somewhat remarkable hill, which, commencing at this point, extends up
along the Bay toward the end. It is separated from the western extremity
of the High Shore by a valley, through which, at one time, the waters of
Ontario flowed; and, when this hill was an island. The rock of this hill
consists of shaly limestone, similar to that which forms the bed of the
Moira. We now approach the end of our voyage, and, as the steamer enters
the port at Trenton, we can see the basin which forms the end of the
bay, in which rests one Island known as Indian Island. Taking the Bay
Quinté in its whole extent, the events of the past belonging to this
quiet sheet of water, are of no ordinary interest. The tourist of
to-day, while he admires the beauty as he passes along, sees no trace of
the past. The placid water, no more reflects the trim and light canoe of
birch, no longer the clumsy, but staunch batteau, or Durham boat, nor
the Skenectady boat. No more is heard the oar of the Canadian voyageur,
keeping time by tuneful voices.




                              CHAPTER XLV.

  CONTENTS—The “Big Bay”—Musketoe Bay—Mohawk Bay—Hay Bay—“Eastern
    Bay”—Site of Ancient Kentes—The Name—Old Families—An Accident,
    1819—Eighteen Drowned—Extract from Playter—Searching for the
    Bodies—Burying the Dead—Picton Bay—Appearance—The “Grand Bay”—
    Upper Gap—Lower Gap—Kingston Bay—A Picture—Recollections—A
    Contrast—Ship Yards—Extract from Cooper—Inland Lakes.


                           THE SEVERAL BAYS.

In looking at the main channel, we have mentioned several indentations,
which have, from their size, received distinct names. We will now
examine these more particularly.

About twenty miles from the Carrying Place, and eight miles east of
Belleville, is _Big Bay_, meaning, originally the big part of the Bay.
As before stated, its size does not appear so well marked as it
otherwise would, from the existence of a large island which lies in the
south part of the Bay, and which is, seemingly a part of the main land.
To the north is a small bay, where the Salmon River empties. Between
Mississauga point, which forms the western boundary of Big Bay, and
Huff’s Island, is another inlet from Big Bay, which is called by the
inhabitants _Musketoe Bay_, or sometimes, erroneously, “Miscouter” Bay.
It is, mainly, but a marsh, in which the Muskrat finds a home, the wild
duck a safe retreat, and where myriads of musketoe may, in their season,
be found. This last mentioned fact explains the origin of the name. It
is stated that, before the adjacent land was cleared, the swarms of
insects was so thick as to actually cloud the air.

At the junction of the western and middle portions of the Bay is the
_Mohawk Bay_. This name is derived from the residence here of the Mohawk
Indians, who came in 1784, and consequently is of no older date than the
settlement of Upper Canada. The original name was _Ganeious_. The Bay is
about five miles in length, and a mile wide at its mouth; it gradually
lessens until it forms the mouth of the Napanee river. In summer the
scenery along this Bay is very agreeable, and in some places really
beautiful. The second flouring mill having been built in 1785, Mohawk
Bay and the Napanee River were well known by early settlers, and along
these shores, now well cultivated fields, there have passed many a time
the batteau laden with grain, or the canoe with a bag of gristing; or
along the shore trudged the pioneer with a bushel of corn on his back,
or in winter hauled it upon a hand sleigh.

HAY BAY.—From the entrance of Mohawk Bay southward, along the reach
about seven miles, is another inlet. This is _Hay Bay_, and, by far, the
largest of the several Bays. By looking at the map, it will be seen that
this indentation is somewhat divided into two almost equal portions by a
narrow channel; and that the eastern part is considerably broader than
the western. This narrow channel was originally called, according to an
old map of Fredericksburg, dated 1784, the “Long Reach,” and the east
end, the “Eastern Bay.” This was then regarded as the real end of the
Bay Quinté. The “North Channel,” leading to the Mohawk settlement, was
but little known, and not taken into consideration. It must be
remembered that the names originally given to the several portions of
the Bay were such as the circumstances of the settlers would be likely
to suggest. The soldiers who settled on the front of the third township
soon learned that in the rear was a Bay, by which they could reach the
back concessions. Some crossed the peninsula, while others reached their
lots by making a circuit of the Fourth Town shore. The distance to them
as they toiled in the batteaux, seemed a long stretch, and hence it was
called the “Long Reach,” while the wider portion, at the end of the Bay
was named Eastern Bay, or the most eastern bay. Here, as we have seen,
dwelt the ancient Kentes. The name of Hay Bay must have been given to
this sheet of water about 1786. In the absence of any certain knowledge
of the origin of the name, we have concluded that it was so called, out
of respect to his memory, after Lieut.-Governor Hay, who died at
Detroit, 29th August, 1785, “after twenty-nine years service.” This was
the year previous to the time of the first settlers locating here. The
name was, most likely, given by the Surveyor, who, in accordance with
the custom, named everything after some influential or prominent person,
or friend. While advancing this theory of the origin of the name, we
must not omit to mention, that when the country was opened up there was,
growing in some places upon the bay shore, wild hay. This may possibly
have given rise to the name; or the name may have been taken from Chief
Justice Hay. Hay Bay, although possessing no particular features of
beauty, has a charm peculiarly its own, as being the original Kente Bay.
It is not wanting in historic interest. Along its shores, now so
fertile, for long years existed abundant game; a fact well known to all
the neighboring tribes. Although no settler took up land here until
1786, there were among them individuals who took no unimportant part in
the war against rebellion. Upon the south shore lived and died some
families who acted more than ordinarily venturesome parts during the
contest, as the Huycks, Miss Loyst, who married a Diamond, and whose two
brothers were with Sir John Johnson at Hungry Bay. Here settled three
Embury’s, David on the north shore, who was brother of Philip Embury,
the first Methodist Preacher in America. On the south side lived Andrew,
and John Embury, and the first family of the Bogarts of Canada,
descendants of the first Moravian minister, to America. Also, here lived
Judge Fisher, Squire Beegle, James Knox, the first Quaker Preacher in
Canada. Upon the north bank, while the colony was yet in its infant
days, was committed, probably, the first act of suicide in the country.
An event even yet remembered by some. And, more than all, it was upon
these waters where occurred an accident, which filled the whole Bay
country with horror; and awakened emotions of the keenest sympathy,
which produced an impression throughout the whole Province, exceeded
only by the loss of the schooner “Speedy,” with all on board.

The accident on Hay Bay took place on a Sunday morning, 20th August,
1819. On the south shore of the bay, in the Methodist meeting-house, was
this day a Quarterly Meeting. Quarterly meetings, in the early days of
the country, were always largely attended, persons coming from a
considerable distance. On this occasion there were present many from the
adjacent townships. Not a few came from the banks of the Napanee. Those
living to the north of the bay had to cross to the place of meeting by
boat. It was a bright sunny Sabbath morning, and already had many
crossed and were joining in the religious services, when there put off
from the north shore, a short distance from Casey’s Point, a boat load,
consisting of eighteen young men and women, most of whom lived along the
bay. They were all dressed in good and modest apparel as befitted the
day, and the house and worship of God. Buoyant with the cheerfulness of
youth, and the emotions of piety, they sang as they stepped into the
boat, and as they made progress to the other shore. The boat being
rather leaky, and so many, pressing it too near the water’s edge, the
water came in and increased fast, and they had no vessel to bail with.
Unhappily, the young men did not think of bailing with their clean hats,
or did not like to do so, until it was too late. The boat filled and
sank, when near the other shore, and these eighteen young men and women,
crying and shrieking, went down into the deep water. At the time of
crossing, there was a prayer meeting proceeding in the chapel. One of
those present was now engaged in prayer, and had just uttered the
petition that “it might be a day long to be remembered,” when a shriek
was heard, another, and another. The prayer was stopped, and some ran up
to the pulpit to look out, and saw the youths struggling in the water.
All ran to the shore, and some plunged in to render assistance. Eight
were taken to the shore. Ten bodies were yet in the water. A seine was
prepared, and so the bodies of these unhappy youths, a few hours ago so
blythe and cheerful were brought dripping to the land. One was not
recovered till the next morning. Two young men were drowned, and eight
young women. Two were of the German family, two Detlors, one Bogart, one
Roblin, one McCoy, one Clark, one Madden, and one Cole. The grief of the
families, so suddenly bereaved, gathered together on the shore, gazing
at the loved bodies, may be better imagined than described. The grief,
too, was shared by the large congregation assembled, and by the
minister. No public worship was attended to, but preparations for the
solemn funeral.

Monday was a day of mourning. News of the disaster soon spread far, and
a great congregation was assembled. Nine coffins were laid in order
outside the chapel. One of the corpses was buried in another graveyard.
Mr. Puffer took for the text, Job xix. 25–27, “I know that my Redeemer
liveth,” &c. He stood at the door and tried to preach to those within
and without, but was so affected by the catastrophe, the weeping
congregation, and the coffined dead before him, that he confessed he
could not do justice to the subject, or the occasion. But he offered
consolation from the gospel to the stricken families mourning. Next, the
coffins of the youthful dead were opened, that friends and neighbours,
and young acquaintances, might take a last look and farewell. Six of the
graves were in rotation, and the coffins were placed in the same manner.
The others were near departed friends in other parts of the ground.
After the reading of the burial service, the graves, one after another,
received the dead, and then were closed up again, until the day when
“the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible.”—
(Playter).

The writer has often heard his father relate the touching circumstances
here told. He was then at home, his father being a resident of the south
shore, and was an eye witness of the scene. His father’s steelyards were
used, the hooks being attached to a pole, to grapple for the bodies.

PICTON BAY.—Where the eastern portion of the Bay Quinté and the Long
Reach unite, the waters are comparatively wide. This was at the first
called the _Grand Bay_. The south side of the Grand Bay forms the mouth
of Picton Bay, which stretches southward some five miles, and which has
at its head the town of Picton, after which the bay has been named.

The view presented upon passing up this indentation of the Bay, and as
well in returning, and looking up the long reach, is one of the most
attractive perhaps in all Canada. As the tourist approaches the head of
the Bay he will be struck with the extraordinary beauty. To the left are
two picturesque buildings, one the Ontario College. Rising up
majestically at the very head of the Bay, is an almost precipitous
mountain, whose gray sides, and wood-crowned summit, gives a grand,
though sombre appearance. Nothing seems to be wanting but the crumbling
walls of an old castle to make the picture complete.

When the refugees first came to the Bay, the inlet, now called Picton
Bay, was regarded with some degree of aversion. The high barren-looking
shores, covered with dwarf firs and cedars, offered no inducements to
the settler. During the first two or three years a party of three or
four ascended to the head of the Bay, but observing the thick cedars and
firs on either hand, and withal suffering much from the musketoes, they
returned and reported that no man could ever inhabit it, that it was fit
only for the musketoe. But before many years the Congers, the Johnsons,
Washburns and Steeles, had taken up their abode here.

We have seen that this Bay constituted a part of an Indian route from
the west to the south shores of Ontario.

To the east of “Grand Bay,” the peninsula of Adolphustown is indented by
two bays.

Between the extremity of Prince Edward Peninsula and Amherst Island,
where Lake Ontario joins the Bay, at a point which formerly was regarded
as the mouth of the Bay of Quinté, is a space nearly a mile. This is
called the _Upper Gap_. Between the eastern end of Amherst and Grape
Island is the _Lower Gap_ which is something more than a mile wide.
Directly to the north of the east end of Amherst Island, upon the coast
of Ernesttown is an indentation where empties a small stream, this is
called _Collins’ Bay_, after Deputy Surveyor Collins.

The only remaining bay of which we shall specially speak, is the
Kingston Bay.

Perhaps no piece of water can be found in Western Canada possessed of
more natural beauty than the Bay of Kingston, during the season of
navigation by water. Whether one enters it from the Great Lake with its
rough swell, or the quiet waters of Quinté, or the bright St. Lawrence,
whose waters are beautiful with a thousand isles; or whether he gazes
from the curving shore at the City’s front; or from the Cataraqui
Bridge; or instead, takes his stand at the point of Frederick or Fort
Henry, there is spread out the same pleasing view; one upon which the
eye can long gaze with admiration. Encircled by a border of green clad
islands, with the massive city upon one side, the waters of the harbour
are peaceful and secure. The former beauties such as Champlain and
Frontenac looked upon, have passed away. There is less of the natural
beauty entering now into the view, but art has taken the place. The
barracks at the _Tête du Pont_, the buildings at Navy Yard, the strong
fort, the warlike martello towers, and the city of solid stone, give a
different, but yet a pleasing picture. Kingston Bay affords a safe place
for boating in summer, and in winter, its coating of ice is the theatre
of attraction for the joyous skater.

Respecting the events which have come to pass by the Bay of Kingston in
the early history of the country, the reader is referred to the history
of Kingston. We will only add that the “ship-yards and marine railways
at Kingston, Garden Island, and Portsmouth, have launched on the inland
seas the greatest in number and largest of tonnage of Canadian vessels
in Canada West; Kingston being second only to Quebec in the extent of
its ship-building.”

Here in 1814 was built the three decked ship of war “_Saint Lawrence_,”
at a cost of £500,000. The chief cause of this enormous cost was the
expense of transportation of stores and equipments from Montreal. In
1853, the aggregate tonnage of the vessels built at the ship-yard in
Kingston alone, apart from those built at Portsmouth and Garden Island,
amounted to 2,500 tons; the cost of these vessels was £26,000, of which
£14,000 was paid for labor.

We will here introduce an interesting notice of the several lakes lying
north of the Bay in the adjacent townships, from Cooper. “Through the
whole tract of country lying north of the Township of Kingston, and in
these and the neighbouring counties, are a multitude of lakes of various
sizes, from that of a mere pond up to that of a lake twenty miles in
extent. The water of these lakes is extremely pure and clear, and they
are furnished with abundance of fish; they are mostly connected by
streams of water, and are navigable, and the streams are capable of
floating canoes or small boats. Through these lakes and streams are
annually floated immense quantities of lumber and timber, and in the
absence of the roads now in course of construction, they have been the
highway to the city from many a fine farm on their banks. Around them,
in some places, the land is much broken, rocky and waste, but between
such broken and rough tracts are lands of great richness and fertility,
and of the first quality. The scenery throughout this tract of country,
and in the neighbourhood of these lakes and rivers is extremely
picturesque, and in many places even grand, varied with rock, valley,
streamlets and wood. When as the country gets older, localities are
sought not only with regard to their flat unvaried richness of soil, but
with some consideration of their beauty of location and scenic charms;
there is little doubt that many a romantic glen here will have its
accompanying cottage, hamlet or mansion, and that many a pretty
homestead will be empowered among these woods and water-falls; even now,
many a good farm is being brought under cultivation in these parts. If
any surpass the rest in picturesque beauty, we should incline to give
the palm to Buck Lake and its vicinity. The neighbourhood of these lakes
abound in deer.”




                             CHAPTER XLVa.

  CONTENTS—Islands—Possessed by Indians—The “Thousand Islands”—
    Carleton Island—History of Island—During the rebellion—Wolfe
    Island—The name—Howe Island—Old name—County of Ontario—Garden
    Island—Horseshoe Island—Sir Jeffry Amherst—The size—Indian name—
    “Tontine”—Johnson’s Island—The Island won—Present owner—First
    settler—The three brothers—Small Islands—Hare Island—Nut Island—
    Wappoose Island—Indian rendezvous—Captain John’s Island—Bartering—
    Hunger Island—Big Island—First settlers—Huff’s Island—Paul Huff—
    Grape Island—Hog Island—Smaller Islands—Mississauga Island—A
    tradition—The Carrying Place—Its course—Original survey—History—
    American prisoners—Col. Wilkins.


                       THE ISLANDS OF BAY QUINTÉ.

The reader who has kindly followed us thus far in examining the bay, and
its several coves, or indentations, is invited to accompany us once more
along its course, and note the several islands which stud its bosom.
They are not numerous; but the numerous points all along, as well as the
turns in the bay recompense any lack arising from the absence of
islands.

When the Mississauga Indians ceded the land along the bay to the British
Government, they reserved certain points of land, and mostly all the
islands between the head of the bay and Gananoque. Those excepted were
Grenadier Island, and the small islands between it and Kingston, and
Amherst Island.

The islands of the St. Lawrence are famed almost the world over, they
are called the “Thousand Islands.” But Howison says, that the
commissioners appointed to fix the limits between Canada and the United
States, counted the islands of the St. Lawrence and found there were
1692. The islands below Gananoque belonged to the Iroquois.

CARLETON ISLAND.—The first island is Carleton Island, called by the
French the island of Chevreux, Goat’s Island; situated between the
American shore of the St. Lawrence, and Wolf Island. It was a military
and naval station during the American rebellion, at which government
vessels were built for navigating the lake, and possessed
fortifications. Its name is derived from Guy Carleton, Esq., “his
Majesty’s Captain-General and Governor-in-chief, and over his Majesty’s
province of Quebec, afterward Lord Dorchester.” This military post, as
we have seen, afforded a retreat for the refugees, who fled from the
Mohawk valley. Says the Rev. William Mcaulay, “Jay’s treaty of peace, as
it was called, in 1783, found Carleton Island occupied by the 84th
Regiment, a body of Highlanders levied in the Carolinas, and
subsequently adopted into the line.” Upon the erection of the northern
line of the United States, Carleton Island came within the boundary of
the State of New York. But it continued in common with other military
posts, in possession of the British, until 1796. Indeed, according to
the gentleman whose words we have quoted above, it remained in
possession of the British until 1812, when the Americans crossed and
seized a sergeant’s guard stationed there. It would seem that parties
entering Canada were required to procure a passport here. A copy of one,
extracted from the history of Dundas, is as follows, directed “To whom
concerned.”

“Permit the boat going from this to pass to Kingston with their
provisions, family, clothing, bedding, household furniture, and farming
utensils, they having cleared out at this post, as appears by their
names in the margin. (John Loucks, two men, two women, three
children).”—Signed “C. McDonell, P. O.”

Among the refugees here during the war was Mr. Mcaulay. In 1776,
Sergeant Major Clark, of the 8th, or King’s Own Regiment, was appointed
clerk and naval store keeper at Carleton Island, where he remained till
1790. This was father of the late Colonel Clark, of Dalhousie. For
further particulars of Carleton Island the reader is referred to the
history of Kingston.

WOLFE ISLAND.—This is a considerable island, 25 miles long, stretching
along near the American shore, directly opposite Kingston. It contains
28,129 acres of good land. The name is found often spelled wolf, leading
us to infer that it is derived from the presence of that animal upon the
island at some time. But it is no doubt after General Wolfe, who fell at
Quebec. The original Indian name, as given in the document conferring a
seigniory at Cataraqui upon La Salle, including this and Amherst Island,
was _Ganounkouesnot_. The French called it the _Grande Island_, and
Simcoe in his proclamation 1792, directed it to be called Wolfe Island.
Mr. Detlor says that “it would seem the greater part of Wolfe Island was
granted to the heirs of Sir William Johnson, the clergy and Crown
reserves excepted.”

We observe a notice in the _Kingston Gazette_, that Wolfe Island, with
Pittsburgh, was conjoined to Kingston for municipal purposes in 1812.

HOWE ISLAND.—Is situated in the St. Lawrence, somewhat below Kingston,
it is a large, long island in front of the township of Pittsburgh, and
one part of it is almost conjoined to the mainland. It is a township by
itself, and contains about 8000 acres. It was called by the French, Isle
Cauchois; but was named by Simcoe, or his advisers, Howe Island.

When Upper Canada was erected into a province, it was divided into
nineteen counties; the seventh of these consisted of Howe Island, Wolfe
Island, Amherst Island, Gage Island, with all the other islands between
the mouth of the Gananoque and the point of Marysburgh. They constituted
the county of Ontario.

GARDEN ISLAND.—Upon the north of Wolfe Island, in Kingston Bay, is
_Garden Island_, containing some sixty-three acres. Near the western
extremity of Wolfe Island, is another small island, which received the
name of _Horseshoe Island_, and separated from the large island by a
narrow channel, which was named Batteau Channel, is _Gage Island_, after
Brig. General Gage, which was also sometimes called _Simcoe Island_. The
name given to it by the French was _Isle aux Foret_. It contains some
2164 acres of rich land.

AMHERST ISLAND.—So called after “Sir Jeffrey Amherst, of the honourable
and military order of Bath, Colonel of the Third and Sixteenth Regiments
of Infantry, Lieutenant-General in the Army, and Commander-in-Chief of
all His Majesty’s Troops and Forces in North America.” This beautiful
island, stretching along opposite, and about a mile and a half from
Ernesttown, being some twelve miles in length, causes an extension of
the Bay Quinté to a corresponding distance. It contains about 14,015
acres of very rich land. The channel separating it from Gage and Wolfe
Islands, forms the Lower Gap, and that which flows above, between it and
Marysburg, is the Upper Gap.

In the time of LaSalle, the Indian name of this island was _Kaouenesgo_.
It formed a part of his Seigniory, and he, some time after his arrival
to build Fort Frontenac, 1678, named the island _Isle de Tonti_, after a
brave French officer, with one arm, who accompanied him. This name,
modified to “Isle Tanta,” clung to the island until recent years. Sir
John Johnson, to whom it was granted, with other land, at the close of
the war, 1783, in a letter to the Military Secretary, calls it the
“Island of Tontine.” This may have been a fancy name of the owner, as we
find no other reference to it. The present name was bestowed in 1792,
after Gen. Amherst, who acted so conspicuous a part in the wars. Upon
some old maps the Island is designated “Sir John Johnson’s Island.” We
find an indefinite statement that the island was claimed by the Mohawks,
and that they ceded their rights to Col. Crawford, who accompanied Sir
John, and who, in turn, transferred it to Johnson. But, as he and Brant
were on the most intimate terms, they could, no doubt, arrange any
difference between themselves.

We do not see that there can be any objection to record a statement
which has been told for many long years by the inhabitants of the Bay,
that the Island was subsequently won by an aristocratic gambler, Lady B—
—, in England, at a game of cards, who afterwards disposed of it to the
present owner, Lord Mountcashel.

Some of the farm lots have been, we believe, disposed of, but the island
is mostly held by tenants, under lease from the Earl. The oldest settler
upon the island was Lieutenant McGinnis, of Johnston’s Regiment. He
lived here in some comfort, having several slaves to do the work.

Off the east end of Amherst Island, in the Bay, are three small islands,
called the _Three Brothers_, “famous for black bass fishing, and for
deep rolling sea.”

Leaving the waters of the Lower Bay, and directing our course westward,
we find the Bay comparatively free of Islands. Here and there, all along
its course, may be seen small islands, close to the shore. These
received names, as a general thing, after the person who owned the
adjacent land. There are, however, a few more islands which need special
notice.

Upon an old plan of Fredericksburgh, dated 1784, is to be seen in Hay
Bay, three islands; one near the north shore, at its eastern extremity,
is called _Hare Island_. To the south, at the eastern shore, are the
other two; the north one is called _Nut Island_; the more southern one
is _Wappoose Island_. This island, from its name, must have been the
place of residence of the principal chief of some Indian tribe, probably
the Kente Indians. Here, must have been a place of considerable
importance to the Indian—a rendezvous, whereat they met, and whereat the
chief held his simple, but dignified court.

Opposite the Mohawk Church, in the Indian Village, just off Grassy
Point, of Sophiasburg, is a low island, containing fourteen acres. This
island originally belonged to the Mississaugas, as did most of the
islands in the Bay, until a comparatively recent date. John Cuthbertson,
a grandson of Capt. John, purchased the island from John Sunday, and
other Mississauga chiefs. The price paid was a cow and a yoke of steers.
A quit claim deed was received by Mr. Cuthbertson, which is yet to be
seen. This bargain led to some trouble with the Government, who held
that the Mississaugas had no right to sell their land except to
Government. However, finally, the receipt held by Cuthbertson was
allowed to be a legal document. This Island is known as Capt. John’s
Island.

There are three small islands in Mohawk Bay, the largest of which is
called Hunger Island. It is situated a short distance from the mouth,
near the north shore, and contains about seven acres of land.

Along the north shore of Sophiasburg is _Big Island_. As its name
implies, it is an island of considerable size, containing over 3,000
acres of excellent land. The channel separating this long narrow island
from the mainland, especially at its east end is very narrow, and is
spanned by a short bridge, and may even be forded. Long grass abundantly
grows all though the channel, which, in summer, covers the water, and
seems to form the island and mainland into one. Here, is the constant
abode of the muskrat, and at certain seasons the resort of the wild
fowl.

It is said that Samuel Peck and Samuel Shaw were the first settlers on
this island. The older inhabitants along the bay remember when this
island was thickly covered with wood of the most heavy description. It
was for many years, at the beginning of the present century, the scene
of lumbering operations. Winter after winter, large quantities were cut
down, and in the spring, rafted and conveyed to Montreal.

The writer has heard it stated, this island was originally, when no
longer owned by the Indians, bestowed on one Hall, and that early maps
designate it Hall’s Island.

Huff’s island is situated to the west of Big Island, and forms a part of
Ameliasburgh, from which it is separated by a marsh, and to which, at
one point it is connected by a low neck of land. To the north is
Mississauga Point. The island obtains its name from the first settler,
Solomon Huff, who settled there in 1825. Solomon Huff was the son of
Paul Huff, one of the original settlers of Adolphustown, who came from
Long Island, New York, with Van Alstine. The writer has conversed with
the wife of Solomon Huff when in her 91st year, who retained a vivid
recollection of the time of their settling, from the fact that when
crossing the ice to the island they broke through with their furniture.
At the time of their settlement their nearest neighbours were on one
hand at Demorestville and on the other at Walbridge’s, on the north
shore of Mississauga Point.

Immediately to the east of Huff’s Island, is Grape Island. It received
the name it bears from the great quantities of wild grapes that at one
time grew spontaneously upon it. This island, now barren and treeless,
was at one time, the home of domesticated Indians. Even yet, may be
seen, the traces of the wooden cabins, where the Mississaugas lived
under the paternal care of the Rev. Mr. Case.

Continuing westward from Big Bay, there are to be seen several small
islands close to the shore, the names accorded them are not beautiful,
but probably have in their origin something significant. Thus, there is
one called Hog Island, and opposite Belleville is another known as Cow
Island. An island west of the mouth of the Moira, is yet called Zwick’s
Island, after the person who once owned the adjoining land. This island
was, at one time, an Indian burying ground.

We next come to the island upon which are extensive sawing mills,
commonly called Baker’s Island. It was formerly called Myers’ Island,
after Captain Myers, who lived adjacent thereto. He, for several years,
paid rent to the Indians for it. Telegraph Island is about four miles
above Belleville; and “Nigger” Island nine miles.

The last island we have to notice, belonging to the bay, is Indian
Island, situated at the extremity of Bay Quinté, west of the mouth of
the Trent River. Upon a map, to be seen in the Crown Land’s Department,
this is designated Mississauga Island. It has also been called Fighting
Island. There is a tradition respecting this island, to which the
existence of human bones found there, seems to give some degree of
plausibility. It is even now related, that at an early date, a company
of Mohawks, who had crossed from the south side of the lake, were
encamped upon this island. A band of Mississaugas, learning the fact,
approached the island cautiously at night, took away their boats so they
could not escape, and then suddenly, with superior numbers, fell upon
the Mohawks, and killed and scalped them all. But the bones found there
may have been placed there for burial.


                          THE CARRYING PLACE.

The distance between the head of bay Quinté, and the waters of Lake
Ontario, at the narrow part of the isthmus is about a mile and
three-quarters. By this narrow neck of land the peninsula of Prince
Edward is saved from being an island. This was called in the first
proclamation of Simcoe, “the isthmus of the Presqù isle de Quinté.” It
is from this source that the harbour on the lake west of the isthmus has
received the name Presqù isle.

We have elsewhere spoken of the fact that a Carrying Place had existed
here from time immemorial. From the Indian villages, which at times were
located, now along the lake shores of the peninsula, and now upon the
bay, the Indians started forth, perhaps to ascend the Trent, or the
Moira, or to pass down the waters of the bay, or perhaps to coast along
the shore of the lake, westward to the mouth of some river. And, when
the French had possession of the country they found this a well marked
Indian path. The French had not occasion to cross it, as they either
ascended the Ottawa, the Trent, or if desirous of going to the head of
Lake Ontario, they passed along its south shore. But in the early years
of Upper Canada, this portage was frequently crossed by those passing
back and forth from the lower parts of Canada to the west. This was the
case particularly after the forts of Oswego and Niagara were handed over
to the United States in 1796.

The original Indian Carrying Place can yet be traced. Its course is
indicated by a road which leads from water to water. The street is
consequently somewhat crooked, and is in some places wider than in
others. When the land was originally surveyed, this path was made the
base line of a row of lots on either side. The surveyor being ill and
entrusting the matter to an assistant; the Indian path was faithfully
followed. While this irregular dividing line between Ameliasburgh and
Murray may appear unseemly, it cannot be regretted that the old path is
thus indubitably known. Upon the Murray side of the road the fence is
comparatively straight, but upon the opposite side it is very devious.
This pretty nearly marks the old Indian path. While used as a Carrying
Place for batteaux, which were transported upon low wheels, the road was
no doubt, to a certain extent, straightened; yet mainly the old route
remained.

The old days, when Weller used to haul the batteaux from water to water,
have left no memorial; and even more recent days when the first
steamboats invariably came to this place, have left but little to mark
their history. Here is the remains of the wharf and frame store house
where once was life and enterprise; but now all is in decay, and rural
solitude prevails. But there is beauty here, as well as interest. All
along the street between the head of the bay and Weller’s Bay of the
lake are buildings, consisting of private residences, and churches. The
tourist will find abundant food for thought at the Carrying Place;
whether he contemplates the far remote past ere the Indian was disturbed
in his native abode; or the days when the French Recollet Missionaries
followed the footsteps of those whom they sought to convert; or the time
when the pioneer surveyor and settler first trod the path; or whether he
reflects upon the many human beings who have come and gone on their way
of life, now going one way now another; or thought of the trader intent
on pressing his business into the very outskirts of the settlements; of
the soldiers—regulars, and militia, who pressed onward for the conflict,
to drive off the invading foe; or of the thousand prisoners carried
captive through the province, which they had boastingly came to conquer.
If the writer were there again, he would ponder, in addition to all
this, upon the sad, yet natural occurence, that, of all those who had
come and gone, the one who imparted much information to him, who came to
the Carrying Place long years ago, is now gone the way of all the earth.
The history of the place is inseparably associated with the life of the
Hon. Col. Wilkins, whose loss was expressed by the presence of many as
he was carried to his grave.




                             DIVISION VIII.
            THE FIRST TEN TOWNSHIPS IN THE MIDLAND DISTRICT.




                             CHAPTER XLVI.

  CONTENTS—The French—Their policy—Trading posts—Cahiaque—Variations—
    Name of River—Foundation of Fort Frontenac—A change—Site of old
    fort—La Salle’s petition—A Seigniory—Governors visiting—War
    Expedition—Fort destroyed—Rebuilt—Colonial Wars—Taking of Fort
    Oswego—Frontenac taken—End of French domination.


                   HISTORY OF THE FRENCH OCCUPATION.

It was the policy of the French, to penetrate, as far as possible, into
the interior of the country, and, by all possible means, secure the
peltry traffic with the Indians. The Recollets and the Jesuits, while
seeking to convert the Pagan Indian, endeavoured as well, to win him to
the interest of their country. As soon as practicable, trading posts
were established at convenient points, at which to buy furs of the
Indians. Not sure, even at the first, of the continued friendliness of
the natives, and subsequently exposed to tribes, who assumed a hostile
attitude, they proceeded to fortify their trading depots against sudden
attacks; not alone to secure this, but to maintain a constant menace to
those who might venture to assume such attitude. It was in carrying out
these designs, that M. de Courcelles, in 1670, ascended the St.
Lawrence, direct to Lake Ontario, from the mouth of the Ottawa, being
the first European to do so. Two years later, he convened a meeting at
the head of the St. Lawrence, of Indian chiefs of the region round
about, when, concealing his ulterior object, he gained permission to
erect a fort; but being immediately thereafter recalled to France, it
was left for his successor, Conte de Frontenac, to establish the fort.

The first name which is found applied to the place, where the fort was
founded, is _Cahiaque_, or _Cadaroque_. It is an Indian name, and most
probably signifies “the strongest fort in the country.” This is inferred
from the following fact:—When certain of the chiefs of the Mohawks, were
in London, in 1710, desirous of doing honor to their host, where they
stayed, at King Street, Covent Garden, they called him _Cadaroque_,
meaning “the most powerful man in London.” Or, possibly, in using the
word, in connection with Frontenac, they may have referred to the strong
expedition which accompanied him. For many years the fort was known by
this name, or one derived from it. It must be remembered that this word,
with many others spoken by the Indians, was written by the French
according to the particular idea of the person hearing the
pronunciation. Hence it is that we find this word changed frequently as
into the following. Beside the two already mentioned are found
Catarcoui, Catarcouy, or Cataraccouy, Catarakvy, Catarakouy, Catarasky,
Cataracto, Cataracouy, Cadaraque, Cadarachqui, Kadaraghke, Kadaraghkie,
Kodakagkie, Cadarochque, Cadaacarochqua, Catarocoui, Cuadaraghque,
Crederoqua, Cataraqui.

While the fort, or place of the fort, was thus known mostly by the
Indians, it was, according to Charlevoix, called by the French, the fort
of Lake St, Louis, the name then applied to Lake Ontario. Subsequently,
the fort was spoken of as the one built by Frontenac; and ultimately, it
came to be permanently designated _Fort Frontenac_. After the conquest,
and at the time of the revolution, the place was known in the rebel
colonies, as Cataraqui; and, in speaking of going to Upper Canada, they
would say to Cataraqui. The river between Ontario and Montreal, was
sometimes called Cariqui, or Iroquois.

The following account of the foundation of the fort, is extracted from
Draper’s Brochure. He says “the expedition was a vast one for those
days, 120 canoes, 2 batteaux, and 400 men.” He then quotes from a
journal of Frontenac’s voyage, describing the entrance into the river
Cataraqui;—“12th, broke up camp very early in the morning, and having
proceeded till ten o’clock, halted three hours to rest and eat. On
approaching the first opening of the lake, the Count wished to proceed
with more order than had been already done, and in line of battle. He
accordingly arranged the whole fleet in this wise:—

“Four squadrons, composing the vanguard, went in front and in one line.
The two batteaux followed next. After these came Count de Frontenac at
the head of all the canoes, of his guards, of his staff, and of the
volunteers attached to his person; having on his right, the squadron
from Three Rivers, and on his left, those of the Hurons and Algonquins.

“Two other squadrons formed a third line, and composed the rear guard.

“This order of sailing had not been adhered to for more than half a
league, when an Iroquois canoe was perceived coming with the Abbe
D’Ursé, who, having met the Indians above the River Katarakoui,
(Cataraqui) and having notified them of the Count’s arrival, they were
now advancing with the captains of the Five Nations.

“They saluted the admiral, and paid their respects to him with evidence
of much joy and confidence, testifying to him the obligation they were
under to him for sparing them the trouble of going further, and for
receiving their submissions at the River Katarakoui, which is a very
suitable place to camp, as they were about signifying to him.

“After Count Frontenac had replied to their civilities, they proceeded
him as guides, and conducted him as guides, and conducted him into a
bay, about a cannon shot from the entrance, which forms one of the most
beautiful and agreeable harbors in the world, capable of holding a
hundred of the largest ships, with sufficient water at the mouth, and in
the harbor, with mud bottom, and so sheltered from every wind, that a
cable is scarcely necessary for mooring.” “On the 13th of July, 1673,
the fort was commenced, and on the 19th, it was finished, and De
Frontenac left on the 27th for Montreal, having laid the foundation of
the future City of Kingston.”

How different was the appearance then from that presented to-day. No
clearing, as yet, broke the woody shores. At this conference between
Frontenac and the Iroquois chiefs, the charms of nature only were
displayed. Where now stands the city of Kingston, was then a dense
forest. The gently curving shore, which now forms the front of the city,
with its line of piers, was undisturbed, except by the birch canoe. The
quiet Bay, within the Point, then more prominent than now, stretching up
with its low sand banks, and begirt with marshes, was then the safe
abode of the wild fowl and muskrat. Across the inlet of the bay, and
where now is the Navy Yard, the land was thickly covered with the
greenest foliage; as well as was the higher and more beautifully wooded
peninsula of Point Henry. And still beyond, to the south, the third
point, stretching out almost to the rugged little island, called Cadar
Island, increased the variety of the picture; and the two indentations
where now is Navy Bay, and the “Dead Man’s” Bay, at one time called
Hamilton’s Cove, added thereto. Then, turning toward the south, there
reposed the magnificently green, long island, now Wolfe Island, with
Gage Island in its front; and still extending the view around the Bay,
was to be seen the islands, now called Simcoe and Amherst, all richly
clothed with the garments of nature. One would wish to look upon a
faithful picture of this primeval appearance of Kingston Bay, before
even the French had planted a post or cleft a tree. However beautiful
Kingston of to-day may be regarded, with its graceful architecture, as
displayed in its public and private edifices; however grand the strong
fortifications, which silently utter words of warning to the passing
stranger whose nation covets our territory, while pretending to
depreciate it; however striking the combination which composes the
picture of Kingston and its harbor of to-day, they cannot exceed, as a
whole, in attractiveness, the prospect seen by Frontenac, of wood and
water so remarkably associated, and charmingly blended, ere the hand of
man had marred it.

It was immediately after this conference, between Frontenac and the
chiefs, when he concealed the true designs he entertained, that the
erection of the first fort was proceeded with. Its site was upon the
point of land by the entrance of the bay, near the _Tete du Pont_, and
commanded the entrance to Cataraqui Creek. It seems, from the testimony
of early settlers of Kingston, that the fort was separated from Kingston
by a deep trench, so that the point was converted into an island, upon
which was built the original village of Cataraqui. In later years, this
ditch has been obliterated by the filling in of material, and, in like
manner, a portion of the bay, immediately north of the point has
disappeared.

In the following year, LaSalle, who has been particularly referred to in
the introductory chapter, presented the following petition to King Louis
XIV.

“The proposer, aware of the importance to the Colony of Canada, of the
establishment of Fort Frontenac, of which he was some time in command,
and desiring to employ his means and his life in the King’s service, and
for the augmentation of the country, offers to support it, at his
expense, and reimburse its cost, on the following conditions, to wit:—
That His Majesty be pleased to grant in Seigniory, to the proposer, the
said fort, four leagues of country along the border of Lake Frontenac,
the two islands in front, named Ganounkouesnot and Kaouenesgo, and the
interjacent islets, with the same rights and privileges obtained
hitherto by those who hold lands in the country in Seigniory, with the
right of fishing in Lake Frontenac and the adjoining rivers, to
facilitate the support of the people of said Fort, together with the
command of said place and of said lake, under the orders and authority
of His Majesty’s Governor, Lieutenant-General in the country; on which
condition, the proposer will be bound:—1st. To maintain the said Fort;
to place it in a better state of defence; to keep a garrison there, at
least as numerous as that of Montreal, and as many as fifteen to twenty
laborers, during the two first years, to clear and till the land; to
provide it with necessary arms, artillery and ammunition, and that so
long as the proposer will command there, in His Majesty’s name, and
until some other persons be authorized to settle above the Long Sault of
the River St. Lawrence, through which people pass to the said Fort,
without being charged with similar expense, or to contribute to that
which the proposer will be obliged to incur for the preservation of the
said Fort.

“2nd. To repay Count de Frontenac, His Majesty’s Governor and
Lieutenant-General in Canada, the expense he incurred for the
establishment of said Fort, amounting to the sum of 12,000 to 13,000
livres, as proved by the statements thereof prepared.

“3rd. To make grants of land to all those willing to settle there, in
the manner usual in said country; to allow them the trade (_la traite_)
when their settlements will be in the condition required by the Edicts
and Regulations of the Sovereign Council of said country. 4th. To grant
them land for villages and tillage; to teach them trades, and induce
them to lead lives more conformable to ours, as the proposer had begun
to do with success, when he commanded there. 5th. To build a Church,
when there will be 100 persons; meanwhile, to entertain one or two
Recollet Friars, to perform Divine service, and administer the
sacraments there. 6th. His Majesty, accepting these proposals, is very
humbly supplicated to grant to the proposer letters of noblesse, in
consideration of the voyages and discoveries which he made in the
country at his expense, during the seven years he continually lived
there, the services he rendered in the country, and those he will
continue to render; and all the other letters necessary to serve him as
titles possessory to said Seigniory.”

In the succeeding year this petition was granted, and a decree to that
effect was issued by the King on the 13th May, 1675, and a Patent of
Nobility issued to La Salle; and Fort Frontenac, with four leagues of
the adjacent country, was created a Seigniory of Canada, and LaSalle its
first Seignior.

In the decree making the grant, it is specified that LaSalle shall
“induce the Indians to repair thither, give them settlements, and form
villages there in society with the French, to whom he shall give part of
said land to be cleared, all which shall be cleared and improved within
the time and space of twenty years. * * His Majesty wills that appeals
from the Judges (to be appointed by La Salle), be to the
Lieutenant-General of Quebec.” But, the subsequent chequered career and
early death of La Salle, probably prevented the carrying out of these
intentions.

When La Salle set out on his western exploring expedition, he “left
Sieur de la Forest in charge of the fort.” As before stated, La Salle
had many enemies, and among them the Governor, M. de la Barre, “who
actually sequestered Fort Frontenac and took possession of it,
pretending that La Salle had abandoned it. This was in 1682.”

The history of the French occupation of Cataraqui is marked by
occasional visits of the French Governor, and the presence of large and
small bodies of armed forces. In 1684 M. de la Barre, the successor of
Frontenac, tarried at Cataraqui two weeks with his convoy, which was
composed of 130 regular soldiers, 700 armed Canadians, 200 savages, and
a mixed body of several hundred from the west. It must have been a
picturesque sight, the encampment of this army. The veterans from France
in their uniform attire, the Canadians in their various hued garments,
and the Algonquins and Ottawas in their wild garb of paint and feathers
formed the components of a picture truly striking. A year or two later
and De Nonville, another Governor, was likewise found encamped here with
an army of 2000. At this time the original fort of wood was at its
greatest pitch of renown and glory. Here was kept stored within the
palisaded walls, arms, ammunition, and provision, beside furs. It was
while enjoying this considerable power that De Nonville committed the
act of treachery toward the Ganneyouses and Kentes Indians. But this act
was followed by an attack by the Indians, and the fort was in a state of
siege for the space of a month; “but was not taken.” Two years later,
however, finding it difficult to maintain this out-post so far from
Montreal, De Nonville ordered De Valrenne, the commander, to blow up the
fort, which was accordingly done, and “three barks on the lake were
scattered,” and “property to the extent of 20,000 crowns,” was
sacrificed.

The fort thus destroyed was rebuilt by the orders of Frontenac, and in
1695 he sent 700 workmen for the purpose. (For the circumstances and the
opposition respecting this, see Introductory.) The fort being completed
it was garrisoned with 48 soldiers. “The expense of re-victualling and
re-establishing the fort, cost 12,000 livres, or between £600 and
£700.”—(Draper).

Respecting the situation of the fort, a manuscript published in 1838,
under the direction of the Literary and Historical Society of Quebec,
says, “it was situated _at the bottom of a bay_, which a little river
flowing into Lake Ontario forms, close to the junction of Lake Ontario
and the River St. Lawrence. It consisted of four stone curtains, 120
feet each, defended by four square bastions. The walls were defended by
neither ditches nor palisades. There was no terrace to sustain it on the
inside. A wooden gallery was built all round for communicating from one
bastion to another. The platforms of these bastions were mounted on
wooden piles, and the curtains were pierced for loopholes.”

Father Charlevoix, writing in 1720, says of Fort Frontenac, “that it is
a square with four bastions built of stone, and the ground it occupies
is a quarter of a league in compass; its situation has something very
pleasant; the sides of the river present every way a landscape well
varied, and it is the same at the entrance of Lake Ontario.”

Fort Frontenac now fully re-established on a stronger basis, continued
for many years to be an important post, with respect to trading, and
likewise offensive and defensive operations against the Indians, and
also the English. Here was deposited vast stores of provision, and
materials of a war-like nature for the use of other forts.

In the first years of the 18th century, rivalry and jealousy between the
French and English Colonists, assumed a more determined form. Already
was gathering the fierce elements of Colonial war, which were to
culminate in the siege of Quebec, and spend its fury upon the Plains of
Abraham. We have seen that the two powers tried zealously, and often by
unscrupulous means to secure the alliance and aid of the savages, whose
love of war and desire to engage in the bloody attack, with the
allurements of promised presents, led them too often to scenes of blood
and rapine. The regions about Cataraqui were often the place of sudden
attack and cruel torture. The fort was an object of dread to the
Iroquois, of jealousy to the English, and with the view of breaking the
chain of forts, of which this was so important a one, the English set
about erecting one at Oswego.

In 1754 the eventful seven years war began, and one of the first events
was the sending of a force of 4000 men and 12 guns by the French
Governor, to attack Fort Oswego. But when the force reached Cataraqui,
it was found necessary to recall a portion of them to Lower Canada, and
defer the attack. One battalion was ordered to Niagara, while one or two
battalions were encamped under the walls of Frontenac. The total force
of Canadians and savages in arms west of Cataraqui at this time was
1000. The following year, it is found stated that, on “June 26, 1756,
English vessels were seen across the Bay of Quinté, coming toward
Frontenac. The French gave chase, and captured a sloop.”

July 29, 1757, witnessed the arrival at the fort of a considerable body,
and for days armed men continued to rendezvous here. The woods around
the fort were alive with soldiers. The attack upon Fort Oswego,
contemplated three years previous, was now about to be made. On the
evening of the 4th August, the party, of no small dimensions set out for
the attack. It consisted of 80 batteaux laden with artillery luggage and
provision, and canoes to carry the force of 3100 men. They started at
night, when the shades of darkness were gathering, and stealthily
directed their way, one boat after another, for the opposite shore. At
the approach of morning they came to a stop, where the thick woods met
the southern shore of the lake. The bushes were parted, and without
noise, the batteaux were, one by one, withdrawn from the water and
carefully covered with leaves, so that unless one passed directly by the
way, no indications could be observed of their existence. By the dawn of
day there was not a ripple upon the waters from the party, and the woods
were hushed, except by the denizens of the forest. All the day long the
party lay concealed. After night had fallen, re-embarkation took place,
slowly and calmly beneath the mild summer’s sky. For five days and
nights the same course was pursued, by which time they had reached the
neighbourhood of Fort Oswego, where reposed the English garrison,
unconscious of danger. The attack was so unexpected, and carried on with
so much spirit, that the garrison had to succumb before reinforcements
could be obtained, and the French returned to Fort Frontenac laden with
spoils.

But the time was approaching when the glory of Fort Frontenac should
depart. At this time the building itself was beginning to decay. Sixty
years had told upon the walls, and a writer of 1758 says they “were not
good.” However, had the fortifications been never so strong, the course
of events would have all the same witnessed the final fall of this
stronghold. “In this year, the commandant at Fort Frontenac was a
Monsieur de Noyan, King’s Lieutenant for Three Rivers. He was an old
man, but brave as a lion.” We have seen that de Lévis having withdrawn,
the fort was left with but a few men, Garneau says seventy; but
Warburton, one hundred and twenty Frenchmen and forty Indians. Even with
this number it was but an easy success for Bradstreet, with his three
thousand men and eleven guns, to possess himself of a fort weakened by
age. Having descended the Oswego River, Colonel Bradstreet crossed to
the Upper Gap and approached Cataraqui along the shore, observing great
caution, and landed about a mile to the west of the fort, August 25, in
the evening. During the following night he cautiously approached the
place of attack, and upon the ground where now stands the market
buildings, he erected a battery. So silently was this done, and with
such despatch, that before the morning of 27th August, 1758, he had it
all completed. The morning light revealed to the French how imminent was
their danger. Dismayed, but not discouraged, the intrepid commander
ordered every man to his post; but a few shots from the English guns
showed to him how futile was resistance. Having signified his intention
to surrender, which was about seven o’clock in the morning, he became,
with his garrison, prisoner of war. The conquerors found in “the fort
sixty pieces of cannon, sixteen mortars, an immense supply of
provisions, stores and ammunitions, with all the shipping on the lake,”
also, “several vessels richly laden with furs, to the value, it is said
of 70,000 louis d’ors.” There was also a large quantity of merchandise
intended for the western forts, beside some of the booty which had been
brought thither after the capture of Oswego. Colonel Bradstreet had no
intention of holding the fort; but to destroy, which he accordingly did,
with the vessels.

There was a feeble attempt to restore the fort in the fall, and “a small
detachment of troops and Canadians, under the command of the Chevalier
Benoit, was sent to Frontenac partly to protect merchandize and
ammunition passing up and down, and partly to rebuild the fort; and
subsequently the _Sieur de Cresse_, an assistant engineer, with Captain
Laforce, a sailor, were sent there to construct two new schooners, to
endeavor to maintain the supremacy on the lakes.” But the following year
the presence of Wolfe before Quebec, and Amherst at Carillon, rendered
the restoration of Frontenac an impossibility. The glory of Fort
Frontenac had forever departed. But the spirit of bravery again
appeared, in later days, in a people of another language, though,
nevertheless Canadians. In 1812–13 the Americans approached Kingston,
but the hostile and determined attitude assumed by the militia and
troops deterred them from attempting to touch the soil here, and when
they did attempt, both above and below, great indeed was the repulse and
discomfiture.




                             CHAPTER XLVII.

  CONTENTS—Cooper’s Essay—Loyalists naming places—King’s Town—Queen’s
    Town—Niagara—Spanish names—Cataraqui from 1759 to 1783—Desolation—
    The rebellion—Station, Carleton Island—Settling—Refugees at New
    York—Michael Grass—Prisoner at Cataraqui—From New York to Canada—
    Captain Grass takes possession of first township—First
    landholders—A letter by Captain Grass—Changes—Surveying forts and
    harbors—Report to Lord Dorchester—Kingston, _versus_ Carleton
    Island—The defenses—Troops—King’s township—First settlers—“Plan of
    township No. 1”—First owners of town lots—Names—Settlers upon the
    front—First inhabitants of Kingston—A naval and military station—
    The Commodore—Living of old—Kingston in _last century_—New
    fortifications.


               SETTLEMENT AT CATARAQUI BY THE LOYALISTS.

It would be impossible to write of Kingston without traveling the ground
already taken by writers, especially in an admirable essay written by C.
W. Cooper, Barrister-at-law, being a prize essay published in 1856. We
shall accept very many of the statements therein contained except we
find trustworthy grounds for controverting them. Much, however, of the
subject matter we had laboriously collected before this pamphlet was
placed in our hands by our friend M. Sweetnam, Esq., P. O. Inspector.

The practice of naming places, rivers, &c., after royal personages and
those occupying prominent places in the public service, naturally arose
from the intense loyalty which reigned in the bosoms of all who had
forsaken their old homes to settle under the old flag in the wilderness.
The pre-eminence of Kingston is indicated by the name, which seems to
have been given it at a very early date, as surveyor Collins uses that
name in 1788. This, the first township surveyed and settled, was named
_King’s_ township. Afterwards the town and township came to be called
Kingston. In this connection reference may be made to _Queenstown_ at
the head of navigation upon the Niagara River. Trade with the west along
Lake Erie was carried on, and boats were accustomed to pass up and down
on their way to and from Montreal. These boats had to be carried around
the Falls of Niagara. Already many of Butler’s Rangers and persons
connected with the Indian department, began to settle upon the Canadian
side of the Niagara. There was very shortly a collection of houses at
the point of landing, and the commencement of the portage, and nothing
was more natural than this, the second village formed by the United
Empire Loyalists, should receive the name of Queenstown, not unlikely
the name was bestowed by the Hon. R. Hamilton.

As we proceed, it will be observed how general was the habit to give
names derived from Great Britain and Englishmen. The most notable
exception to this is to be found in connection with those places that
received names during the time of Sir Peregrine Maitland, who had a
fancy for bestowing Spanish names.

During the time which elapsed between the evacuation of Frontenac, the
year after the destruction of the fort, in the autumn of 1759, until the
commencement of the American rebellion, and until its close, ruin and
desolation prevailed at Cataraqui. It is found intimated, but not on the
best authority, that there continued to live at this place a certain
number of French families and half-breed Indians. That such was the case
is quite possible, though, as yet, no positive proof is to be found.
But, at the most there was a few log huts around the ruins of the fort,
and upon the cleared ground adjacent thereto, or perhaps upon the site
of the ancient chapel of the Recollets. No doubt the Indians frequently
encamped in this vicinity, perhaps had a permanent village. The words of
Captain Grass, penned twenty-seven years later, may probably be accepted
as correct, that “scarse the vestige of a human habitation could be
found in the whole extent of the Bay of Quinté.”

The rebellion led to the establishment of a military post at the Island
of Chevereux, or Goat Island, subsequently named Carleton Island. This
position was found more convenient than the site of old Fort of
Frontenac. After the defeat of General Burgoyne, at Saratoga, in 1778,
there were many refugees who sought protection at the several military
posts along the northern frontier of New York, that of Carleton Island
among the rest. Indeed, it is probable that to this place a large number
escaped, as being more safe than Oswego or Niagara. A communication was
with some regularity kept up between this place and Montreal, and also
the Fort of Niagara. By the army boats, refugees may have passed to
Montreal; but it would seem that a considerable number remained
domiciled at Carleton Island, eating the food supplied by government. Of
course, able bodied men would be at once enrolled into the companies, to
do military service; yet there would remain a certain number of males,
besides the women, who were incapacitated for military life. During the
continuation of the war, there is every reason to believe that
individuals, perhaps families, would cross to the old fort at Cataraqui,
to stay for a while, or even take up their abode.

It may have been, that there were here some advantages in cultivating
the cleared land, which did not exist at Carleton Island. In the absence
of active duty, not unlikely the soldiers and officers would pass over
to fish or hunt, or perhaps to examine the land as to quality, and
facilities for settlement. Bongard says his father, who was with
Holland, said that a small village existed at Cataraqui. But it was not
until the close of the war 1783, that a systematic settlement commenced.
That settlers existed, during this year, at Cataraqui, there is no
doubt. It was sometimes referred to in Lower Canada as Seignory, No. 1.
Col. John Clark, whose father was in the Commissariat Department during
the war, says, that he was born at Cataraqui, in 1783, and was baptized
by the Rev. Mr. Stuart. The family must then have been living on the
mainland, as he speaks of another brother as being born on Carleton
Island. The probability is that at this date, there were a few families
living in the vicinity of the fort.

At the close of the war, it was a question of considerable importance,
what can be done to ameliorate the condition of the loyalists? While the
commissioners, who completed the terms of peace at Paris, chose to sink
the interests and welfare of the loyalists in their unseemly haste to
complete the treaty, the officers commanding in America, everywhere felt
the deepest sympathy, and keenest compassion for the refugees. Among
these was the officer commanding at New York. At this juncture of
affairs, when they were undecided, whether to embark for Nova Scotia, or
Lower Canada, it came to the ears of the General, that one Michael
Grass, of New York, had been a prisoner of the French, before the
conquest at Cataraqui. He caused that person to appear before him, and
to report as to the character of the country, and the probabilities of
its being a suitable place for refugees to seek homes. Mr. Grass having
rendered a favorable report, the result was that he was commissioned
Captain, and placed at the head of a band of loyalists, staying at New
York. They were dispatched in King’s ships, under the care of a
man-of-war.

Mr. Robert Everett Grass, of Sidney, the grandson of Captain Grass,
says, that the party of refugees set sail from New York in a fleet of
seven vessels, and after a long voyage of nine weeks, during which they
encountered a severe gale, lasting eight days, and nearly wrecking them,
they reached Sorel. This was probably in the early part of 1783. The men
of the party ascended the St. Lawrence in batteaux, and landed at the
mouth of Little Cataraqui Creek, thence proceeding westward, prospecting
as far as Collin’s Bay. Crossing to the west side of this little bay,
Captain Grass attempted to drive a stake in the ground, with the
intention of fixing a tent, or commencing a survey, whereupon he found
it rocky. Remarking that he had come too far to settle upon a rock, he
returned to the east of the cove, and took possession of the first
township of the Bay Quinté. There seems some reason to believe that,
when Grass arrived in Canada, and explained to the Government his
mission, that Surveyor General Holland, directed Deputy Surveyor Collins
to proceed with Captain Grass to Cataraqui, so that he might be guided
by him. If such was the case, the base line along the front of the first
township, must have been run before Captain Grass crossed to the west of
Collins Bay, and rejected the land lying to the west thereof. Captain
Grass, as well as the surveying party, returned to Sorel for the winter,
and, in the spring, they returned, accompanied by all of the families,
under Captain Grass. It was the summer of 1784 that the first township
was occupied. There was some dissatisfaction at the preference accorded
to Captain Grass by those who had been in Canada. His superior claim was
however acknowledged. At the same time, there appears to have been some
compromise, from the fact, that while Captain Grass himself obtained the
first lot adjoining to the reserve for the town, the second one, which
was by number, lot 24 was granted to the Rev. Mr. Stuart, and the next
to Mr. Herkimer, neither of whom had any connection with Captain Grass’
company.

The following extract of a letter written by Captain Grass, at a
subsequent period, reveals to us the appearance the place presented to
him, at the time of his settling. The old gentleman had some grievance
to make known to the public, respecting a road, and he commences his
communication thus:—

“Seven and twenty years, Mr. Printer, have rolled away since my eyes,
for the second time, beheld the shores of Cataraqui. In that space of
time, how many changes have taken place in the little circle in which
fate had destined me to move! How many of the seats of my old associates
are now vacant! How few of these alas! to mourn with me the loss of the
companions of our sufferings, or to rejoice with me at the prosperous
condition of this our land of refuge! Yet will I not repine; they are
gone, I trust, to a better land, where He who causeth the wilderness to
smile and blossom as the rose, hath assigned to them a distinguished
place, as a reward for their humble imitation of his labors. Yes! seven
and twenty years ago, scarce the vestige of a human habitation could be
found in the whole extent of the Bay of Quinté. Not a settler had dared
to penetrate the vast forests that skirted its shores. Even on this
spot, now covered with stately edifices, were to be seen only the
bark-thatched wigwam of the savage, or the newly erected tent of the
hardy loyalists. Then, when the ear heard me, it blessed me for being
strong in my attachment to my sovereign, and high in the confidence of
my fellow-subjects, I led the loyal band, I pointed out to them the site
of their future metropolis, and gained for persecuted principles, a
sanctuary—for myself and followers a home.” “Kingston, 7 Dec. 1811.”
(Signed)      “G.”

On the 29th May, 1788, Lord Dorchester, the Governor of Canada, issued
instructions to John Collins, Surveyor, to make a survey of “forts,
harbours, &c., from Carleton Island to Michilmacinac.” His report was
found among the “Simcoe papers.” The report, dated Quebec, 6th Dec.,
1788, says:—

My Lord—“In obedience to your Lordship’s instructions, wherein is
specified, that doubts being entertained whether Carleton Island or
Kingston” (and this shows how early the royal name had been given to the
first township) “is the most eligible station for the King’s ships of
war to protect the navigation of Lake Ontario, and the upper part of the
river St. Lawrence, I am to make this particularly an object of my
attention, and report how far it may be necessary to occupy either, or
both, and what works I judge advisable for that purpose.” “With respect
to Kingston, and what is there called the harbour, and where the town is
laid out, is not the best, situation on this side for vessels, as it
lies rather open to the lake, and has not very good anchorage near the
entrance, so that they are obliged to run a good way up for shelter; the
most eligible situation is to the east.” After referring to the more
frequent directions of the wind, he concludes, that to get into the
lake, it is as easy from Kingston as from Carleton Island, but that the
latter affords the best shelter. “Having brought forward all the
material information and observations I have been able to make and
procure, and having duly weighed the several properties, both of
Kingston and Carleton Island, relative to naval purposes only,” he
concludes, “that the preference rather leans on the side of Carleton
Island. If the object was that of trade only, or regarded merely by the
transport of goods to Niagara, I do not see that Carleton Island has any
material advantage over Kingston; but, as a station for the King’s ships
of war, I am induced to think that Carleton Island is the best,” as it
possessed many natural advantages. Respecting Kingston, a fort and
out-works could be constructed to protect the harbour; but an enemy
might advance in the rear, and bombard the fort and the navy. “In regard
to the present condition of the works at this post, the whole is so far
in ruins as to be altogether defenceless, and incapable of being
repaired, the ditch which is in the rock, has never been sufficiently
excavated, the other works have been completed, but it strikes me they
were never capable of any serious defence, as well as from the bastions,
as well as the oblique manner in which their faces are seen from the
other works, but the whole could only be considered as a temporary
matter. The green logs with which the fort was built, could not be
expected to last long: the ground is favorable for a fort of greater
capacity and strength, but it is probable that such a system may have
been originally adopted for the works, at the place it might have been
thought adequate to its importance, to the number of troops designed for
its defence, and the strength it was likely an enemy would be able to
bring against it; and there ideas would again be brought into
consideration, if this post should be established, or any new system
adopted. Without, therefore, going, in this place, into a detail of
particular works, I will remark, that as the ground in front widens and
extends somewhat over the extremities of the work, particularly on the
right, precaution should be taken to strengthen those points towards the
field, to contract, in some degree, the advantage an enemy attacking
might have in the extent of his flanks. The barracks, although partly
dismantled, and in a very bad condition, may be still repaired.”

From the foregoing, it may be inferred that the troops had all been
withdrawn from the head of the St. Lawrence, and that only a
Commissariat Department remained at Carlton Island. Probably, it was
only when Canada was erected into a distinct Province, that regular
troops again were stationed here, and then, it having been ascertained
that Carleton Island would belong to the United States, Kingston
superseded it.

Although the “King’s Township” was mainly settled by the band of
Loyalists who came by way of the St. Lawrence, from New York, there were
several others who received grants of land here, a few of whom, no
doubt, reached Kingston at as early a date as 1783, and, as we have
seen, they may have visited the place, previous to that date. Among
these, was Col. Hanjost, or John Joost, or Joseph Herkimer, who had been
compelled to forsake his home at the German Flats, where his father
lived. Looking at “A Plan of Township No. 1,” (now Kingston), “in the
District of Mecklenburgh, surveyed in 1783, with the proprietor’s names
on the lots,” in the Crown Lands Department, the following may be
observed. Just by the grounds of the Fort, the water is called Cataraqui
Harbor. Across the mouth of the Bay, and between Points Frederick and
Henry, is Haldimand Cove. Beyond Point Henry, is Hamilton Cove. Passing
up the river, the first lot has upon it the name of Joseph and Mary
Brant. This lot was not numbered, however. (Capt. Brant came to the
place in 1785, and remained living there for a time). Still proceeding
along the west shore of the river, lot No. 1, has the name of Neil
McLean; No. 2, Henry Wales; No. 3, James Clark; No. 4, Capt. Crawford;
No. 5, Lieut. Brown; No. 6, Sovereign; No. 7, at first was granted to
Lawrence; this name is superseded by the name of Braton. To the west of
the road, is a block of land, of 700 acres, for “Capt. James McDonnell;”
but this name is erased, and Robert Macaulay written instead. Probably
Macaulay became the purchaser. To the east of the road, is another block
of land, for John Macaulay. The island in the mouth of the river, called
“Isle Aux Pére,” was granted to Neil McLean, “by order of General
Haldimand.” Turning to the south of the Fort, the first lot has the name
of Capt. Grass; the second from the Fort, Rev. Mr. Stuart; the third has
the names upon it of Lawrence Herkimer, Sam. Hilton, Capt. Jost Hartman;
the fourth, Francis Lozion, Rockland, James Brown, John Moshier; fifth,
Lieut. Ellerbeck; sixth, John Stuart, Lieut. Gallary, Lieut. Mower,
Charles Pauder; seventh, Capt. McGarrow; eighth, Lieutenant Atkinson;
ninth, Robert Vanalstine; tenth, Richard Moorman; eleventh, R. Gider:
this lot lies on the “Petite Cataraqui;” twelfth, Lieut. Kotte,
Surveyor, and afterward John Stuart; thirteenth, Capt. Grass, also Capt.
Everett; fourteenth, Grass; fifteenth, Capt. Harkman; sixteenth Nicholas
Herkimer. This brings us to Collins’ Bay, or, as the original name
appears “Ponegeg.” Continuing westward, among others, are to be seen the
names of Purdy, Capt. Wm. Johnson, Wm. Fairfield, Senr., Daniel Rose,
Matthias Rose, Robert Clark, James Clark, Sen., Sergt. John Taylor,
Capt. J. W. Myers, who has two lots; (these two last became the first
settlers in Sidney and Thurlow); Lieut. James Robins, Sergt. Williams,
Lieut. Best, Lieut. John Durenbury, and then there was a lot (No. 18)
for the “King’s saw mill,” subsequently Booth’s Mills. Of the foregoing,
it is uncertain how many became settlers. But the most of them seem to
have obtained these front lots, irrespective of Captain Grass.

Of the other early settlers, the following are, doubtless, the principal
ones. For their names, I am partially indebted to Mr. G. H. Detlor,
himself the descendant of an Irish Palatine. “Wm. MacAulay, Thomas
Markland, John Kirby, John Cummings, Peter Smith, England, John
Ferguson, Lyons, Pousett, McDonnell, Boyman, Cook, Taylor, Smyth,
DeNyke, Murney, Cuthbertson, Alcott. The Rev. John Stuart, Hon. Richard
Cartwright, Allen McLean.” These did not probably come the first year,
but within the first two or three years.

It is said that John Fralick or Freeligh, who had held a commission in
the army, was one of the first settlers in Kingston, and built the
fourth house erected. Other names given, as among the first inhabitants
of the village of Kingston, are John Forsyth, Joseph Forsyth, Anderson,
Punbee, Merrill, Stoughton, Gray, Hix, Cassady, Ashley, Burley, Stower,
Donald McDonald, James Richardson, Patrick Smith, John Steel, Ebenezer
Washburn. Early settlers on the front of the Township, beside those
before given, were Holmes, Day, Ferris, several Wartmans, and Graham.

Before proceeding with the history of Kingston, it is desirable to
notice more particularly some events connected with the occupancy of
Kingston, as a Naval and Military station. We have seen that Surveyor
Collins gave the preference for Carleton Island. But Lord Dorchester
decided that Kingston was the most desirable place for purposes of
defense, and it is a striking fact that the views held by him have been,
to a certain extent, reiterated by Gen. Michel, in 1867. Both seemed to
hold the opinion that Canada, west of Kingston, was untenable against an
invading foe. When Simcoe assumed the Government of the newly formed
Upper Province, it was the declared desire of Lord Dorchester, that he
should select Kingston as the capital, and make it a well fortified
town. Already steps had been taken to establish a naval as well as a
military station. Haldimand’s Cove, between Point Frederick and Point
Henry, had been selected for the Naval depot, and here was a Dock Yard
and Stores, which were continued for many years. These were commenced
about 1789, and the same year barracks were built by soldiers, upon the
ruins of the old fort, which was the commencement of the Military
Station, and the head-quarters of the troops in Upper Canada, and the
residence of the Commander-in-Chief; also a staff of the Ordinance and
Engineer Departments was kept up. Cooper, writing 1856, says: “Of late
years, a general reduction has been made,—a small garrison only is now
kept, and the Artillery is wholly withdrawn.” (This was at the time of
the Crimean war). The establishment was, some dozen years ago, greatly
reduced, and is now wholly abandoned. In years past, however, the
officers and crew of Her Majesty’s ship Niagara, were regularly piped to
quarters in a handsome stone building in the Dock Yard, which was
manned, and the crew disciplined in complete man-o’-war fashion. In
these bygone days, Kingston was the residence of the Commodore in charge
of the Naval Department, who lived in a style which would have quite
outshone that of some of our economical Governors. Those connected with
this and other departments, followed the worthy Commodore’s example, and
as the population was not then great, the influence of that example
rendered the town, if not a very prosperous, certainly a very gay, and
seemingly happy one. Times have certainly changed since then, as far as
the expenditure of Imperial money is concerned.

After Kingston had been selected as a military station, it naturally
grew more rapidly. The presence of the soldiers and of seamen, and their
expenditure of money, had the effect of starting into quicker life, the
infant town; but when Simcoe, in 1792, passed it by, and sought his
gubernatorial residence at Newark, it received a material check in its
growth. Being the largest collection of houses in Upper Canada, Kingston
had claims, irrespective of the existence of the two arms of the
service. During the first decade in the history of Upper Canada,
Kingston did not rise above a small village, although it was honoured,
sometimes, with the appellation of “city.” Rochefoucault says, 1795,
that Kingston “consists of about 120 or 30 houses. The ground in the
immediate vicinity of the city, rises with a gentle swell, and forms,
from the lake onwards, as it were, an amphitheatre of lands, cleared,
but not yet cultivated. None of the buildings are distinguished by a
more handsome appearance from the rest. The only structure, more
conspicuous than the others, and in front of which the English flag is
hoisted, is the barracks, a stone building surrounded with palisades.
All the houses stand on the northern bank of the bay, which stretches a
mile further into the country. On the southern bank are the buildings
belonging to the naval force, the wharfs, and the habitations of all the
persons, who belong to that department. The King’s ships lie at anchor
near those buildings, and consequently have a harbour and road separate
from the port for merchantmen.”

“Kingston, considered as a town, is much inferior to Newark; the number
of houses is nearly equal in both. Kingston may contain a few more
buildings, but they are neither so large nor so good as at Newark. Many
of them are log houses, and those which consist of joiners’ work, are
badly constructed and painted. But few new houses are built. No
town-hall, no court-house, and no prison have hitherto been constructed.
The houses of two or three merchants are conveniently situated for
loading and unloading ships; but, in point of constructure, these are
not better than the rest.

“Kingston seems better fitted for a trading town than Newark, were it
only for this reason, that the ships, which arrive at the latter place,
and are freighted for Lake Erie, pass by the former, to sail again up
the river as far as Queen’s Town, where the portage begins.”

Cooper remarks that “Fort Frontenac existed for several years after the
conquest, the remains of the tower in the interior being removed in
1827. The present barracks were built, the officers’ quarters in 1821,
the men’s stone barracks in 1827, and the frame barracks in 1837. At the
commencement of the war in 1812, Point Henry, the site of the present
extensive military works, was covered with trees; in the following year
a rude fort of logs and embankment was thrown up. A year or two after
its erection two large and substantial stone towers were added to the
defences, they were lofty, square towers, rounded at the corners. These
remained until 1826 or 1828. Stone magazines, ordnance offices, and
armoury were built outside the fort during the years 1816, ‘17 and ‘18.
Extensive stone barracks, roofed with tin, were built between 1818 and
1820; one of these within the fort was 230 feet in length; another
building which stood where the advanced battery has since been built,
was 80 feet in length, and formed the officers’ quarters.

“These barracks stood until 1841, when they were pulled down and the
material sold. Two large houses in Brock Street, and one in Barrack
Street, were built from the stone, which, it may be remarked in passing,
is not the ordinary blue limestone in general use, but a much whiter
material, apparently not so durable. The erection of the present fort
was commenced in 1832, several previous years having been spent in the
quarrying and preparing material. It was first occupied in 1836. On
Point Frederick the first works were a breastwork of logs and earth,
with traversing platforms for guns; within the breastwork was a block
house. These works were built during or just after the war; this block
house was burnt in the year 1820. There were also built, about the same
time, a block house surrounded with a strong stockade on the hill on
Princess Street, on the lot formerly owned by the late Mr. Jacob Ritter;
a small redan on Ordnance Street; a battery at Mississauga Point; a
block house near the present Marine Railway; one on Stuart’s or Murney’s
Point; another at Snake Island; one which stood until recently, near the
present new court house, with those now standing, one of them on the
hill to the east of the city, and the other at the west end of
Wellington Street. These block houses, excepting, of course, that on
Snake Island, were all connected by a strong stake fence, or stockade;
portions of which still exist, and formed a chain of defences
surrounding, what was then, the whole city.”

From the first, it will be seen that the village of Kingston was to a
great extent indebted to the public service for its prosperity. Isaac
Wild, writing in 1796, says that from 60 to 100 men are quartered in the
barracks.




                            CHAPTER XLVIII.

  CONTENTS—The situation of Kingston—Under military influence—
    Monopolist—Early history of legislation—In 1810—Gourlay’s
    statement—Police—Modern Kingston—Lord Sydenham—Seat of government—
    Perambulating—Surrounding country—Provisions—An appeal for
    Kingston as capital—Barriefield—Pittsburgh—Building of small
    crafts—Famous—Roads—Waterloo—Cemetery—Portsmouth—Kingston Mill—
    Little Cataraqui—Collinsby—Quantity of land—Early and influential
    inhabitants—Post masters—“Honorable men”—Deacon, Macaulay,
    Cartwright, Markland, Cummings, Smiths, Kerby—Allen McLean, first
    lawyer—A gardener—Sheriff McLean—“Chrys” Hagerman—Customs—Sampson,
    shooting a smuggler—Hagerman, M.P.P.—Removes to Toronto.


            THE FIRST TOWNSHIP—EVENTS IN ITS EARLY HISTORY.

It must be admitted, the place did not possess from its geographical
situation the requisites for becoming a great city, although its
situation at the head of the St. Lawrence, would always secure for it a
certain degree of importance. There are evils incident to places,
depending upon the military and naval bodies, and these can be seen in
connection with the history of Kingston. Anything which drew away for a
time, to any extent, either arm of the service, had a damaging effect
upon the prosperity, and stagnation resulted in business.

Early Kingston must be regarded as a town growing up in the back woods,
with a population governed and influenced more or less by the society of
officers and soldiers, and while the former gave dignity and tone to the
higher classes, the lower portion of society was correspondingly and for
evil, affected by the presence of the soldiers, with the numerous
groggeries, and low houses of entertainments, which particularly in
former days, were found to exist in connection with military
establishments.

In the first years of Canada, speculation was common with a certain
class. Land claims could be purchased for a mere song. The holder of a
“location ticket,” would often part with his title for a few quarts of
rum, while many other holders were glad to sell for a few pounds of
ready money, or certain articles of stock. It came that in time, a
certain number of monopolists, living at Kingston, held land in the rear
concessions and neighboring townships. The Imperial money in Kingston
was often spent without contributing to the improvement of the adjacent
country. But the time came when the encircling settlers compelled a more
generous course of conduct.

But, much obscurity rests upon the history of the first seven or ten
years of the village of Kingston. The effort has been made to gather up
the fragments pertaining thereto, and arrange them so as to form a
connected whole.

Cooper says that “the town was laid out in 1793, being then confined to
what is now the eastern portion in the vicinity of the _Tête du Pont_
barracks, and what was then known as the Cataraqui Common, lots 25, 24,
23, on which is situated the chief part of the city, were then farm lots
of 200 acres each, and uncleared.”

According to the census roll in the office of the clerk of the peace
1794, the population of Cataraqui village was 345. It would seem that
the appearance of the village was not very pleasing. But the
surroundings had a certain wild beauty. The first buildings were of the
most inferior kind. Kingston now so beautiful in its fine buildings and
well appointed streets, had in its first days but the humblest of log
tenements, with the rude Indian wigwam for a neighbor. Instead of fair
broad streets, and a well ordered park, there was the Indian foot path,
and the thick tangled wood, with the stately pine.

In 1793 an act was passed “to fix the times and places of holding the
courts of quarter sessions, within the several districts,” according to
which it was provided that the courts of the midland district should be
held in Kingston, in April and October of each year. This added somewhat
to the dignity of the place. Then in 1801, there was created an act to
empower commissioners of the peace, to establish a market at Kingston,
where might be exposed for sale “butchers’ meat, butter, eggs, poultry,
fish, and vegetables.” It was further enacted that all “rules and
regulations shall be published by causing a copy of them to be affixed
in the most public place in every township in the district, and at the
doors of the church and court house of the said town of Kingston, &c.”

In 1810, Kingston was yet a small place. Mr. Miles who moved there at
the time says there was not a sidewalk or pavement, and he for a time
boarded in one of several log houses close by the market place, “where
was no lack of mud in the spring and fall, and it was no uncommon thing
for waggons to be pried out by fence rails just north of the market
place. Pine trees of the forest yet waved almost over the market place.
A thick wood covered Point Henry, and the ground, where now is erected
St. Andrew’s Church and parsonage. The limit of the town on the north
was at Store Street, now Princess, the last house being on the north
east side, Alcott’s old store, and on the west side where Mr. Meadows
now resides. The road, for it was then such only after passing, Alcott’s
turned to the right, and went a zigzag course northwards, till it
reached the second concession, now Waterloo road. This was a distance of
five miles from the foot of Store Street.”

A resident writing to the _Kingston Gazette_, December 26, 1815, among
other things, says that the town of Kingston, “possessing so many
advantages, it is time that its inhabitants should adopt some plan of
improving and embellishing of it. The streets require very great
repairs, as in the rainy seasons it scarcely possible to move about
without being in mud to the ankles; from the breadth, they will admit of
very wide footpaths on both sides, which ought to be paved, at least in
every part of the town where the buildings are connected. Lamps are
required to light the streets in the dark of the moon. Trees should be
planted on each side. The streets should be kept free of lumber of every
kind, and piles of wood. A fire engine, with a certain number of
buckets, with a company of firemen should exist. But first the
legislature must form a code of laws, forming a complete police. To meet
expense, government might lay a rate upon every inhabitant householder
in proportion to value of property in house.”

Another correspondent under the signature of Citizen, says, “January 27,
1816, that he approves of “A Residents” remarks, and in addition, he
suggests that the lower classes follow the example of the liberal spirit
manifested among heads of society in the previous summer in contributing
to the turnpiking of the streets, and paving the footpaths before their
own doors. They ought to imitate, though faintly, that noble and
generous example.” Besides this, among other things, Citizen speaks
against persons who work at their trades on Sunday, instead of going to
church. “Luther,” another correspondent says, there is the noise of
hammers and axes from sunrise to sunset, on Sundays.

According to the _Kingston Gazette_, August 14, 1829, the census taken
that year shewed the population of the town to be 3528, but this did not
include the military. The number of inhabitants in 1836 was 6000.

At the present time, 1867, Kingston is said to cover an area of 2930
acres, while Toronto boasts of 5885 acres.

R. Gourlay says, in 1816, that Kingston “is now progressing rapidly in
population and buildings, as well as in business. From 1811 to 1816 the
number of dwellings increased from 130 to 300; but it is estimated that
100 more will have been erected at the close of this year.” Much of this
prosperity was doubtless due to the war, causing so many troops to be
stationed there; at the same time business and general growth of the
City received an impetus which the close of the war failed entirely to
arrest. This year a bill passed Parliament “to regulate the police,
within the town of Kingston.” More ample provision was made in 1824.

In 1821, a writer says, Kingston was the largest town in Upper Canada,
containing about 5000 inhabitants including the military. “The people
live in good style, but are not very hospitable; they are mostly in the
mercantile business.” The number of inhabitants is probably over
estimated, as in 1824 it is stated on good authority, that the
population amounts to 2336. “The buildings are of such an inferior
description as scarcely to be worthy of notice.”


                            MODERN KINGSTON.

The events chronicled in this work are mainly those which came to pass
prior to 1830, and the history of the first township here recorded must
mainly be limited to those early days. It will not, however, be
inappropriate to glance, and it will be a mere glance at the Kingston of
modern days. The greatest event in connection with Kingston, was the
selection by Lord Sydenham, when the Upper and Lower Provinces were
united in 1840, into one, for the capital of United Canada. Its claim to
that honor as the most central city cannot be questioned. It may fairly
be questioned on the other hand whether it was a wise and judicious
policy, which caused Kingston to be forsaken, and the perambulatory
system to be substituted. Had the Seat of Government permanently rested
at Kingston, much expense to the country would have been saved, and at
the same time a great deal of heart bitterness stirred up by political
agitators, likewise prevented. But the hopes of Kingston as the capital
were shortlived, and with the death of Lord Sydenham, in 1842, resulting
from an accident, who had been mainly the cause of Kingston becoming the
capital, the brightest prospects of the oldest town in Upper Canada,
were buried.

In 1845 Government was removed to Montreal. The motives according to
Cooper, which had much to do in determining the removal were not such as
are supposed to actuate statesmen. After rebutting the charge which it
seems had been made, that there was “no surrounding country calculated
to furnish marketable produce to a large non-producing population,” and
referring to the undoubted facts that the townships along the Bay of
Quinté were far more than adequate to meet all the gastronomists wants,
he concludes. “It may seem a small consideration when treating of so
important a branch of the subject, to take into account these
circumstances, but there is no ignoring the fact that the absence of
some of these minor luxuries had a serious effect on the minds, and
perhaps digestion of some of the officials of Her Majesty’s Provincial
Government, and some people at a distance are persuaded that Kingston is
a city built on a rock, surrounded with barren and stoney wilds, out of
which a bare existence is wrung by the occupants, and but a scanty
supply afforded to the City, and in deference to those thus
unenlightened, facts are dwelt on which may seem trivial to those in the
least acquainted with the neighborhood. Since 1845, when the Government
was removed to Montreal, this City has greatly increased in the number
of well built and commodious houses, which, with a well regulated and
well supplied market, tempting the most fastidious, would prevent even
the temporary inconveniences which in that year were felt. If any
families had to adopt double-bedded rooms, and to import their own
celery in those days, we can now assure them ‘_nous avous changes tout
cela_.’ In short we claim for a City central, indeed almost in the very
centre of the Province to be governed, proverbially healthy,
substantially built, strongly fortified, well lighted, thoroughly
drained, pleasantly situated, abundantly supplied, easy of access, the
focus of a net-work of good roads, the outlet of the produce of several
rich countries, provided with a good harbour, and enjoying many other
advantages, a pre-eminence among all Canadian Cities, as the permanent
Seat of the Government of the Province.”

The existence of the Seat of Government at Kingston, although of short
duration, had a beneficial effect; many handsome buildings were erected
besides those used for the several Public Departments. “The Municipal
Legislature of the City was encouraged to make improvements in streets,
drainage, sidewalks, and otherwise, and to erect the present handsome
and expensive edifice, the City Hall and Market House, though not so
useful as it would have been had the Government remained here. The whole
building is occupied, and produces a revenue exceeding in amount the
interest on its cost. On the whole it may fairly be considered that the
City was improved by the temporary location of the Government here.”

BARRIEFIELD.—The Cataraqui Bridge, which spans the great Cataraqui
River, connects Kingston with the Township of Pittsburgh, the origin of
which name is sufficiently well indicated. Close by, is the village of
Barriefield, “named after Commodore Barrie, who was head of the Naval
Department for many years.” “It forms a sort of suburb to the city, and
though not a place of much increase, has been long settled. It has an
elevated ground, and from it the visitor obtains a very favorable and
pleasing view of Kingston, with its harbors, forts and towers. At
Barriefield, are built the best small crafts, skiffs, and pleasure boats
in use throughout the Province. They are sent hence to all parts, and
their character and build are well known to the aquatic sportsman, and
amateur mariner. Not only in the Province, but abroad, these boats are
sought after, and in use, some of them being now afloat on the Lake of
Geneva. The Kingston, Pittsburgh, and Gananoque, and the Kingston and
Phillipsville Macadamized Roads run through this township, opening up
the township beyond, and affording to the settler a ready access to a
never-failing market. Within this township, are upwards of thirty-eight
miles of thoroughly macadamized roads, besides good country roads to and
between the concessions. That part of Pittsburgh where Barriefield
stands, and for about two miles eastward, was formerly part of the
township of Kingston. When the site of the Town of Kingston was first
selected, the spot where this village is situated was suggested, but was
overruled in favor of the present locality of Kingston, which certainly
offered greater advantages for the site of a city.”

Kingston Township contains, not only the city of that name, but various
villages; “one of the nearest to that city is that of _Waterloo_, a very
pretty and neat little hamlet, about three miles from town. It contains
about 300 inhabitants, and has its Town Hall, Church, Stores, Inns, &c.”

“In the neighborhood of this village, is the _Cataraqui Cemetery_, laid
out on a rising ground crowned by a grove of small pine trees. Much care
and skill in landscape gardening has been displayed in rendering the
ground picturesque and pleasing; a fine and extended view of the
surrounding country, and a pretty glimpse of the Bay is obtained from
the Cemetery grounds. This spot is not excelled in beauty and
appropriateness, by anything in the Province, and is compared by
travelers, who view it, to Greenwood Cemetery, in Brooklyn, N. Y. It
covers some sixty-five acres of land, and when ornamented by such
numerous and elegant monuments, as the living have erected to mark their
respect to the beloved dead in older places of sepulture, will be
unsurpassed by the oldest and most beautiful cemeteries known.”

“_Portsmouth_ is another village, about equidistant from Kingston with
Waterloo, lying westward on the Lake shore; it was at one time, a very
bustling spot, and much enterprise was evinced in ship-building. It
suffered, for a time, from the withdrawal of the Seat of Government, and
the construction of the St. Lawrence canals, but has now recovered its
former prosperity, which promises to continue. The ship-building
business has revived, and is carried on with energy and success. In its
neighborhood are several handsome houses and villa-residences: the
surrounding country offering very inviting spots for building. It
contains about 350 inhabitants, and a large amount of rateable property,
and has an exceedingly neat unique little Church, in old English style,
with a belfry.” Portsmouth is now united to Kingston, by the erection of
buildings between them.

Within the Township of Kingston, about five miles from the city, is the
old “Kingston Mill.” It is situated upon the Rideau Canal. The traveler,
as he passes along by train, over a tubular bridge, will be struck by
the beauty and grandeur of the scene. (For particulars, see “Early Years
of Upper Canada.”)

Little Cataraqui is a stream of small dimensions, confined to the
township. In addition to the Little Cataraqui stream, there is running
across the township, the Collins Creek, so named after Surveyor Collins.
Not far from its source, in the north east part of the township, is a
small, pleasant lake, of the same name, while, at its mouth, is Collins’
Bay. This is a beautiful inlet of the Bay Quinté, and forms a good
harbour. The place is known as Collinsby, and is situated about five
miles west of Kingston.

The quantity of land in the township, is about 47,906. The soil is
principally clay upon a limestone foundation; but still there is much of
it capable of bearing good crops, to the careful and scientific farmer.

Thomas Deacon, father of the present Post Master, was Post Master from
1800 to 1836, when his duties in the Commissariat Department obliged him
to resign that office. The Hon. John Macauley occupied the post from
1813 to 1836, when he resigned, and was succeeded by the present
incumbent, Robert Deacon.

We will supplement the reference we have made to the leading men of
Kingston, by giving extracts from a communication we have, at the last
moment received, written by one who, now well advanced in life, spent
his earlier years of manhood in Kingston, when the first inhabitants
were in the afternoon of their life.

The Hon. R. Cartwright, the pioneer merchant, and Judge of Mecklenburgh,
seems to have stood next in importance and influence to the Rev. Mr.
Stuart. “Among the prominent merchants were Thomas Markland, John
Cummings, Peter Smith, John Kirby, and John Macaulay.” They were “all
honorable men,” and “members of the English Church,” and of undeviating
loyalty. Mr. Markland left a son. John Cummings left no issue. He was a
man of “great energy; a magistrate, and filled other offices under the
Government.” Peter Smith was “highly respected, upright in all his
dealings, and free from any moral or political reproach.” “A fine
specimen of an English gentleman.” He “carried with him evidence that he
was no stranger to good dinners, and understood the qualities of good
wine.” He died at an advanced age, 1825, leaving a son and two
daughters.

“John Kirby was another fine specimen of an Englishman. He loved good
wine and good dinners. Extremely affable, always in good humor,
universally respected. His highest ambition, in the evening of his days,
seemed to be the enjoyment of domestic tranquility, and a quiet home,
made happy to him by a wife of rare sense, intelligent, and possessed of
many amiable accomplishments.” The Hon. John Macaulay had a well
disciplined mind, possessed great energy of character, and was decided
in his political opinions no doubt, from conscientious motives. In his
business transactions “he was scrupulously exact.” “Extremely temperate
in his habits. Was one of those who passed through life without exposing
themselves to the obloquy of their political opponents.” Allen McLean,
Esq., the first Lawyer of Kingston; created such by an order in Council.
His “abilities were moderate,” and “his original education defective.”
“A man of considerable taste, modest, dignified in his deportment. For
many years, was the only legal adviser in the place. He was a faithful
representative in Parliament for many years. Was liberal in his
political opinions.” “As proof of his good taste, he was proprietor of
one of the best gardens in the Province. It covered one acre of ground,
and contained many choice fruit trees, such as apples, plums, pears,
peach, &c.,—all tastefully arranged, kept in prime order, and defended
from the wind by a high wall. He took an honest pride in showing his
garden to his friends who called upon him, and was not stinted in
distributing its luscious products.” Mr. McLean left one daughter, who
became the wife of John McLean, Esq., Sheriff of the Midland District.
Christopher Hagerman resided for many years in Kingston. Was, for many
years, Custom House Officer, and while so, one of his students (Mr.
Samson, afterwards of Belleville) detected a man, by the name of Lyons,
in the act of carrying smuggled goods, and ordered him to stop. On his
refusing to do so, Mr. S. discharged his pistol, which took effect, the
ball passing through the chest. Lyons rushed to his house, a few doors
off, and fell exhausted from loss of blood. Mr. Samson, frightened at
what he had done, hastened to summon two doctors, Drs. Armstrong and
Sampson. This occurred before daylight, on the morning of the 26th June,
1824. The life of Lyons was despaired of for many days; but, eventually,
he grew better, and gained a moderate degree of health. It is creditable
to Mr. Hagerman, that he cheerfully paid the medical attendants. Mr.
Hagerman represented Kingston in Parliament several years. He removed to
Toronto, a few years previous to the rebellion of 1836.




                             CHAPTER XLIX.

  CONTENTS—The second town—Ernest’s town—King George—His children—
    Settlers of Ernesttown—Disbanded soldiers—Johnson’s regiment—Major
    Rogers’ corps—The “Roll”—Number—By whom enlisted—An old book—
    Township surveyed—Settling—Traveling—Living in tents—A change—
    Officers—Names—Occupants of lots—Mill Creek—The descendants—
    Quantity of land—Village—The settlers in 1811—The main road—
    Incorporation of Bath—Trading—Fairfield—The library—Bath by
    Gourlay—Bath of the present—Bath _versus_ Napanee—In 1812—American
    Fleet—Wonderful achievement—Safe distance from shore—Third
    township—Fredericksburgh—After Duke of Sussex—Surveyed by Kotte—A
    promise to the disbanded soldiers—Johnson—Fredericksburgh
    additional—A dispute—Quantity of land—Extract from Mrs. Moodie—
    Reserve for village—Second surveys.


                  THE SECOND TOWNSHIP—ERNESTTOWN—BATH.

The first township was named after His Majesty, the King’s Town, and all
of the other townships, both upon the St. Lawrence and Bay Quinté,
received names after distinguished loyalty, or some distinguished
nobleman, or general of Great Britain, then occupying a prominent
position. King George the Third, who died in 1820, aged eighty-two,
having reigned sixty years, had a family of fifteen children, whose
names were George, Frederick, William Henry, Charlotte Augusta Matilda,
Edward, Sophia Augusta, Elizabeth, Ernest Augustus, Augustus Frederick,
Adolphus Frederick, Mary, Sophia, Octavius, Alfred, Amelia. These royal
names were appropriated to the townships, towns, districts, &c.

Ernesttown was so named after Ernest Augustus, the eighth child of the
King.

The first township, we have seen, was chiefly granted to Captain Grass
and the band of loyalists who came from New York under his guidance,
notwithstanding some objection from Sir John Johnson, and the officers
of his regiment. The second township, however, and also the third, were
allotted to the 2nd battalion of the 84th regiment, commonly called Sir
John Johnson’s regiment, also the King’s New York Royal Rangers. The
regiment was generally designated, by the rebels, as the Royal Greens.
This body of men took a conspicuous part in the war—took a noble part,
although those who feared them, and were unequal to meet them in
successful combat, endeavoured to malign them. The history of this
regiment is referred to elsewhere, and as well that of the distinguished
founder. The writer has in his possession the “roll of the 2nd battalion
of the King’s Royal Rangers, New York,” containing the names of the
parties by whom each of the soldiers was enlisted, which will be found
in the appendix.

By this it is learned that the whole number of the company was 477. That
Sir John Johnson enlisted 88, Major Ross 47, Captain Leahe 17, Guminall
38, Munrow 29, Anderson 1, Lieutenant Halbert 1, Captain McKay 95,
Morrison 30, Singleton 1, Major Gray 2, Captain Crawford 2, John
McDonell 2, Lieutenant Langan 30, Langhn 2, Lieutenant Wair 1, French 1,
C. McAlpine 1, Ensign Thompson 1, Lieutenant McKay 2, Sergeant Howell 2,
Tipple 1, Ensign Smith 3, and 69 by whom, it is not stated, they were
enlisted. This roll was afterwards a precious document, when it became
necessary to prove that one was truly a U. E. Loyalist. The book in
which this roll is found, seems to have been an account book kept by the
Adjutant, Fraser, and is dated at Oswego, 28th November, 1782.
Subsequently, it was used as an account book by “Captain Crawford’s
company.” We believe it was after his death that the book came into the
possession of Mr. Sills. It is an interesting relic of the past, and
ought to find a lodgement in some museum.

Many of these disbanded soldiers were from the Mohawk valley and Upper
Hudson. The majority were from the old Johnston district, and not a few
of Dutch origin. These honest and industrious settlers are represented
to-day by wealthy and valuable citizens, whose names unmistakably
indicate the stock from which they have descended.

This township was surveyed probably in 1784. It may be that a base line
was run in the fall of 1783. By looking at the map of this township, it
will be seen that the lots are marked, like those of Kingston, from west
to east, showing that the base line was run along the whole length, and
then subsequently the survey completed from the west.

In the early spring of 1784, came the soldier settlers; the 1st
battalion, commonly called Jessup’s Corps, settled on the St. Lawrence,
in Edwardsburgh and Augusta, while the second, or Rogers’ Corps, passed
up to the Bay of Quinté. Respecting this regiment, the following will
prove appropriate, from the pen of the historian of the County of
Dundas. “At the close of the war, this regiment was stationed at the
Isle aux Noix, a fortified frontier post at the northern extremity of
Lake Champlain, which has been mentioned as an important fortress during
the old French war. Here they passed a whole year, and were employed in
adding to the already extensive fortifications of that island. While
they remained there thus employed, two Government surveyors, named
Steichmann and Tewit, were actively engaged surveying the County of
Dundas, for their future occupation. Late in the autumn of 1783, the
soldiers were joined by their wives and little ones, who had wandered
the weary way afoot, to Whitehall, through swamps and forest, beset with
difficulties, dangers, and privations, innumerable. The soldiers from
Isle aux Noix met them there, with boats, and conveyed them the rest of
their journey by water, through Lake Champlain. Imagination fails us
when we attempt to form an idea of the emotions that filled their
hearts, as families, that had formerly lived happily together,
surrounded with peace and plenty, and had been separated by the rude
hand of war, now met in each others embrace, in circumstances of abject
poverty. A boisterous passage was before them in open boats, exposed to
the rigors of the season—a dreary prospect of a coming winter, to be
spent in pent up barracks, and a certainty, should they be spared, of
undergoing a life-time of such hardship, toil, and privation, as are
inseparable from the settlement of a new country. As soon as the journey
was accomplished, the soldiers and their families, were embarked in
boats, sent down the Richelieu to Sorel, thence to Montreal, and on to
Cornwall, by the laborious and tedious route of the St. Lawrence. The
difficulty of dragging their boats up the rapids of this river was very
great; to us it is really quite inconceivable. Arrived at Cornwall, they
found there the Government Land Agent, and forthwith proceeded to draw
by lottery the lands that had been granted to them. On the 20th of June,
1784, the first settlers landed in the County of Dundas.”

Not unlikely some of the 2nd battalion were stationed at Carleton Island
and Oswego, up to the time that settlement took place. We learn that
Captain Crawford’s company at least was at the latter place in 1782.
However, it seems clear that most of the battalion was in Lower Canada,
and came up with the first battalion. The survey was not yet completed,
and they pitched their tents along the shore, waiting until the work of
drawing lots was accomplished. In the meantime, they passed their days
as best they could; not knowing where their lot would be cast, they
could not proceed with the clearing of land. The writer has been told by
one who, passing up during this summer, saw the tents spread along the
shore, upon whose brink the primeval forest yet stood in all its native
beauty. Now, had they been stationed at Carleton Island or Oswego, it is
not likely they would have thus come before they could enter upon their
work of settling.

The camp tents in use by these disbanded veterans were the same they had
occupied in their campaigning. How great the change to them. The alarm
of the coming foe, the thought of approaching battle, the cannon’s roar,
the rattle of small arms, no longer disturbed their dreams, nor sounded
upon their ears. The battle cloud had passed away, leaving but a wreck
of their worldly goods, and there was a great calm—the calm of the
desert wilderness, unbroken even by the sound of the pioneer’s axe—the
calm of a conscience quieted by the thought that all had been sacrificed
in a righteous cause. They had met and conquered many a foe; but the
fate of war had driven them to the desert wild, to encounter new fears,
to fight the battle of the pioneer. How they succeeded; how glorious the
victory, is written, not merely by our own feeble hand elsewhere—it is
indelibly inscribed upon the pages of the townships, by the tillers of
the soil.

In this township as well as elsewhere, the officers seem to have had the
choice of lots upon the front, while the rank and file took possession
of the rear lots. Among the officers who settled on the front of
Ernesttown and Fredericksburgh, may be found the names of Lieut. Church,
Lieut. Spencer, Capts. Crawford and Thompson, Ensign Fraser, Capt.
Howard. According to John Collins Clark, son of Robert Clark, the first
lots were taken up in the following order, commencing at the easternmost
lot, No. 42:

Lot 42 was first occupied by David Purdy; Joshua Booth, Esq., married to
a daughter of David Fraser, lived on Lot 40 or 41; Mr. Nicholas Lake,
Lot 39, but soon left it; Lot 38 was settled by Capt. Wm. Johnson;
William Fairfield, sen., Lot 37. He had twelve children, all of whom
lived to marry. Daniel Rose commenced a settlement on Lot 30, but in a
few years left, and removed to the third concession. Matthias Rose,
sen., settled on Lot 35, he died in his 90th year. Lot 34 and east half
of 33, were settled by Robert Clark, Esq. His wife was a Ketcham, they
had five sons and a daughter; he died at the age of 80 years. His eldest
son, Matthias, had twelve sons. West half of Lot 33 was occupied by John
Longwell. The east half of Lot 32 was first owned by John Sayer; the
west half by Simon Swarts. Lot 31 was school land, first occupied by
Michael Phipps and William Sole. East half of Lot 29, owned by a German
named Gedd, west half occupied by Daniel Fraser, Esq., though not the
first settler on that lot. Sebastian Hogle, John Lake, and John Caldwell
settled Lots 27 and 28, but soon removed back into the concessions.
James Parrot, Esq., a half-pay officer, settled Lot 26; he afterward
sold this lot to Adam Stanring, from the Mohawk River. The next
settlers, continuing westward, were Jacob Miller, Frederick Baker,
Wigant (Lutheran clergyman), John Mabee, Joseph Huff, a waggon maker,
Adam Peat, a tailor, Nicholas Amey, Simon Snider, David Williams,
generally called Sergeant Williams, a blacksmith, Joseph Losee, Lieut.
John Dusenbury. Lieut. Best soon left, and Dusenbury died. Lot 19, has
latterly been partially laid out into village lots, and a number of
buildings erected. Lot 18 was a Government mill lot. It was leased for
some years by Joshua Booth. From the number of mills subsequently
erected on the stream, that empties here, it obtained the name of “Mill
Creek.” Lot 17, settled by William Cottier which was afterward owned by
A. D. Foward. There were several occupants of the next lot; and the next
was settled by Brisco, and the next by Richard Robins. Then came one by
John George. Lot 11, now a part of Bath, was owned by George McGinnis, a
half-pay officer, who sold to Fairfield. No. 10, on which is situated
most of the village of Bath, was occupied by John Davy. No. 9 was owned
by James Johnson, father of the celebrated “Bill” Johnson, the traitor
of 1812. The next was settled by Jeptha Hamley, Esq. Westward lived
Matthias Rose, William Rose, Wilcox, Shibley, then Finkle, Brisco,
Huffman, Pruyn, Williams, Church, &c. As a general thing, the sons of
the first settlers, settled in the rear concessions. At the present
time, says Clark, there are not more than 10 or 12 of the farms on the
front owned by the descendants of the original settlers.

The township of Ernesttown contains 68,644 acres, all of which is
excellent land with the least exception, so that the pioneers were not
the losers in having this township allotted to them instead of Kingston.
However, at that time the distance from Carleton Island and Cataraqui
seemed considerable. The land being good, and the settlers industrious,
as a general thing, the time was not long, when the township became the
best cultivated, and most wealthy, not alone around the Bay of Quinté
but in the whole of Western Canada. The richness of the soil, and lying
more immediately at the mouth of the Bay, contributed to its prosperity,
and a village before many years sprung up, which for a time rivalled
even Kingston itself, in respect to rapid increase of inhabitants, the
establishment of trade, building of ships, and from the presence of
gentlemen of refinement and education, and in the foundation of a
library and a seminary of higher education.

Gourlay says, in 1811, that “the settlers are most of them practical
husbandmen. Their farms are well fenced, well tilled, and accommodated
with barns.” There are now above 2,300 inhabitants, a greater number
than are found in any other township in the Province. They have three
houses of public worship, one Episcopalian, one Presbyterian, and one
Methodist. In 1817, Ernesttown had “one parochial academy in the
village, and thirteen common schools over the township.”

In some of the townships first surveyed, a plot was reserved at the
front, and subsequently laid out into town lots. Such was the case in
Ernesttown, seemingly. At all events a village sprung up at an early
period, on the front of the tenth lot. It was for a long time known as
the Village of Ernesttown; but in time, after the war of 1812, it
acquired the name of Bath, probably after the beautiful English town of
that name. The distance of Bath from Kingston is about eighteen miles,
and the road leading thereto was one of the first constructed in Upper
Canada, and the country there was regarded as the very centre of
civilization in the Province. For a long time the main road between
Kingston and York passed by Bath, even after it was no longer solely by
the way of Prince Edward and the Carrying Place. A branch of the main
road passed from this place to Napanee, and thence to Thurlow and
Sidney. Bath was regarded as a city in embryo. Its progress was onward,
until the war of 1812. Gourlay says of it in 1811, that “it promises to
be a place of considerable business.” But the war dealt a serious blow
to the place, from which it never recovered fully. The _Kingston
Gazette_, of 1816, remarks, to the effect, that the village is emerging
from its depression, and that it ought to be made a post town, and a
port of entry. In the summer of this year Samuel Purdy started a public
conveyance between Kingston and Bath. The following year the Steamer
_Frontenac_ and _Charlotte_ were commenced here. In 1818 a bill was
introduced into Parliament “to constitute the town of Bath—to provide
for laying out and surveying town lots and streets, and a market-place
therein, and regulating the police thereof.”

The first person to engage in the trading business at Bath was Benjamin
Fairfield.

Thus wrote Gourlay, of Bath, in 1811: “From the lake shore the ground
ascends about seventy rods, and thence slopes off in a gentle northern
descent. The ascent is divided into regular squares by five streets,
laid parallel with the shore; one of them being the lower branch of the
main road, and all of them crossed at right angles by streets running
northerly. One of these cross streets is continued through the
concession, and forms that branch of the main road which passes round
the Bay of Quinté. On the east side of this street, at the most elevated
point, stands the church, and on the opposite side is the academy,
overlooking the village, and commanding a variegated prospect of the
harbour, the sound, the adjacent island, the outlets into the open lake,
and the shores stretching eastward and westward, with a fine landscape
view of the country all around. The situation is healthy and delightful,
not surpassed perhaps in natural advantages by any in America. The
village is increasing in buildings, accommodations, inhabitants, and
business, and seems calculated to be the central point of a populous and
productive tract of country around it.”

A stranger visiting Bath to-day, having read of its early and
enterprising days, will not unlikely feel a pang of disappointment. We
are sorry to say that the place presents a tumbling-down appearance. A
large brick building, built in 1809, to accommodate what was then the
largest Free Mason lodge in the province, has a large rent in it, as if
an enemy’s cannon ball had penetrated and shattered it. Prominently
situated it attracts great attention. The quietness of the place reminds
one of Goldsmith’s deserted village. Within our own recollection, ship
building was carried on here; but now nothing indicates the place of
busy enterprise; there is nothing but the plain unbroken beach, where
was constructed the first steamboats built in Upper Canada. The literary
spirit that led to the establishment of a library here at an early date,
we fear has departed—gone with the spirit of those who nobly conceived
the project—gone as lawyers Macaulay, Fairfield, and Ridwell, who here
entered upon promising careers of professional usefulness. The glory of
Bath has not ceased to depart; year after year it has lost some element
of importance to its existence. The rich country around for many years
poured into this charming village its ever increasing supplies. The
merchants of Bath exchanged goods for the produce, and became rich; but
now, Napanee, affording a greater variety of the necessaries and
luxuries for family use, draws a large majority of the well-to-do
yeomen, who there spend their money. Occasionally, a grain buyer may be
able to offer a little higher price here, yet the farmer takes his money
to spend in Napanee. Times, indeed, have changed since the denizens of
Bath regarded their village as a rival of Kingston; when enterprise
sought here a larger field in which to drive business, and men of
education adorned society, and gave refinement and superior advantages
to its people. Then Napanee was in the backwoods—a place regarded as we
do now the settlements upon the Hastings’ Road; and those who lived
there were removed from the centre of civilization. But now the iron
horse speeds along by the old York Road; and Bath of Canada, like its
great namesake at home, although still beautiful, is interesting, mainly
from its past associations.

It was the citizens of Bath who first saw the American fleet in 1813
approaching the shore. The early morning sun saw the inhabitants very
shortly aroused to action. The old veterans, who for so many years had
used the plow and the axe, anxiously enquired for their old weapons of
warfare. Mrs. Perry tells us that she distinctly remembers that the word
came to her father’s while they were at breakfast, that the enemy was
entering Bath. Her father, then fifty-eight, forsook his breakfast and
sought his gun. But before he and his sons reached the village, the
fleet had passed on toward Kingston. Three of his sons, hurried on to
Kingston. In like manner, all along the front, arose the men of
seventy-six, with their sons; and their arms flashed in the morning
sunlight. The enemy had won at Bath a great victory. They had stolen in
at the early dawn, when no foe was there, and actually had succeeded in
taking and burning the schooner _Benjamin Davy_.


                  THE THIRD TOWNSHIP—FREDERICKSBURGH.

The early settlers sometimes called it the “Township of Frederick.” It
was called after Augustus Frederick, the Duke of Sussex, ninth child of
the king.

According to the original plan of this township, preserved in the Crown
Lands’ Department, it was “surveyed in 1784 by James Pearly Lewis Kotte,
Henry Holland, and Samuel Tuffe.”

The limits of the second township having been defined, the third was
also planned. Having fixed the base line, which formed a slight angle
with that of the second town, over the width of twenty-five lots, it was
at first, the intention to limit the township to this extent of
frontage; and the lots were consequently completed and numbered from
west to east, as had been done with the first two townships. But it
turned out that this would not meet the requirements of Sir John
Johnson’s disbanded soldiers, to whom the promise had been made that
they should be located in a township by themselves. The result was, that
the wishes of this corps’ were gratified, and the township was enlarged
to the extent of thirteen additional lots, which the map will show are
numbered from east to west, and which indicate that the lots were
completely surveyed before they were numbered. That portion of the third
town included in the portion first numbered, received the name of
“Fredericksburgh Original,” and that subsequently added, was called
“Fredericksburgh Additional.” The original intention of the surveyor,
was to have the latter portion form a part of the fourth township, which
would have effected a more equal division of the land; but the disbanded
soldiers did not wish to pass under the control of other officers, such
as held command of the settlers of the fourth township. Indeed, as will
be more particularly pointed out in connection with that township,
Adolphustown had well nigh been entirely consumed by the renewed
arrivals of Rogers’ men. There need be no wonder that the old soldiers
should thus desire to remain side by side under a common commander, in
the wilderness field, to fight the stern battle of pioneer life, and to
convert the wilderness into homesteads. The fact that numbers of each
battalion were unwilling to settle, except under their own officers,
reveals the spirit of the times: it tells us how much the settlement
partook of a military character, and the feeling of attachment which
existed between the officers and men, as well as among the rank and
file. It would not do that the same lots should be occupied as a part of
the fourth town under Captain VanAlstine; they must be severed from that
township, and united to Fredericksburgh, under the jurisdiction of their
old major.

Fredericksburgh contains 40,215 acres of the very best quality of land.
The following is taken from Cooper’s Essay, by the pen of the talented
Mrs. Moodie. “We approach Fredericksburgh: this too is a pretty place,
on the north side of the bay; beautiful orchards and meadows skirt the
water, and fine bass-wood and willow-trees grow beside, or bend over the
waves. The green smooth meadows, out of which the black stumps rotted
long ago, show noble groups of hickory and butternut, and, sleek fat
cows are reposing beneath them, or standing midleg in the small creek,
that wanders through them, to pour its fairy tribute into the broad
bay.” In 1811, the township had “a large population, and many excellent
farms, an Episcopal Church (subsequently burnt), and a Lutheran
Meeting-house.”—(Gourlay).

There was also a “reserve” for a village in this township at the front,
which, however, never grew into a village.

In 1798, an act was passed, the object of which was to ascertain, and
establish the boundary lines between the townships by which
irregularities might be removed. In 1826, a special act was obtained “to
make provision for a survey of the first, second, and third, concessions
of Fredericksburgh, original, and the whole of Fredericksburgh,
additional.” It was enacted that the eastern boundary line of the said
township, otherwise known as the line between lots number twenty-five,
and the Gore, in the said second and third concessions, shall be, and
the same is hereby declared to be, the course or courses of the
respective division or side lines of lots or parcels lying in the
aforesaid tract of land; and all surveyors shall be, and are hereby,
required to run all such division or side lines of any of such lots or
parcels of land, which they may be called upon to survey, to correspond
with, and be parallel to, the aforesaid eastern boundary line.




                               CHAPTER L.

  CONTENTS—The Fourth Township—Adolphustown—After Duke of Cambridge—
    Quantity of Land—Survey—Major VanAlstine—Refugees—From New York—
    Time—Voyage—Their Fare—Names—Arrived—Hagerman’s Point—In Tents—
    First Settler—Town Plot—Death—The Burial—A Relic—Commissary—
    Dispute of Surveyors—The Settlers—All things in common—An Aged
    Man—Golden Rule—Old Map—Names—Islands—The Township—Price of Land—
    First “Town Meeting”—Minutes—The Officers Record—Inhabitants,
    1794—Up to 1824—First Magistrates—Centre of Canada—Court Held in
    Barn—In Methodist Chapel—“A Den of Thieves”—Court House erected—
    Adolphustown Canadians—Members of Parliament—The Courts—Where
    first held—Hagerman—Travelers tarrying at Adolphustown.


                      SETTLEMENT OF ADOLPHUSTOWN.

The Fourth Township westward from Fort Frontenac, was, some time after
its survey and settlement, named Adolphustown, after Adolphus, Duke of
Cambridge, the tenth son of King George III. The Township contains about
11,459 acres, and was surveyed in 1784, by Surveyor-General Holland.

In the year 1783, a party of Loyalists sailed from the port of New York.
They were under the command of Capt. VanAlstine, with a fleet of seven
sail, and protected by the Brig “Hope,” of forty guns. Some of this band
had served in the army, in an irregular way, more had been in New York
as refugees. VanAlstine although commissioned to lead this company, it
would seem, had not been in the service—was not a military man, but a
prominent Loyalist of the Knickerbockers. But these refugees, in setting
out for the unknown wilderness, were provided with camp tents and
provision, to be continued for three years, and with such implements as
were given to the disbanded soldiers, as well as a batteau to every four
families, after arriving at their place of destination. The company were
mostly from the Counties of Rockland, Orange, and Ulster, on the east
side of the Hudson, and Westchester, Duchess, and Columbia, on the west.

They sailed from New York on the 8th Sept. 1783, and arrived at Quebec,
8th Oct. Many were undecided whether to remain in the Lower Provinces,
or go on to Canada. The events of this voyage; this departure from old
homes, to penetrate the unknown north, are even yet held in remembrance
by their descendants. Thus, it is told, that after leaving New York a
few days, a shark was observed following the vessel, which created no
little consternation. It continued to follow for many days, until a
child had died and been consigned to the deep, after which it was no
longer seen. The Government rations with which they were supplied,
consisted, as the story has been told the writer, of “pork and peas for
breakfast; peas and pork for dinner; and for supper, one or the other.”
The party proceeded from Quebec thence to Sorel, where they spent the
winter. They inhabited their linen tents, which afforded but little
protection from the intense cold. While staying there, it was determined
to grant them a township on the Bay Quinté. The first Township had been
granted to Capt. Grass, the second and third were to be possessed by
Johnson’s Second Battalion; so VanAlstine’s corps were to have the next
township. Surveyor Holland was engaged in completing the survey, and
even then, had his tent pitched on the shore of the fourth township. The
party left Sorel 21st May, 1784, in a brigade of batteaux, and reached
the fourth township on the 16th June. The names of some of those who
composed this party, were: VanAlstine, Ruttan, Huycks, Velleau, Maybee,
Coles, Sherman, Ballis, three families of Petersons, Loyce, VanSkiver,
Philip and Thomas Dorland, Cornelius VanHorn, VanDusen, Hagerman, father
of the late Judge Hagerman, Angel Huff, Richard Beagle, John and Stephen
Roblin, Fitzgerald, Michael Stout, Capt. Joseph Allan, Hover, Owen
Ferguson, John Baker, Wm. Baker, German, Geo. Rutter, James Noxen, John
Casey, Benj. Clapp, Geo. Rutledge, David Barker, Owen Roblin.

It is a curious fact, fully attested by the Allison’s, the Hover’s and
others, that as the batteaux slowly wended their way along the shore,
having passed the mark which indicated the boundary of the Third
Township, several of the passengers, gazing upon the woods, expressed a
wish to possess certain places, according to the fancy of each; and,
strangely enough, the Cole’s, the Hover’s, the Allison’s, the Ruttan’s,
and others, did actually come respectively into possession, by lot, in
accordance with their previously expressed wish.

The company had reached the land whereon they were to work out their
future existence. The writer has driven upon the ice along the Bay,
following, it must have been, almost the way taken by this party, as
they landed. They passed along the present Adolphustown wharf, westward
nearly half a mile, and rounded a point known as Hagerman’s Point. Here
a small, but deep stream empties itself, having coursed along a small
valley, with sloping sides, in a westerly direction. They ascended this
creek for nearly a quarter of a mile; and proceeded to land upon its
south side. Between the creek and the bay is a pleasant eminence; it was
upon its slopes the settlers, under VanAlstine, pitched their tents. The
boats were hauled up; and among the trees, the white tents were duly
ranged. Thus housed, and thus far removed from the busy haunts of men,
this community continued to live for many days. Steps were taken at an
early day to draw lots for land. As so much of the township was washed
by the waters of the bay, there was not the same anxiety among the
settlers with respect to the decision of the ballot. Every one drew his
number, with one exception, and this was a notable one, as indicating
the noble feeling of brotherhood which lived in the breasts of the noble
band of refugees. The exception was not in favor of the person in
command, or a particular friend. Mr. Cole had expressed a liking for the
first lot, now known as Cole’s Point, and he, having a large family and
consequently more anxious to get on his land, and get settled for the
winter, and the land ready for the next summer, was immediately, by
universal consent, put in possession of the lot; and he even that year
raised some potatoes.

In addition to the 200 acres granted to each of the company, there was a
town plot, consisting of 300 acres, regularly laid out into town lots of
one acre each, and one of these was granted to each of the settlers.
This plot thus surveyed, it was believed in time would become the site
of a town.

While they were yet living in their tents one of their number died, a
child it is said by some. The dead was buried close by, under a tree.
When others came to die, they also were buried here, and thus was formed
the “U. E. Loyalist burying ground.”

The second person buried in this place, while it was yet a woods, was
Casper Hover. Shortlived was his career as a pioneer. But a few months
had passed, and he had barely taken possession of his land when, one day
engaged in clearing off the land, he was struck by a falling limb and
killed. A blow so sudden was felt not alone by his own family, but by
all the settlers. Imagination cannot call up the heart-stirring scene of
this burial in the woods by his comrades. As there was yet no roads nor
path, not unlikely the body was conveyed by batteau from Hover’s farm to
the burying ground. The coffin must have been made of rough green
boards, split out of logs, or perhaps made with a whip saw. There was no
minister to discharge any rights belonging to the dead, or improve the
events for the spiritual welfare of the living.

Casper Hover had for his wife Barbara Monk, a relative of Barbara Heck,
well known for her connection with early Methodism in the new world.
There remains now in possession of Joseph Allison, of Adolphustown,
whose wife was a Hover, a pewter platter which belonged to Barbara Monk.
It is a relic of no ordinary interest. Barbara Monk was a descendant of
the Palatines, and this platter was carried by her ancestors when they
were forced to leave the Palatinate. They took it with them to Ireland,
thence to New York, and finally it was brought by Barbara to
Adolphustown, with VanAlstine’s company. The writer has had the
satisfaction of examining this relic of former days. It is a round dish,
of solid metal, 16 inches broad, and weighing over five pounds. It bears
no signs of wearing out. This article of household usefulness is, or was
in the past, regarded as a township one, and was famous for its
associations with innumerable pot pies. For many a year when there was a
bee, or a raising, or a wedding, the pewter platter was engaged to do
service.

The stores of provisions for the settlers in this township, were placed
under the care of VanAlstine himself; but it would appear, from the
statements of some, that Philip Dorland gave his assistance, and to some
extent, was responsible, acting under the instructions of a committee,
for the distribution to the families. Also, one Emery, was connected
with the department.

It would seem that Surveyor General Holland, who surveyed the fourth
town, and Deputy Surveyor Collins, who surveyed third town, had some
trouble with respect to “Fredericksburgh additional.” The number of lots
composing the third township at first, was not enough to supply the
whole of the battalion; having been promised lots in the same township.
When it was seen that all could not be accommodated in the lots of third
township, it was determined to take a certain number from the fourth
township. To this Surveyor Holland consented, probably with the
concurrence of Major VanAlstine. But more of Rogers’ company continued
to come; and Collins wished to absorb the whole of the fourth town, to
accommodate them. In this he was, no doubt, supported by officers of the
battalion; Sir John Johnson among the rest. But Holland, in the interest
of the company, which had already settled in the fourth town, under
VanAlstine, objected. The statement comes to us that Holland and Collins
had well nigh fought a duel in connection with the matter. As Collins
was a deputy under Holland, there must have been some strong influence
supporting the former, which was probably through Sir John Johnson. But
Holland, having completed the survey of the side lines as he desired,
started precipitately to Quebec with his report. Collins hearing of
this, started after. Whatever may have been the contest at head
quarters, Holland’s report of the fourth township was received, and the
third township was limited to its present size.

Mr. Joseph Allison, says, respecting the settlement, that “what was
one’s business was everybody’s business, they were all dependent on each
other.” Each concession was considered a neighbourhood, each being about
four miles in length. After the trees were felled and the brush burnt,
then came on the logging bees, and every man had to give an account of
himself, if he should be missing when notified. There were no
aristocrats, from Major VanAlstine down to the humblest individual. Each
had to do what he could. They were perfectly organized in this branch of
business, being divided into companies or squads of six; and each squad
had to take a regular “through” of about six or seven rods wide, piling
all the timber in their respective “throughs.” These logging bees were
always attended with much strife, all striving to be ahead; and as they
were always used to their rations of rum, they must, on these occasions,
have all they wanted. Then, in the evening, they must have their dance.
It was considered the privilege and duty of all the women in the
neighbourhood to attend and assist in cooking, as many of the settlers
were bachelors. Indeed, if there was a wedding, in one of the
concessions, all had a right to attend, belonging to the neighbourhood.
These pioneers of Adolphustown were a wonderfully hardy set of men,
possessed of great physical powers, although inured to hardships of a
very pressing kind. They lived to a great age; very few of them died
under eighty, and two of them lived to be over a hundred. John
Fitzgerald was the oldest man that came with VanAlstine, he died in
1806, aged 101; Daniel Cole was 106, when he died. The leading men of
the settlement were VanAlstine, Captain Peter Ruttan, Michael Stout, the
Dorlands, and Nicholas Hagerman. If any dispute or grievance arose, it
would be left to some one to settle, but they all, with very few
exceptions, tried to do as they would wish to be done by.

“Joseph Allison was a whip-sawyer by trade, and assisted to saw the
first boards that were used in the buildings. He drew lot 17.”

Examining an old map in the Crown Lands Department, certain names are
found written upon the Islands and Points of Adolplustown. The southern
extremity has upon it the name of Lieutenant Michael Vandervoort. The
adjacent island has Lieutenant Samuel Tuffee, and P. V. Dorland.
Proceeding around the point to the north, the first indentation of the
bay is named Bass Cove. The next point is for John Speers, and Humphrey
Waters—called on the map “Speers and Waters lot, 150 acres.” The next
cove is called Perch Cove, and the next point is for Lieutenant Samuel
Deane, 100 acres. Then comes Little Cove. The bay off these points is
called “Grand Bay,” northward to where Hay Bay commences, it is called
“The Forks,” while Hay Bay is designated “East Bay,” and up toward the
Mohawk Bay it has the name of “the North Channel;” Casey’s Point on the
north shore of Hay Bay is called Green Point, and the land there is
allotted to Philip and Owen Roblin.

Beside those mentioned, as forming a part of VanAlstine’s company, there
were, among the first settlers of Adolplustown, and probably of
VanAlstine’s party: Angel, William and John Huff, Thomas Casey; and at a
later period came “Billy” Monroe, John Roblin, John and James Canniff,
Philip Flagler, Carnahan, Robert Short, Fisher, and Captain Allan.

In some respects Major VanAlstine’s company were better off than the
soldier pioneers. Although they had to come a long distance by ship, and
ascend the St. Lawrence in small boats, which precluded the possibility
of bringing to the country many articles for family use; yet they could
fetch with them some things to contribute to family comfort, beside
clothing.

The township being almost surrounded by water, and having many
indentations of the bay, there was thereby afforded the most
advantageous place for the settlers, whose only mode of traveling was by
boat. Every concession has communication with the bay. The township is
the smallest in the Province, containing but 11,459 acres. The land at
first, it is said, could be had for “one shilling an acre,” and half of
lot 15, of 100 acres, was sold for a “half joe”—£8.00. In contrast to
this, in 1817, there was “no land in the township which could be
procured for less than £4 an acre,” and few would sell at that price.
Although so well provided with a water way for travel, good roads were
early constructed.

The following are the minutes of the first “Town meeting” held in
Adolphustown, on the 6th of March, 1793, for which we are indebted to
Mr. J. B. Allison.

“The following persons were chosen to officiate in their respective
offices, the ensuing year, and also the regulations of the same.”

“Ruben Bedell, Township Clerk; Paul Huff, and Philip Dorland, Overseers
of the Poor; Joseph Allison, and Garit Benson, Constables; Willet Casey,
Paul Huff, and John Huyck, Pound Keepers; Abraham Maybee, and Peter
Rutland, Fence Viewers.”

“The height of fence to be 4 feet 8 inches. Water fence voted to be no
fence. Hogs running at large to have yokes on 18 by 24 inches. No pigs
to run until three months old. No stallion to run. Any person putting
fire to any bush or stubble, that does not his endeavour to hinder it
from doing damage, shall forfeit the sum of forty shillings.”

                                     (Signed)      PHILIP DORLAND, T. C.

                  *       *       *       *       *

It is most likely that Philip Dorland was merely secretary for the
meeting.

Ruben Bedell was successively elected town clerk for three years, when,
in 1795, Archibald Campbell was appointed, who served for four years. In
1800, Daniel Haight was appointed. In 1801, William Robins filled the
office, and continued to fill it for three years, when in 1804, Ruben
Bedell was again elected. The following year Bryan Crawford was
appointed; the next Daniel Haight, who continued four years; John
Stickney then filled the office three years, and Daniel Haight was again
appointed, 1813.

There is in the Township Records, a Return of the inhabitants for 1794,
March, with the names of each family, and the number of members in each.
They are as follows: Ruben Bedell, 5; Paul Huff, 6; Solomon Huff, 10;
William Griffis, 5; Caspar VanDusen, 6; Nicholas Peterson, 8; Nicholas
Peterson, Sen., 3; Isaac Bern, 1; Thomas Jones, 4; Alexander Fisher, 10;
James McMasters, 8; James Stephenson, 1; Russel Pitman, 7; Joseph Clapp,
4; George Brooks, 6; John Halcom, 3; Martin Sherman, 3; Joseph Cornell,
5; Peter Valleau, 5; William Clark, 6; Joseph Clark, 1; Albert Cornell,
8; Peter Delrya, 4; John Huyck, 6; Alexander Campbell, 5; Buryer Huyck,
2; Albert Benson, 4; Gilbert Bogart, 2; Abraham Bogart, 3; Christopher
German, 5; William Casey, 6; Edward Barker, 3; David Kelly, 4; Battin
Harris, 8; John Canniff, 13; Nathaniel Solmes, 10; Peter Wanamaker, 4;
Garret Benson, 1; William Mara, 4; John Roblin, 3; John Elms, 3; John
Wood, 2; Peter Ruttan, Jun’r., 3; Owen Roblin, Jun’r., 2; Owen Roblin,
Sen’r., 8; Benjamin Clapp, 8; George Rutter, 7; Jacob Bullern, 6;
Cornelius VanHorn, 6; Robert Jones, 5; Paul Trumper, 8; William Hanah,
4; Michael Slate, 4; Peter Ruttan, Sen., 5; Denis Oscilage, 1; Joseph
Carahan, 8; Thomas Dorland, 6; Philip Dorland, 9; Willet Casey, 8; Peter
VanAlstine, 3; John VanCott, 7; David Brown, 3; Peter Sword, 2; William
Brock, 5; Nicholas Hagerman, 8; Cornelius Stouter, 3; Abraham Maybee, 7;
Henry Tice, 3; Thomas Wanamakers, 1; William Button, 5; Joseph Allison,
2; John Fitzgerald, 2; Matthew Steel, 5; Conrad Vandusen, 5; Henry
Hover, 3; Arion Ferguson, 2; Henry Redner, 4; Andrew Huffman, 4; Daniel
Cole, 11; Henry Davis, 5; James Noxen, 1.—Total 402.

The total number of inhabitants in 1800, was 524, and in 1812, 575. The
returns are given, yearly, up to 1822, when the number was only 571. It
is observable that the number fluctuates from year to year. This was due
to the fact that families would come to the township, from the States,
remain a few years working a farm on shares, and then would move up the
Bay, to another township.

Major VanAlstine, as the military commander, was the chief officer. But
there lives no account of dissensions and litigations, for many a year.
When the Government appointed Magistrates, probably not until after
Upper Canada was erected into a separate Province, VanAlstine was the
first to receive the commission. There were, likewise, appointed at the
same time, or soon after, several others, viz., Thomas Dorland, Nicholas
Hagerman, Ruttan, Sloat, and Fisher, afterwards Judge. It is said the
Magistrates did not always agree. Ruttan and VanAlstine had dissentions;
and VanAlstine claimed certain power, by virtue of his command over the
corps who peopled the township. Whereupon Ruttan, at the next meeting,
donned his suit of clothes, which he had worn as an officer of the
Regular Army, and declared no one was his superior, and, it is said,
gained his point.

The time came, when Adolphustown was almost the Centre of Canada. It is
true, Kingston was the great point to which the military and naval
forces centred, and the circumstances of such gave that place a status
which it could not otherwise have obtained. But Adolphustown was really
the centre of the settlements in the central part of Canada—the Midland
District. So it came that the court was alternately held at the Fourth
Town and Kingston, being twice a year in each place. The first court in
this township, was held in the barn of Paul Huff, which served the
purpose very well in summer. The next occasion was in winter, and some
building had to be procured. Application was made for the Methodist
Chapel. Some objection was made, on the ground that a “house of prayer”
should not be made a “den of thieves,” referring to the criminals, not
to the lawyers. But the Chapel was readily granted for the second court
held in Adolphustown. It is said that a proposition was made, in due
form, that if the inhabitants of the Fourth Town would build a Court
House, the court should be held there twice a year. The offer was
accepted, and a subscription set on foot, which resulted in the erection
of a Court House. When the court ceased to be held, in accordance with
the agreement, the Court House reverted to the Township.

The building of the Court House was followed by the growth of a village,
and among its population were those whose names became household words
in every Canadian home. It continued a place of importance for many a
year; and, even when the court ceased to be held, the village, by virtue
of its situation, and the standing of the township, continued for a long
time of no little repute.

Adolphustown contributed, during the first years of Upper Canada, a good
many worthy individuals to the welfare of the country, indeed
Adolphustown look the lead for many years in political, as well as more
general matters relating to the country. The general elections, at one
time, resulted in the election of four natives of this township to
Parliament, viz: two Hagermans, Sam’l Casey, and Paul Peterson. Says
Joseph B. Allison, of Adolphustown, “Our township, though, perhaps, the
smallest in the Province, (if it were consolidated, it would not be more
than three miles and a half square,) has furnished as many statesmen and
judicial officers as any of the larger townships. From the humble abodes
of Adolphustown, have gone to the Legislative Halls of Canada, Thomas
Dorland, John Roblin, Christopher A. Hagerman, Paul Peterson, Dr. W.
Dorland, Willet Casey, Henry Ruttan, Samuel Casey, Dan’l Hagerman, David
Roblin, John P. Roblin, who represented the County of Prince for many
years. The Hon. John A. McDonald although not born here, spent his
juvenile years, and attended the common schools in Adolphustown. Now, we
challenge any township in the Province, that has not a city or town
connected with it, to turn out eleven members of Parliament, all of them
U. E. Loyalists.”

Roblin, who settled in the third concession, was elected three times to
Parliament, in 1808, 1811, and 1812. At first, he sat for two years;
but, when sent the second time, he was expelled, because he was a
_local_ Methodist Preacher. His constituents re-elected him, and again
he was expelled, to be a third time elected; but he died before the
Parliament again met, on the last day of February, 1813, aged 44.

It was in the year 1793, in the second Session of Parliament, that an
Act was passed “to fix the time and place for holding the Courts of
General Quarter Sessions of the Peace.” The Act provided “that the
Courts of General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the Midland district
of this Province, shall commence and be holden in Adolphustown, on the
second Tuesday in the month of July, and on the second Tuesday in the
month of January; and in Kingston, on the second Tuesday in the month of
April, and on the second Tuesday in the month of October.” The other
places were Michilmackinac, Newark, New Johnstown, and Cornwall. In this
second year of Upper Canada, no mention is made of Toronto, nor yet of
York. Where now stands the splendid Osgoode Hall, with its chaste and
beautiful decorations; and, indeed, now exists the whole of Toronto,
with its unrivalled University building, its Colleges, its handsome
Churches and elegant mansions was then a tangled forest, and, except an
Indian path along the Don, marking a portage to Lake Simcoe and Fort
Toronto, there was no indication of human existence. Moreover, about
this time, upon the shores of Adolphustown was born Christopher
Hagerman, who was destined to adorn the bar and grace the bench; who saw
arise the Courts of Law, the organization of the Law Society, and
assisted to establish them at Toronto, where he spent his latter days,
and where now his ashes repose.

Among those who first came to Adolphustown are some who had seen service
in an irregular way, as well as the refugees. The names of some of them
will be found among the loyal combatants and loyalists.

For several years, the families that came from the States would stop at
the Fourth Township, where they would “work out,” or take a farm on
shares, or perhaps rent a farm, until they could find a suitable place
on which to permanently settle, in the back townships, such as
Sophiasburgh, Ameliasburgh, Sidney and Thurlow. The ordinary terms for
working a farm on shares was for the owner to furnish team, seed, &c.,
and take one-half of the produce when gathered.

Conrad VanDusen kept the first tavern west of Kingston, and at his house
travelers up and down the Bay would stop. Also, new comers to the Bay
would here first tarry, until decided where to settle.




                              CHAPTER LI.

  CONTENTS—Marysburgh—Origin—Once part of a Seigniory—Survey—Hessians—
    Old map—The lots—Officers of 84th Regt.—Original landowners—Indian
    Point—McDonnell’s Cove—Grog Bay—“Accommodating Bay”—“Gammon
    Point”—Black River—“Long Point”—Reserves—Course pursued by the
    Surveyor—Number of Hessians—Their sufferings—Dark tales—
    Discontented—Returning to Hesse—A suitable location—Not U. E.
    Loyalists—Received land gratis—Family land—Their habits—Capt.
    McDonnell—Squire Wright—Sergt. Harrison—The Smith’s—Grant to Major
    VanAlstine—Beautiful Scenery—Smith’s bay—“The Rock”—Over a
    precipice.


                     THE FIFTH TOWNSHIP—MARYSBURGH.

This township is so called after Mary, Duchess of Gloucester, eleventh
child of the King.

It is more than likely that the extremity of Prince Edward Peninsula was
frequently visited during the French occupancy of Frontenac. Indeed, it
is quite probable that the Seigniory granted to La Salle included a
portion of the present township of Marysburgh. And no doubt, the
beautiful bay, long time called South Bay, that is the body of water
lying between Indian Point and Long Point, with Wappoose Island, was
often visited during the American rebellion.

The original surveyor, Mr. Collins, having been instructed to lay out a
fifth township on the shores of the Bay, recognized the south shore as a
desirable place upon which to settle disbanded troops. The forked
peninsula, with the coves, and the Black River, supplied valuable
facilities for the intending pioneer. The surveying was commenced in
1784, and finished in ‘85 or ‘86. Referring to the loyal combatants, it
will be seen that the Foreign Legion composed of Hessians, and a few
Irish and Scotch, had offered, to such of them as desired to remain in
Canada, grants of land. It was the Fifth Township in which the
Government determined they should be located. Having been staying in
Lower Canada for a time, they ascended in batteaux in 1785, and, we
believe, under the care of Archibald McDonnell, proceeded to occupy the
township; while the surveying was still going on along the bay. Great
pains had been taken to secure a frontage upon the water either of the
Bay Quinté, the South Bay, or Black River. By referring to the oldest
map of the township in the Crown Lands Department, it is found that
while most of the land was allotted to the Hessians, a considerable
portion was taken up by commissioned and non-commissioned officers of
the 84th Regt.

By looking at the map of Marysburgh, it will be seen that great
irregularity exists in the formation of the lots, and it will be
observed that great care has been taken to secure a frontage upon the
water to as many lots as possible. This was, as elsewhere shown, to
procure a water communication to the central points of the settlement;
and as well facilities for fishing, to the settlers. By maps preserved
in the Crown Land Department, it may be seen to whom was originally
granted certain parts of the township, from the names written thereupon.
The names of places are, as well, very suggestive. It would seem that
Collins, as well as others, engaged in laying out the townships, did not
forget to make claim to eligible lots, here and there, for himself. To
these he was doubtless entitled, and acted no unjust part.

At the extremity of what is now called Indian Point, but formerly
designated Point Pleasant, was a considerable tract of land which was
not laid out into lots, but which has marked upon it, as the original
owner, Surveyor John Collins. Subsequently, Collins conveyed it to
Alexander Aitkins, a lawyer. Proceeding up the Bay of Quinté, we come to
a small cove, known now as McDonnell’s Cove; but maps exist upon which
this is called Grog Bay. In the absence of fact, it may not be well to
relate the traditionary origin of this name. It is sufficient to say
that it most likely arose from the habit, then far more common than now,
of visiting this place to fish, and drink grog. Adjacent to this bay was
a large block of land granted to Archibald McDonnell. Upon the south
shore of Point Pleasant the water, now Smith’s Bay, is marked
“Accommodating Bay.” When we remember the great necessity for each
settler to have access to the water, and the constant course pursued by
the surveyor to secure it; we have no difficulty in arriving at the
conclusion that this name arose from the increased facilities this
indentation of the lake supplied, in this respect. The point of land
stretching out between “Accommodating Bay” and Prince Edward Bay, and
Black River, a name due to the dark color of its water, which is north
of the furthermost point of the peninsula, is called “Gammon Point.”
This name was given, most likely from the fancied resemblance it bore to
a ham; the term gammon being the word commonly used by the old settlers
for ham. Looking at the hill from the south-west, it does bear such a
resemblance.

The lots were surveyed with their front upon the north shore of the
Black River, and, then returning to the water, and continuing towards
the extremity of Prince Edward’s Bay, the lots were made to front upon
the water, making them angular with the others. At the very end of the
Bay, they are changed again, so as to have a front at right angles with
the others. There are four of these lots. The surveyor had now reached
the rock of “Long Point,” as it is called, at the present day. Here we
find, again, that the lots front to the north, upon Prince Edward’s Bay.
The surveyor next proceeded to survey the base line as far as Bluff
Point, and then returning, formed fifteen lots, which brought him to the
rear of those laid out at the head of the Bay. He then crossed over to
the Lake Shore, and commenced to survey westward. The point was then
named “Point Traverse,” from the fact, we fancy, that the surveyor
crossed here to continue his survey without laying out the extremity of
Long Point, which offered no inducements for the settlers. Upon Point
Traverse, was set apart a block of land, containing 2,500 acres, which
is marked “Military Lands.” Probably, with some idea of erecting here
some military post. These were afterwards conveyed to “Capt. Joseph
Allen.” Upon the same map, in the Crown Lands Department, we learn that
a block of land near Black River, was originally granted to James Brock,
Esq. To the west of the fifteen lots laid out at the neck of Point
Traverse, and fronting upon the Lake, was a reserve for the Clergy. This
seems to have been the extent of the first survey in this section.

Returning to the Bay of Quinté, we find that at this time lots were laid
out along the shore westward, to within about two miles of the Lake on
the Mountain. The land thence not being attractive, it was not then
surveyed. Subsequently when laid out, the lots were placed at a slight
angle with those to the east, in order to front upon the Bay. Sixteen
lots brings us to the entrance of Picton Bay. Again a change is found to
take place, so that the lots may front upon the east shore of this bay.
Six lots reach to the head of the bay, which appears to have been the
termination for a time. But subsequently, the survey was continued,
being slightly altered, that the base line might follow the old Indian
Carrying Place. There were nine lots in this row. Turning to East Lake
and West Lake, it will be seen that the lots were arranged to front on
either side, as well as at the ends. The time at which these lots
mentioned were surveyed, is somewhat uncertain, but probably before
1786.

It is impossible to state the exact number of Hessians who settled in
Marysburgh; but judging from accounts, and the names taken from the
Grantee’s list, it is surmised there were about forty. Unacquainted with
the English language, and unaccustomed to the profound solitude of the
forest, and the flittings of the dark-skinned Indian, often in a state
of semi-nudity, it is no reason for wonder, if the Hessians felt
otherwise than contented in their wilderness home. Although upon the
borders of a lovely bay, rich in valuable fish, they were ignorant of
the mode of catching them; and, when the Government supplies, which were
continued to them, as to the other settlers for three years, was
withdrawn; although this valuable article of diet was at their very
door, they were exposed to the terrors of actual starvation. Even during
the time that rations were to be given them, it is related they were
often in want. A dark tale of cupidity, and heartless carelessness on
the part of officials, to whom were entrusted the duty of furnishing the
necessary stores, has been told. How much of truth there may be in this
report, it is now impossible to say. When we remember the circumstances
of the times; the settlers scattered along hundreds of miles of
uncleared land, that the stores had to be transported from Montreal, and
Lachine by batteaux, and that, necessarily, many persons became
responsible for the transit, as well as the distribution, we need not be
surprised if there was now and then carelessness and neglect; and now
and then reprehensible appropriation of stores, which were intended by a
paternal Government for the mouths of the hungry. Many of the Hessian
settlers would gladly have escaped from all the terrors which
encompassed them; but it was now too late. As a general thing, they had
not the means of removing. But there were a few who managed to extricate
themselves, and who returned to the old country. One John Crogle went to
Kingston, mortgaged his farm for £6 to Rev. Mr. Stuart, and took his
departure for the fatherland; another mortgaged his lot to Captain Allan
and left, leaving his wife; and never returned.

Probably no place in the country afforded a better location for these
foreigners who were entirely ignorant of the rugged duties of pioneer
life, and had but an imperfect conception of agricultural pursuits, and
moreover, were quite unable to speak the English language. It has been
said, indeed, that the Government exercised a thoughtful regard in
placing them, where a means of existence was at their very door, by the
catching of fish, beside what the soil might bring forth. But the fact
that they were of a different nationality—essentially a different people
from the loyalist settlers, militated against them. Many of the latter
were Dutch, and could speak little or no English; but the former could
understand Dutch no more than they could English, German was their
native tongue. The Hessians were not U. E. Loyalists, and they were
often made to feel this by not receiving for themselves and family the
same allowance of land, and by the behaviour manifested toward them by
the loyalists. The writer recollects the tone of disparagement toward
the “fifth towners,” by an old inhabitant of the fourth town. These
things combined to delay prosperity to the township, as a general thing.

They received land gratis; but subsequently when the title deed was
given, a sum of £5 was demanded, being the amount of expense incurred at
the time of their enrolment into the service. This was protested against
upon the floor of the Parliament, but without avail. The quantity of
land each should receive was to depend upon the number of children.
Beside the allotment to each, at the time of settling, he was to receive
an additional fifty acres at the time each child attained the age of
twenty-one. This took the name of “Family Lands.”

Although prosperity did not come to the township of Marysburgh as
quickly as to the first four townships, yet the time eventually arrived
when it partook of the general spirit of advancement. From several
sources we have the statement that the old soldiers were for many years
given to somewhat irregular habits; and that an important instrument in
effecting a reformation among them, was the Rev. Darius Dunham, the
first Methodist preacher to visit them.

Beside those of the foreign legion who settled in this township, were
several officers, and non-commissioned officers of the 84th regiment,
and a few who had been in the regular army. The most important of these
was Captain Archibald McDonnell, who arrived at the township in 1784,
and landed in the cove, which now bears his name, and there on the shore
pitched his tent, until he had erected a log cabin.

Then, there was “Squire” Wright, who was supreme in authority in the
township for many a day, even before he was appointed magistrate. He was
the Commissary Officer, and the old soldiers were wont to come to him,
to settle any differences that might arise among them.

Sergeant Harrison was an early settler, he has a son still living now in
his 88th year; yet hale as a man of sixty-eight. He was born in St.
John’s, Lower Canada, and was five years old when he came with the
family to the place, an elder brother having preceded and erected a hut.
He tells us that the Hessians were to have three years’ provisions, but
for some reason only received two years. He remembers when blazed trees
alone marked the way, from one house to another; and then the bridle
path, which in time was widened into a road. The first horse brought to
the township is well remembered, it was owned by Colonel McDonnell. This
one, with another, were the only ones, for many a year, in the place.

Among the first settlers were William Carson, Daniel McIntosh, and Henry
Smith, a German, who had several sons: John, William, Benjamin, Charles,
Barnit, and Ernest. Smith’s Bay is so called after Charles.

Major VanAlstine had granted to him a large block of land in this
township. The original grant is now before us, and gives the information
that the quantity was 437 acres, consisting of lots number five and six
in the first concession. The document is dated “4th June, 1796,” signed
“J. G., S.” (John Greaves, Simcoe). “Peter Russell, Auditor General.
Registered, 17th June, William Jarvis, Registrar.”

This lot of land included the high hill, with the lake at its summit, so
well known to excursionists. The Major at once proceeded to erect a mill
here, which proved a great convenience to the inhabitants of the
township. The lake was for a time called VanAlstine’s Lake. In 1811,
Major VanAlstine having died, the land, with 30 acres cleared, and a
dwelling-house, and another for the miller, and out-houses are found
offered for sale by the executors.

We cannot leave the township of Marysburgh without commending the
beautiful scenery to those who may not have visited it, especially the
interior, and the shores of South Bay. A trip by carriage from Picton
across the rugged hill, which seems to encircle in an irregular manner,
the whole township, to the Black Creek, whose dark and narrow waters,
inclosed by muddy banks, contrast so markedly with the bright blue of
the bay into which it empties, hard by Gammon Point, is one that will
well repay any one making it. The irregularity of the roads makes the
drive none the less interesting. Approaching the bay, there is spread
out a view whose beauty we have never seen surpassed, and rarely
equalled either in the new world or the old. Having obtained a close
view of Prince Edward Bay, and observed the far-stretching Point
Traverse with the three prominent Bluffs; and still further away to the
south, the Ducks, and Timber Islands, the tourist should follow us
closely as may be the changing shore, that forms the head of Smith’s
Bay, to the north side, where another delightful prospect will lay
before him.

About six miles east of Wappoose Island, is a bold point standing out
into the Lake. It presents a bold and precipitous front of about 100
feet in height. It is now commonly designated the “Rock.” Formerly, it
was called “Cape Vesey Rock.” Here was a reserve for the Mississauga
Indians, of about 450 acres. This was not surrendered by the Indians
until 1835, although some time prior, a settler by the name of
Stevenson, had been in occupation. Some years ago, there was overhanging
the brow a mass of rock, which one day fell, with a thundering crash.
And the old inhabitants tell of a deer and an Indian huntsman, whose
bodies were found lying at the foot of the rock both having approached
the brink with such speed that, to turn aside was impossible, and both
bounded over the perpendicular rock to meet a common doom.




                              CHAPTER LII.

  CONTENTS—Sixth township—Name—Survey—Convenient for settlement—First
    settlers—A remote township—What was paid for lots—“Late
    Loyalists”—Going to Mill—Geological formation—Along the fronts—
    High shore—Grassy Point—Its history—Marsh front—Central place—
    Stickney’s Hill—Foster’s Hill—Northport—Trade—James Cotter—Gores—
    Demerestville—The name—“Sodom”—First records—Township meetings—The
    Laws of the township—Divided into parishes—Town clerk—Officers—The
    poor—The committee—Inhabitants, 1824—Fish Lake—Seventh township—
    The name—Survey by Kotte—At the Carrying Place—Surveyor’s
    assistant—No early records—First settlers.


         SIXTH TOWNSHIP—SOPHIASBURGH, NORTHPORT, DEMERESTVILLE.

This township is named after Sophia, the twelfth child of King George
III. In the year 1785, Deputy Surveyor General Collins, who was then at
Kingston, instructed his assistant Louis Kotte, to lay out a sixth
township, commencing at the southern extremity of South (Picton) Bay,
and proceeding northward along the west coast of the Bay Quinté, the
lots to front upon the bay. These were measured along the high shore to
Green Point, forty-four lots. Following the bay, which at Green Point
turns westward, a row of lots were laid out to the head of the bay,
sixty-four lots of which were to form the northern front of the sixth
township. By referring to the map it will be observed that this township
was also a convenient place for a new settlement, having two sides of a
triangle upon the bay. The comparatively straight high shore; and the
equally even coast upon the north, enabled the surveyor to obtain a
uniformity which had been impossible in the fifth township, although
securing an extensive frontage for the settlers. About 1788, probably,
the first settlers of this township took up their land at the head of
Picton Bay, sometimes called Hallowell Bay. They were two Congers,
Peterson, Spencer, Henry Johnson; and at a later date came Barker and
Vandusen.

Respecting this township generally, Mr. Price, who has kindly exerted
himself to procure facts, observes, “I find there is some difficulty in
getting information.” “The first settlers are all dead, with one or two
exceptions, and many of the farms on the north shore were bought from
the U. E. Loyalists who never lived on them.” The occupation of the
township generally, may be regarded as a later settlement. This rich,
and now, long settled place, was once considered as a remote settlement,
as Rawdon, Huntington, and Hungerford, were thirty years later. All, or
nearly all, who took up land here and became the pioneers, had at first
lived in one of the townships upon the lower part of the bay, most of
them in Adolphustown. Guilliam Demerest, John Parcels, and Roblin, were
among these. Some of the settlers drew land here; but many purchased,
and lots, now worth the highest price, were procured for a very small
sum, or for a horse, or cow, or a certain quantity of grain. Some of the
settlers had formerly lived in the Lower Province, or in New Brunswick
and Nova Scotia. Also, there was continually coming in, those who felt
no longer at home under the new form of government in the States, or who
were glad to escape persecution. These were not in time to secure land,
and were often called the “Late Loyalists”. Then, again, a few years
later, when the bitterness of spirit, which had led the rebels to commit
such serious acts of cruelty to the loyalists, had subsided, and a
degree of intercourse had commenced between the two; it came to pass
that many, who had not taken an active part on either side in the
contest, and who had friends in Canada, emigrated to the shores of the
bay, or, as they called Canada then, Cataraqui. For instance, the Cronks
and Ways, who were among the first settlers upon the Marsh front, as the
north shore was called, were but the precursors of several others of the
same name, who entered about the beginning of the present century. Some
of these were, no doubt, influenced by the proclamation issued by
Simcoe. Nathaniel Solmes was one of the older settlers. He came from
Duchess County in 1792, lived in Adolphustown two years, then settled on
lot No. 10, 1st concession.

One of the first settlers upon the north front was John Parcels. He was
of Captain VanAlstine’s company, and settled in that township, where he
continued to live until 1809, when he removed to lot No. 24, where
Northport now stands. His wile having died in 1787, he married Mrs.
Parliament. Their first-born, named Richard, was the first, or one of
the first white children born in Sophiasburgh. Mrs. Parcel’s son, George
Parliament, says, in a memorandum, “I recollect having to go to Napanee
Mills, in company with my brother Jacob, a distance of nearly twenty
miles, to get our grinding done, we had our wheat on a hand-sleigh, as
the roads were not passable by any other mode of conveyance.”

The land was often purchased at a very low price; for instance, lot No.
16, in the 1st concession, was purchased for a horse, harness, and gig.
A farm belonging to Matthew Cronk, was bought for a half barrel of
salmon. The Foster-place, where Benjamin Way, used to live, was sold for
an old horse. This is one of the best farms in Prince Edward, now,
perhaps valued at seven or eight thousand dollars. In 1793, Nicholas
Lazier paid $25 to Tobias Ryckman, for 200 acres.

The geological formation of Sophiasburgh and Ameliasburgh, is not
without interest. That the mountain about Picton, and the high shore at
one time formed the shore of the bay, or perhaps, what is more likely,
stood up as an island in a lake, with much broader boundaries than Lake
Ontario now has, there is but little doubt. It will not be possible to
discuss such points to a great extent, at the same time, it will be well
to make a few observations as we proceed. It has been seen that this
township has two long fronts upon the bay.

These join at what is known as Grassy Point. Commencing at the head of
Picton Bay, the reader is invited to follow the course of the bay, and
to observe the points of interest which may be found. No one can travel
by the road on the summit of the high shore, without been deeply
impressed with the beauty of the scenery. From this height, is an
extended view of the bay, stretching down toward Kingston, with the
rugged shore of Marysburgh on the right, and the lower and more
attractive lands of Adolphustown, and Fredericksburgh on the immediate
left, while beyond the Reach, lies the placid waters of Hay Bay. About
fifteen miles from Picton, the high shore recedes from the bay, and
turns to the west, stretching away almost to the waters of Ontario. From
this part of the coast, to Grassy Point, a distance of over nine miles,
the land is low; but the road is a pleasant one, until it turns to cross
to the north shore. Continuing along the south shore, although walking
in silence, and quite removed from human habitation, we are treading
upon ground, which, in the past, was a place of note. The following
notice respecting Grassy Point supplies information.

“On Wednesday, the 27th of June, at the Court House, will be sold by
auction to the highest bidder, that beautiful property, consisting of
343 acres of excellent land, of which a large portion is cleared,
situated in one of the finest parts of the Bay of Quinté, being the
residue of a reserve for military purposes, and afterwards granted to
Sir John Harvey, on which there is a Ferry crossing to the Six Nation
Tract. In the neighborhood, there is an extensive settlement of
respectable farmers. The premises and the vicinity abound with game, and
the bay with fish of every description peculiar to Lake Ontario. It is
particularly suitable for grazing, and is within 40 miles of Kingston,
which is a never failing ready money market.”

Sir John Harvey was afterward, for his services in the war of 1812,
appointed Governor of Nova Scotia. The land was sold to Samuel Cluse,
Civil Engineer, the person who surveyed the Welland and Rideau Canals.
He died at Ottawa some years ago, and left this property to his
daughter, Anna, now Mrs. Paul Peterson, who resides upon the place. The
agent who advertised the land for Sir John, as ‘excellent land,’ was
scarcely correct. Much of the land is rocky, with but few inches of
soil. Clumps of scraggy trees exist with patches of plain. But along the
shores are pleasant nooks, in which agreeable fishing may be found. The
Point is divided into two, by a small bay. The more eastern of the two
points is known as Grassy Point, and the other Green Point. The
intervening cove has been known as Louis Cove, from a Frenchman of that
name who long lived here. The land to the East of the cross roads,
between lots two and three, is useless, almost, for agricultural
purposes.

Grassy Point, from its geographical position, naturally became a place
at which the early settlers, in passing up and down the Bay, made a
rest. At that time, but few trees were growing, the Point being a green
plain. Most likely, it had been the site of an Indian village. The first
settler here, who came at an early date, was Haunce Trumpour. His house
was well known to the pioneers; and the navigator, wearily toiling in
the batteau, gladly welcomed the appearance of his hospitable roof.
Passing around the extreme northerly point, off which is Capt. John’s
Island, we are upon the north shore, or marsh front, of Sophiasburgh.

Grassy Point was not only a convenient place for resting, to those
passing along; but it likewise was regarded as the most central point at
which to hold township meetings. And here, the whole militia, which
comprised mostly all the male population of Prince Edward, even from the
extreme point of Marysburgh, were wont to meet, to have their annual
trainings. At these times, John Trumpour’s house became one of no little
importance. The training took place here so late as 1802.

Proceeding on our way westward, the land becomes very much better. At
the northern termination of the cross-road before mentioned, is a ferry,
which has long existed. The first settler here, who established the
ferry, was Richard Davenport. It originated from the necessity of the
settlers of the Sixth Township, having to go to Napanee to mill. Many a
bushel of grain has been backed from this township to Napanee mills, and
the flour carried back. Mr. Paul Peterson now lives here.

Proceeding on our course. As the land improves, it is no longer level,
but becomes uneven, and, on lot eight, is found a considerable eminence,
known as Stickney’s Hill, which stands closely against the Bay. This
hill has attracted no little attention, on account of the large number
of human bones which the plow has, year after year, turned to the
surface. Various stories have gained currency relative to the origin of
the bones; the most notable of which is, that here perished Col. Quinté,
with a number of men. (Respecting this, see History of Bay). The most
likely explanation is, that here, for years, the Indians living on
Grassy Point buried their dead. Upon this hill, in the burying ground of
the Solmes family, reposes the remains of Dr. Stickney, after whom the
place is named, and who was the first physician to practice in this
township. Since we visited this spot, but a few short months ago,
another pioneer has found here a resting place. A faithful Canadian, an
exemplary citizen, Richard Solmes, having lived to see the wilderness
truly blossom as the rose, full of years, has passed to the grave,
followed by a whole community of people, and mourned by a highly
esteemed family.

West of Stickney’s Hill, the land gradually rises; and a few miles
gradually brings us to a higher eminence, called now, Foster’s Hill,
which is noticeable for many miles up and down the Bay. It was once, no
doubt, an island in the midst of a great lake. Being covered with wood,
adds, in summer, very much to the beauty and interest of the scenery. At
the summit of this prominent hill is a table land of rock covered with
but little soil. But very soon the soil increases in depth, and away, on
every hand, stretches a fertile land. Near the foot of the hill, and
upon the shore, where the land is pressed out into the bay, almost to
form a point, is situated the Friends’ Meeting House. No one acquainted
with the mode of worship practiced by this exceedingly conscientious
denomination, can help being impressed with the truly suitable locality
for deep spiritual communing. Two miles further westward, at the
commencement of the channel, between the mainland and the Big Island,
brings us to the pleasant village of _Northport_, so called from its
situation, upon the north shore of the township. The situation is
charming, and here may be seen the very essence of rural happiness. The
village, consisting of some 200 inhabitants, has two stores, but no
place where intoxicating liquors are sold. The trade is confined to the
inhabitants of the township, with an occasional customer from the
Mohawks, across the Bay. The view, looking westward, through Big Bay and
the Narrows, along the shore of Thurlow, to Belleville, is, upon a
lovely summer night, very pleasant to the gaze.

The village of Northport was built partly on the property originally
owned by James Morden and Isaac Demill; James Morden having built first
here in 1791. The first merchant to commence business here was Orton
Hancock, in 1819. The first wharf built here was in 1829; but prior to
that Jacob Cronk had constructed one on his farm, lot twenty-one,
probably in the second year the Charlotte run.

In addition to the names already given, of the first settlers of
Sophiasburgh, we may mention the following: three families of Ostrom’s,
the Short’s, Brown, the Cole’s, Barse, Abbott, Cronks, La Zier, Spencer,
Basker, Peck, De Mill, Fox, Spragg, Goslin, Trippen, Mowers.

James Cotter was an early settler, became the first Justice of the
Peace, and, in 1813, was elected to Parliament, and served four years.

The township having been surveyed so that the lots might front upon both
sides, there resulted a certain number of Gores, designated respectively
by the letters B C D and G. The first of these Gores settled was by
Philip Roblin, who was one of the first settlers of the township.

DEMERESTVILLE.—This village, which is situated upon lots 38 and 39, of
the marsh front, is named after the original settler, Guillame Demerest.
The old settlers called him “Demeray”. He was a native of Duchess
County, N. Y., and was a boy during the rebellion. He was often engaged
in carrying provision to the British army. He continued to live in
Duchess County, until 1790, when he came to Canada. He failed to prove
his right as a U. E. Loyalist, and consequently “lost a fine grant of
land”. He died at Consecon, 1848, aged seventy-nine. The village sprung
up from the mills, which were here erected. It was, for many a day,
called Sodom. This name, it is stated, arose from the fact that when Mr.
Demerest’s first wife was on her death-bed, a ball was given in the
place, at which the inhabitants generally attended, and created some
little noise, whereupon she said they were “as bad as the inhabitants of
Sodom.” The village of Demerestville was incorporated in 1828.

We copy the following from the first record of the township of
Sophiasburg, by which it will be seen that their mode of procedure was
unlike that observed by other townships. All of the townships were
acting by virtue of a common law, but seem to have given the law a
widely varying interpretation.

“Passed, at Sophiasburg, at a regular town meeting, held on the 3 day of
March, 1800.

“For the better ascertaining astrays, and knowing and describing horses
and neat cattle, sheep or swine. Be it understood by this town meeting,
that every inhabitant and householder shall, within six weeks from the
passing of this Act, have their mark and brands recorded, according to
law by the Town Clark.

“And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any astrays,
horses, neat cattle, sheep or swine, that shall be found on any open or
improved lands from the twentieth of November to the first of April
yearly, and every year the owner or owners of such improvement or
cleared lands shall give in their natural mark, or artificial marks, and
describe their age, as near as possible, to the Town Clark, who is
hereby ordered to record the same in a book, to be kept for that
purpose; for which such informer shall receive one shilling for each
horse or neat cattle; and sixpence for each sheep or swine. Provided
always, and be it so understood, that such astrays above mentioned, is
not one of his near neighbors, which shall be left to the Town Clark to
decide; and the Clark shall send word to the owner or owners, if he
knows them, by the mark or brands; and, if unknown to the Town Clark, he
is hereby ordered to advertise them in three different places in this
township; for which he shall be entitled to receive from the owner, or
owners, as followeth, viz: For sending word, or writing, or recording,
or informing any way, one shilling and threepence; if advertised, one
shilling and six-pence, for each horse or neat cattle; and for each
sheep or swine, six-pence per head. And be it further enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that if any inhabitant or householder who shall
leave any astrays, as above mentioned, on his or her cleared lands for
eight days, from the 20th day of November to the first of April, and
neglect to give notice thereof, as by the above Act mentioned, shall
loose the reward for finding, or feeding such astrays, and pay the owner
one shilling for each horse or neat cattle; and six-pence for each sheep
or swine. And be it further enacted, by the authority, that if no owner
or owners shall appear by the first Monday in April, to prove their
property, then, and in that case, the Town Clark shall advertise for
sale, all such astrays, in three townships, viz., Ameliasburg,
Sophiasburg, and Hallowell, for the space of twenty days, describing the
marks and brands, color and age, as near as possible; and if no owner or
owners shall appear and prove their property, then the Town Clark shall
proceed to the sale of such astrays, by appointing the day of sale, to
the highest bidder; and, after deducting the expenses, to be adjudged by
persons hereafter appointed by each parish, in this town, and the
overplus shall be delivered into the hands of a Treasurer, hereafter to
be appointed.

“And be it observed—That all well regulated townships is divided into
parishes. Be it enacted, by the majority of votes, that this town shall
be divided into parishes, and described as followeth, that is to say:
That from lot No. 45, west of Green Point to lot No. 19, shall be a
parish by the name of St. John’s, and by the authority aforesaid, that
including No. 19, to No. 6, in the Crown Lands, west of Green Point,
shall be a parish by the name of St. Matthew. And be it further enacted,
by the authority aforesaid, That including the tenants on the Crown
Lands, and including lot No. 28, shall be a parish by the name of St.
Giles; and from Nicholas Wessel’s, to Hallowell, shall be a parish by
the name of Mount Pleasant.

“Whereas, all the fines and forfeitures that may incur within our
limits, shall be appropriated to charitable uses; we, the inhabitants of
Sophiasburg, in our town meetings, on the 3d day of March, 1800, do
think it necessary to appoint our Treasurer, in this town, out of the
most respectable of its inhabitants, to be Treasurer to this town, to
receive all forfeitures and other sums of money that is, or shall be,
ordered to be appropriated to charitable uses; which Treasurer is hereby
ordered to serve in that connection during good behaviour, or till he
shall wish a successor. And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that we do appoint and nominate Peter Valleu, who is appointed
Treasurer, who is to keep a book and receive all the moneys coming into
his hands, and enter by who received, and for what fined; and when a
successor is appointed, he shall give up all the monies he has belonging
to said town, with the book and receipts, to the successor, and deliver
the same on oath, if required; and that each parish shall nominate one
good and respectable inhabitant, who together with the Overseer of the
Poor, shall be inspectors to inquire and see that all the fines and
forfeitures of this town is regularly received and delivered to said
Treasurer. And if any person who comes and proves of any astrays that
had been within one year and a day, then the Treasurer and those Parish
Inspectors, and the Overseers of the Poor, shall refund such moneys as
was delivered to the Treasurer, deducting two shillings on the pound for
its fees of said Treasurer. And be it enacted by the authority
aforesaid, that when there is any money in the hands of the Treasurer,
and a necessity to lay it out on the same charitable use—this body
corporate shall have the sole management and disposing of, who is to
receipt to the Treasurer for the same end, have recorded in his book,
and the use they had applied the same and the Treasurer, Overseers of
the Poor, and the Parish Inspector may hold meetings and adjourn the
same when and as often as they or the major part of them shall choose so
to do and shall be a body corporate to sue and be sued on anything that
may appertain to their several offices.”

We find no further record until the year 1820, which is as follows: “An
Act passed at a town meeting, held at Sophiasburg, 3rd January, 1820,
for the relief of the poor in the township of Sophiasburg.

“Report of the Committee on the subject.

“We, the Committee appointed, who have the care of the poor of the said
township, have agreed to report that one half-penny on the pound, of
each man’s rateable property, be paid for the present year, and it is
seen of the Committee that when any person is agreed with to keep any of
the poor, that they endeavour to get them to take produce in payment for
defraying said poor. Signed on behalf of the Committee,

                                                JAMES NOXEN, _Chairman_.

Sophiasburg, 3rd January, 1820.

“Passed at a regular town meeting, held at Sophiasburg, 1st January,
1821.

“The report of the Committee to the care of the poor for the present
year is, that one farthing on the pound, of each man’s rateable
property, will be sufficient for the present year.

“By order of the Committee.

                                 (Signed)      JAMES NOXEN, _Chairman_.”

The following year, a somewhat similar report is found, signed by Tobias
Ryckman, Chairman.

It is not until the year 1822 that any record is found of the
appointment of officers, that is, the Township Constables, Assessors,
Collectors, &c.

“At a regular town meeting, held at Sophiasburg, at the house of John
Goslins, on the first January, 1822, the following officers were chosen
and elected”: “Town Clark, John Shorts; Lewis Ketchum, David Birdett,
Sylvenus Doxy, Constables; Thomas D. Apleby, John Shorts, Assessors;
Sylvenus Day, Collector,” &c.

John Shorts was successively elected until 1826, when Thomas D. Appleby
was appointed. We find a note appended to the report of this year as
follows: “Our laws at present be as they will. We have them long, and
keep them still.”

The next year, 1827, the town meeting was held at the inn of John
Goslin, and John Smith was elected Town Clerk. A note says “Farmers Town
Laws, as heretofore—Hogs not to run at large in Demerest Vill.” John
Smith was Town Clerk until 1832. This year S. W. Randell was elected.

It is found stated that in 1824 there were 1796 inhabitants, and in
1825, there were 1793.

In some respects, it would be found interesting to notice the township
to a later period; but we have already devoted as much space to this
town as we had intended.

Within this township is Fish Lake, situated a short distance east of
Demerestville, it was so named from the countless numbers of fish which
inhabited its waters when discovered, which was in the year of the
famine, or “scarce year.” The food thus supplied saved, it is said, many
from suffering and death.


                             AMELIASBURGH.

This township took its name from the fifteenth child, and seventh
daughter of the King. She died in November, 1811, aged 27 years. Upon
the oldest chart of this township, to be found in the Crown Lands
Department, is the following note: “The front of this township is a
continuation of Lieut. Kotte’s survey from Green Point to the head of
the Bay of Quinté, whose orders were in 1785, to have cross roads
between every six lots.” This note was most probably, made in
consequence of there being an absence of three cross roads, when the
settlement of the county made them necessary.

Coming to the Carrying Place, or portage, from the head of Bay Quinté to
Weller’s Bay, it will be seen that a row of lots somewhat smaller in
size, is formed on either side of the road. But while the road seems to
have a straight course upon the map, by visiting the place, one will
observe that the course is not altogether direct. We have it from one,
who, no doubt knew, that the surveyor’s assistant, a mulatto by the name
of Smith, was told to lay out a double row of lots; both to front upon
the Indian path, which instructions were literally carried out, whereas
it was intended they should be straight. The lots upon the west side of
the road extended to the small marshy creek. This row of lots, numbering
twelve, originally forming a part of Ameliasburgh, now belong to Murray,
the Carrying Place being the dividing line between the two townships.

We have been unable to find any early record of Ameliasburgh.

According to information furnished us by Mr. Ashley and others, the
first family that settled in this township was George Angel Weese, with
three sons, John, Henry and Francis, natives of Duchess County; they
came here in 1787. The second settler was Thomas Dempsey, who came in
1789. (See U. E. Loyalists). Among the other settlers were Bonters,
Sagers, Bleekers and Coverts.

The names of other early settlers of Ameliasburgh are mentioned
elsewhere, and are among the first patentees. Among them was Elijah
Wallbridge, a native of Duchess County. He came to Canada in 1804, and
purchased on Mississauga Point, of one Smith, 1200 acres of land, all of
which, we believe, is still retained in the family. Two years later his
family came by French train in winter.

William Anderson, sen., who is still living, aged 88 years, a native of
Ireland, emigrated to America with his parents in 1793. He came to
Canada in 1803. In 1806 he settled on Mississauga Point, having married
Miss Polly Way, a descendant of the U. E. Loyalists.




                             CHAPTER LIII.

  CONTENTS—Prince Edward—The name—Rich land—Size of peninsula—Shape—
    Small Lakes—Sand hills—The Ducks—Gibson’s rock—The past—First
    settler—Col. Young—Prospecting—Discovery of East Lake—West Lake—
    Moving in—Settlers in 1800—East Lake—Capt. Richardson—“Prince
    Edward Division Bill”—Office seekers—Township of Hallowell—The
    name—Formation of Township—First Records 1798—The officers—The
    laws—Magistrates—Picton—Its origin—Hallowell village—Dr. Austin—
    Gen. Picton—His monument—Naming the villages—A contest—The
    Court-house—An offer—Enterprise—Proposed steamboat—Churches—Rev.
    Mr. Macaulay—Rev. Mr. Fraser—Rev. Mr. Lalor.


                      PENINSULA OF PRINCE EDWARD.

The name of this district is derived from Prince Edward, Duke of Kent,
the father of our Queen, who visited Canada at an early date (see under
Early Government).

The peninsula is a rich and beautiful tract of land stretching away from
the main land, to be washed on the one hand by the quiet waters of the
bay, and on the other by the more turbulent waves of Ontario. It is some
seventy miles in length, and varying in breadth from two to twenty
miles. The neck of land, or isthmus which separates the head waters of
the bay from Lake Ontario, is something less than a mile-and-a-half
across. It is known as the Carrying place.

Prince Edward district is irregular in outline, on both the lake and bay
sides. Along the lake coast there are numerous bays extending inward,
two or three being of considerable size. The larger ones are Weller’s
bay, Consecon Lake, West Lake, and East Lake. In places, the shore is
rendered exceedingly picturesque, by the presence of irregular and
beautifully white sand-hills. They have been gradually formed by well
washed sand which the waves have carried shoreward, so that the wind
might, in the lapse of time, deposit it heap upon heap. The mariners
regard this coast with justifiable concern, at the extreme southerly
portion, off Long Point, in the vicinity of the Ducks, where many a
vessel has come to grief.

The geological formation of the peninsula is of considerable interest;
and the observant student of this interesting science, may trace many
steps which indicates the geological history.

In a valley, upon the second concession road of Ameliasburgh, may be
seen a huge mass of rock, known as Gibson’s rock, whose history carries
us back, far into the remote past, when the continent of America was
covered by a vast ocean, and when massive icebergs, cast loose from
their native place in the frozen north, carried with their icy scales
huge rocks from the north land coast. Then, carried southward by wind or
tide, and reaching water of a milder temperature, the ice became melted,
and the rocks were deposited in the depths of the ocean. When the
continent of America was upheaved, and the waters departed to their
present limits, this huge body of stone, unlike the stone forming the
geological bed of this region, was found fast fixed to the soil, ever to
form a part of it.

In the whole of Upper Canada, there is not, perhaps, any section so full
of historic interest, excepting Frontenac, as Prince Edward. We have
seen that the forked peninsula was well known by the Aborigines, and
that they were accustomed to cross from the south side of the lake to
Point Traverse. It was always a favorite hunting and fishing ground,
where abundant supplies were obtained. And, not unlikely, some portion
of Indian Point belonged to the Seigniory, granted to La Salle.
Moreover, the two points stretching far into the lake, became early
locations for the refugees and disbanded soldiers.

In the history of Marysburgh, reference has been made to the early
settlement of the point east of Picton Bay, which commenced in 1784. But
it appears by the statement of John C. Young, that his grandfather,
Colonel Henry Young, made the first settlement in the summer, or fall of
1783. For an account of this half-pay officer, the reader is referred to
the Royal combatants of the rebellion of 1776.

With a brother officer, Young left Cataraqui, or, Carleton Island, in a
canoe, and ascended what was then called (perhaps first by these
parties), the South Bay, now Picton Bay. They landed at the commencement
of the Indian Carrying Place, subsequently, for some time known as
Hovington’s Landing, after the individual who here built a convenient
house. They left their canoe here, and set out southward. We have been
told that they intended to seek the bay now known as Smith’s Bay; but,
according to his descendant it would seem they had no particular point
in view, desiring only to examine the land. Following, no doubt, the old
Indian path, they came out at the north corner of East Lake, a point
afterward called the Indian Landing, which name it still retains.
Following the east shore of this lake to the south corner, they were
surprised to hear the roaring of Lake Ontario, having thought they were
following the shore of an inland lake. They crossed the strip of land
covered with cedar, spruce, and balsam, and taking off their shoes,
waded from the beautiful sand-beach across the outlet of the lake to the
opposite point, and proceeded along the west side to the north corner of
the lake, to where David McDonald now lives, having entirely walked
around East Lake. They here constructed a hut, of cedar bushes, in which
to stay the night. The following morning they set out in a north-west
direction, and came to West Lake, following the east side, they reached
the sand-beach. Traversing this, they arrived at the point where
Wellington now stands. Here they stayed the night. The next day they
continued on around the north side of West Lake through the woods, and
the same evening regained their canoe. They observed plenty of deer and
other game, and fish, the former of which Ensign Young’s wife
subsequently assisted him to hunt. The succeeding day they returned to
Carleton Island. Mr. Young, from this rich land over which he walked,
selected the west side of East Lake for his future abode. His eldest son
Daniel, who had belonged to the Engineers, was at Carleton Island,
having been with his father during his stay at Fort Oswego. His second
son, Henry, was at St. John’s with the rest of the family. He sent a
message for him to come up. This must have been in July or August. In
September, the father and two sons, having procured a large canoe,
loaded it with provisions, and other necessaries, and ascended to the
Indian Carrying Place, Hovington’s Landing. They carried their
provisions across, and constructed another boat with which they conveyed
their things to the point selected for settling, about three miles. Here
they proceeded to build a log shanty. Sometime after, the father left,
leaving behind his two sons, to winter alone in this out-of-the-way
place. They were the first settlers in Prince Edward County. Mr. Young
descended to St. John’s, where his family still remained, and stayed the
winter.

In the spring he came up the St. Lawrence with his family as far as
Fredericksburgh, where he left his daughters while he went to see how
his sons fared, and had passed the winter. He found them all well; and
remained the summer with them, during which they built a more commodious
log house. In October, he returned to Fredericksburgh for his daughters,
who accompanied him to the wilderness home. These four daughters,
Elizabeth, Mary, Catherine and Sarah, subsequently married Henry
Zuveldt, Jonathan Ferguson, William Dyre, and John Miller. They all
lived to be upwards of eighty years.

On the first day of January 1800, the settlement at East Lake, in the
township of Hallowell, consisted of the following families, in the
following order, commencing at Silas Hills, at the head of East Lake,
near the place now known as the Cherry Valley, and proceeding around the
north side of lake, viz:—“Colonel John Peters and family, half-pay
officer; Major Rogers and family, do; David Friar, Mr. Friar, U. E. L.;
Roswell Ferguson, do; Elisha Miller, do; Blasdall Tailor; Caleb
Elsworth, Lieut. Heny Young, half-pay officer; Henry Young, Jun.,
U.E.L.; Augustus Spencer, half-pay officer; George Wait, U. E. L.;
Benjamin Wait, do; William Dyre, do; George Elsworth.”

“_List of settlers on the south side of the lake._—Henry Zuveldt,
(Zufelt) U. E. L.; Johnathan Ferguson, Sen., U. E. L.; Johnathan
Ferguson, Jun., do; Anthony Badgley, do; John Miller, do; Farnton
Ferguson, do; William Blakely, do; Sampson Striker, do; Barret Dyer, do;
Daniel Baldwin, John Ogden, U. E. L.; Richard Ogden, do; Solomon
Spafford, Joseph McCartney, Joseph Lane, William Ensley, Col. Owen
Richards, U. E. L.; James Clapp, do; Charles Ferguson.”

“At this time there were no settlers in the second concessions neither
side of the lake.”—(Rev. G. Miller.)

East Lake is about five miles long and one and a half wide. It was for a
time called Little Lake. West Lake is about fifteen miles in
circumference.

Prince Edward was one of the original nineteen counties of Upper Canada,
established by the proclamation of Simcoe in 1792. By this proclamation,
we learn that the Peninsula was called by the French “Presque isle de
Quinté.” Originally it was divided into the three townships of
Marysburgh, Sophiasburgh, and Ameliasburgh. Subsequently the townships
of Hallowell and Hillier, were formed, and in later days the township of
Athol.

In 1831, an act was passed to erect the county into a district, “so soon
as the Governor shall be satisfied that a good and sufficient gaol and
court house has been erected therein, when a proclamation should
announce the formation of the new district.” The act specified that the
“gaol and court house should be erected in the village of Picton, upon a
certain block of land, containing two and a half acres, granted, or
intended to be granted and conveyed to Asa Worden, Simeon Washburn, and
James Dougal, Esquires, agreeably to a resolution adopted at a public
meeting in May, 1826,” unless a majority of Justices of the Peace of the
Midland District should declare the site ineligible.

We find the following respecting the division of Prince Edward. “Pro.
Parliament,” “Prince Edward division bill.” Mr. Roblin moved the
adoption of the Preamble in a few remarks, stating its (the Peninsula)
geographical position, the population being 10,000, the remoteness of
the inhabitants from the location of the District Court House and Gaol,
at Kingston, the earnest desire of the people for separation. Mr. Samson
moved, as an amendment, that the village should have a member when it
contained 1,000 souls. The debate upon the bill, resulted in one of
those fierce encounters that was then not unfrequent between William
Lyon McKenzie, and the Solicitor General, afterwards Chief Justice
Robinson.

If we may credit the _Free Press_, there were plenty of applicants for
office in the newly erected district, there being no less than sixteen
seeking the office of Sheriff.


                               HALLOWELL.

We find in Sabine, that “Benjamin Hallowell, of Boston, Commissioner of
the Customs in 1774, while passing through Cambridge in his chaise, was
pursued toward Boston by about one hundred and sixty men on horseback,
at full gallop. In July, 1776, he sailed for England. While at Halifax,
he said, in a letter, “If I can be of the least service to either army
or navy, I will stay in America until this rebellion is subdued.” It
appears from another letter that he frequently tendered himself to the
Commander-in-Chief without success. In the autumn of 1796, Mr. Hallowell
came to Boston. He was accompanied by his daughter, Mrs. Elmsley, and by
her husband, who had just been appointed Chief Justice of Upper Canada.
He died at York, Upper Canada, in 1799, aged seventy-five, and was the
last survivor of the Board of Commissioners. The British Government
granted him lands in Manchester, and two other towns in Nova Scotia,
_and a township in Upper Canada, which bears his name_. He was a large
proprietor of lands on the Kennebec, Maine, prior to the revolution; but
proscribed and banished in 1778, and included in the Conspiracy Act a
year later, his entire estate was confiscated. His country residence at
Jamaica Plain, was used as a hospital by the Whig Army during the seige
of Boston; and his pleasure grounds were converted into a place of
burial for the soldiers who died.”

We are unable to learn whether any part of the township of Hallowell was
granted to Benjamin Hallowell, or not, but, it is not at all unlikely,
that at first he did hold some portion of the land. At all events, there
seems every reason to believe that the name was derived from him. On
July 3, 1797, an act was passed, whereby it was provided “that a
township shall be struck off from the southern-most parts of the
townships of Marysburgh and Sophiasburgh.” The reason set forth was,
that “the inhabitants of the townships experience many difficulties from
the uncommon length of the said townships.” The Governor was by
proclamation, “to declare the name of such township before the first day
of August next.” Mr. Hallowell’s brother-in-law, Mr. Elmsley, had
recently been appointed Chief Justice, and doubtless the distinguished
position Mr. Hallowell had held, led to the naming of the new township
to commemorate his loyalty.

Surveyor Gen. William Smith, was the person employed to lay out the new
township.

The first record of this township is as follows: “The annual meeting of
the inhabitants of the township of Hallowell, held on Monday, the fifth
day of March, 1798, held by virtue of an act of the legislature of the
Province of Upper Canada, before Augustus Spencer, and John Stinson,
Jun., two of his Majesty’s Justices of the Peace, the following persons
were chosen town officers for the ensuing year:” Bazel Ferguson, Town
Clerk; Caleb Elsworth, and Peter D. Conger, Assessors; James Blakely,
and Thomas Goldsmith, Town or Church Wardens; Benjamin Wail, John
Miller, Owen Richards, Henry Zufelt, Ichabod Boweman, Aaron White, Carey
Spencer and George Baker, Overseers of Highways and Fence Viewers;
Daniel Young, and Isaac Bedal, Pound Keepers; Samson Striker, Henry
Johnson, Samuel Williams, and Isaac Garret, Constables.

At the first township meeting, “it was enacted that no fence is to be
lawful in the township under the height of four feet eight inches high,
sufficiently made.” Horses, horned cattle, hogs, sheep, were to be
permitted to run at large with certain exceptions. “It is enacted that
if any freeholder shall suffer any Canadian thistle to go to seed on his
farm, he shall forfeit and pay the sum of twenty shillings.” A law was
also passed, that if any one set fire to any rubbish or brush, whereby
his neighbors property was endangered, without previously making two of
his neighbors acquainted, he should pay a fine of forty shillings, to be
expended for the benefit of the highways. Bazel Ferguson, who seems to
have discharged his duty as Town Clerk, recording the proceedings in a
neat legible hand, was successfully elected to that office for ten
years. In 1810, James R. Armstrong was appointed, and again the
following year. The next following, Arra Ferguson was elected, who
continued in office three years, when Simeon Washburn received the
appointment, and remained in office two years, when Arra Ferguson was
again selected, and continued for three years. Robert Scott was Town
Clerk two years, and then again followed Arra Ferguson for eight years.
William Barker then was appointed.

The three Justices of the Peace, before whom the annual meeting
continued for many years to be held, were John Peters, Augustus Spencer,
and John Stinson, doubtless the first magistrates in the township. In
the year 1815, we notice as “present” at the annual meeting, Stephen
Conger, Barret Dyer, Ebenezer Washburn, Justices of the Peace.

The town meeting was held in the year 1801, “at the house of Richardson
and Elsworth,” “near Hallowell Bridge;” likewise the following year. In
1803 the meeting was held “at the house of Thomas Richardson.” The
following year 1805, it is “the house of the late Thomas Richardson.” In
1806, the meeting was “at the dwelling house of Thomas Eyre.” In 1807 it
is “the Inn of Thomas Eyre.” Here the annual meeting was successively
held for many years.


                                HILLIER.

In the year 1823 there was an act passed for the division of the
township of Ameliasburgh, in consequence of the inconvenience of the
inhabitants to meet on public occasions. The dividing line was
established between the fourth and fifth concessions. The act went into
force on the first of January, 1824. The Lieutenant-Governor at that
time was Sir Peregrine Maitland, who had for his secretary, Major
Hillier. There is no doubt the new township was called after Major
Hillier.


                                PICTON.

At the beginning of the present century the ground on which the town of
Picton now stands, was covered with a dense forest of pine and hemlock,
while in the low land existed a thick and tangled cedar swamp. A bridge
of very inferior construction was erected across the creek about the
time of the war of 1812, it was on the road between Kingston and York,
and was called for a long time Hallowell Bridge. Thus we find in an
advertisement, in the _Kingston Gazette_, 1815, that “Richard G. Clute
sold goods and groceries at Hallowell Bridge.”

The first settlers of Picton are said to have been Ebenezer Washburn,
Henry Johnson, Abraham Barker, Harry Ferguson, James Dougal, Cary
Spencer, Congers, Peterson, Richard Hare, Captain Richardson.

Among the early settlers of Picton were Dr. Armstrong, elsewhere spoken
of, and Dr. Andrew Austin. The latter was a native of Vermont, and a
doctor of medicine of the University of New York. He came to Picton in
1822, having obtained his license to practice in Canada. Remained
practicing his profession, very much respected, until his death in 1849.

Some time after the war of 1812, the Rev. William Macaulay, bestowed the
name of Picton upon a small collection of houses situated at the south
side of the stream which empties into the head of Picton Bay, in the
township of Marysburgh. The name was given in memory of the celebrated
British General who had recently fallen upon the field of Waterloo. At a
late visit to St. Paul’s Cathedral, we felt no little pleasure with a
touch of sadness in gazing upon the memorial which has been erected to
commemorate a nation’s appreciation of military worth. We transcribe the
following:—

“Erected by the public expense, to Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Picton,
K.C.B., who, after distinguishing himself in the victories of Buzaco,
Fuentes de Onor, Cindaet Rodrigo, Badajoz, Victoria, the Pyrenees,
Orthes, and Toulouse, terminated his long and glorious military service
in the ever memorable battle of Waterloo; to the splendid success of
which his genius and valour eminently contributed,” &c.

Prior to the naming of this collection of buildings, the village upon
the west of the stream, upon the first lots in Sophiasburgh, was known
as Hallowell. The Rev. Mr. Macaulay with the enthusiastic loyalty,
characteristic of his family, desired that both places should be known
as one village, under the distinguished name of Picton. The citizens of
Hallowell Village, however, were opposed to any other name than
Hallowell, and we find in a map published in 1836, the names of Picton
and Hallowell respectively applied to the two places. But when the whole
was incorporated by Act of Parliament, Mr. Macaulay had sufficient
influence, we are informed, to secure the name of Picton for the
corporation; yet we have the town of Hallowell spoken of in 1837. The
growth of Picton was not particularly rapid. At a meeting held at Eyre’s
Inn, Feb. 14, 1818, over which Ebenezer Washburn, Esq., presided, it was
stated that there was in the township of Hallowell, which included
Picton, but two brick houses, one carding and fulling-mill, one
Methodist chapel, now known as the old chapel at Congers, one Quaker
meeting house; and that preparations were being made to build a church,
that is for the Episcopalians. Orchards, it was stated were beginning to
be planted.

There seems to have been no little antagonism between the villages of
Picton and Hallowell. While an effort was earnestly made to make the
east side, the heart of the community, the inhabitants of Hallowell
strove to fix the central point upon the west side. When Prince Edward
was erected into a district, in 1831, and it became necessary to erect a
jail and court house, it became a warm question as to the site of the
building. The Hallowell _Free Press_ became the channel of a sharp
discussion.

In the Press of June 21, 1831, is a letter signed, “A farmer of
Sophiasburgh,” one paragraph of which says, “Among all these advantages
pointed out in the most striking colours, I have discerned none so great
as the $200 so liberally offered by Mr. Macaulay, which $200 must
otherwise be paid by the rateable inhabitants of the county.”

The year 1831 seems to have been an important one to the inhabitants,
not only of Picton, but the peninsula. Enterprise was the order of the
day, and improvements of a public character were in various ways
proposed. The _Free Press_ of 5th July, says, under the heading “Another
Steamboat,” “We understand that a number of the enterprising inhabitants
of this village, have it in contemplation to build a steamboat to ply
between this place and Prescott, to perform their trips in a week. A
number of merchants and capitalists have offered to take stock. We are
of opinion that a boat built and owned by the inhabitants of this
county, would be not only useful to the inhabitants of the Peninsula,
but profitable to the stockholders. We would suggest to them the
propriety of having the channel in the bay at the lower end of the
village cleared, so as to allow steamboats to pass up as far as the
bridge.”

The present English Church, standing on Church Street, was the first
built in Picton. It was erected by the Rev. Wm. Macaulay, aided by a
partial loan in 1825. Mr. Macaulay was the first minister; he came to
the parish after seven years of officiating at Cobourg, and has remained
as Rector ever since. The Roman Catholic chapel, now standing on Church
Street, was the first erected, in 1828 or 9, the land having been given
for that purpose by Mr. Macaulay. The new stone church was built in
1839. Rev. Mr. Frazer was first minister, in 1828; Rev. Mr. Brennan,
occasionally from 1832 to 1836; the Rev. Mr. Lalor from 1836 to the
present time.




                              CHAPTER LIV.

  CONTENTS—Eighth Township—Sidney—Name—Survey—Settlement, 1787—Letter
    from Ferguson—Trading—Barter—Potatoes—Building—Cows—No salt to
    spare—First settlers—Myers—Re-surveying—James Farley—Town Clerk at
    first meeting—William Ketcheson—Gilbert’s Cove—Coming to the front
    River Trent—Old names—Ferry—Bridge—Trenton—Its settlement—Squire
    Bleeker.


               THE EIGHTH TOWNSHIP—SIDNEY—ITS SETTLEMENT.

No Royal name being available for this township, the noble one of SIDNEY
was conferred. The name is derived from Lord Sidney, who, at the time of
the Revolutionary War, was His Majesty’s Secretary for the Colonial
Department.

A map in the Crown Lands Department, has written upon it “Sidney, in the
District of Mecklenburgh, was surveyed in 1787, by Louis Kotte.” This
was probably written by Kotte himself. It is most probable that the
first lots only were then laid out. While Kotte was the chief surveyor
to whom was entrusted the duty, it is gathered from different sources
that he was not present to superintend the work. Mr. William Ketcheson,
of the fifth concession, who came with his father to the place, in 1800,
says that one McDonald was the surveyor, and laid out the land as far
back as the 5th concession, when he died.

While the townships fronting upon the two shores of the Bay were being
surveyed in the western portion, not a few were on the look out for a
good location. These parties consisted of all classes, but it appears
most likely that the majority of those who had the first choice were
individuals connected with the surveyors, and who had influence with
them. The officers, naturally, enjoyed greater privileges, and some of
them sought suitable spots with the view of trading with the Indians, or
streams of water to supply power for sawing and flouring-mills.

As illustrative of those times we will make use of a letter lying before
us, written at that time.

In the year 1789, John Ferguson and Wm. Bell opened a store in the
Eighth Township. It appears with the view of trading with the Indians,
and such of the settlers as could pay for the goods they might buy. A
letter written by Ferguson, in 1790, from Kingston, to his partner,
says: “As to again taking up goods for trade, had I money I would not
think it worth while—notwithstanding all I said and begged of you, you
nevertheless have let the white people have almost everything we had.
When do you think they will pay for it?” By the foregoing we may learn
the difficulties attending mercantile pursuits, as well as the procuring
of the common necessaries of life. It was no doubt a matter of first
importance to Ferguson to see that the goods brought a return. It was no
hard-heartedness that caused him to find fault; for in the same letter
he says, “Forsyth is arrived, and I know not how I’ll pay him.” On the
other hand, Mr. Bell, with his little stock of goods upon the Bay Shore,
in the distant Eighth Township, is applied to by the needy settlers for
necessaries. They have no money; it is an article almost unknown among
them, but they want this and that, and who could refuse? Ferguson
afterward says, “You must oblige every one to pay you in wheat, or
otherwise I will want bread before winter is over—if they will not take
3s. 9d. for wheat, make them pay in money immediately, or else send me
down their accounts, and I’ll summon every one of them. Let your half
bushel be examined before Squire Gilbert. Do not spare a potatoe to any
one soul. I hope to get a barrel of pork here, but do not trust to
that.”

In the same letter Mr. Ferguson says, “If convenient, I could wish
you’ld get cut and brought home, as many logs as would build a house the
width of the one we have, and 14 feet long. Let them be small and handy—
we have plenty of small pine handy—and it soon can be put up when I get
home. If Johnson will saw ten logs about 14 feet long, for us, into inch
boards, and find himself. He shall have the loan of the saw from the
time he finishes them until the 15th day of April next.” “The cows must
be sent up. I do not know how the calf will be kept. I have bought two
pairs of ducks which I’ll take up, and also some fowls if I can get
them.” “Spare no salt to any one, as none is to be had here, but at a
very dear rate.” “The Indian prints goes up, which will spoil the trade
this season, as after this the Indians cannot want clothing until the
spring.” “Rum I must endeavour to take up, as without that nothing can
be had.”

The late Mr. Bleeker, of Belleville, tells us that among the very first
settlers upon the front of Sidney, were Chrysler, Ostrom and Gilbert.

The interesting history we give elsewhere, of Capt. Myers, as a loyalist
and pioneer, shows that he was one of the first inhabitants of Sidney. A
pioneer in the construction of mills upon the River Moira, he had
previously built in 1794 or ‘5, a sawing mill upon a small uncertain
stream which empties into the Bay a few miles east of Trenton.

We have seen that the survey took place in 1787. It is questionable,
however, whether more than the first concession was at this time laid
out. There is some reason to believe that Louis Kotte did not attend
very closely to his duties, but left the surveying to an incompetent
assistant. Probably he thought it did not matter whether the side lines
were correct or not, in a remote township so far removed from
civilization, as Sidney. At all events, in later days, it was found
necessary to re-survey the township, which was done by Atkins.

The first settlers, most likely, came in 1787, yet it may be that one or
two had previously squatted by the Bay Shore. We do not find in the
Crown Lands Department any map with the names of grantees upon the
different lots, such as exist in connection with other townships.

No doubt that in Sidney, as in other places, many lots were drawn, and
subsequently disposed of before the patents were issued, so that the
original owner cannot be traced. By the close of last century the
township was pretty well settled. An early settler who has recently
passed away, and who leaves highly respectable descendants, was James
Farley. He came in 1799.

The first township meeting was held the following year at Gilbert’s
Cove, and James Farley was chosen Town Clerk; but Surveyor Smith was
present and did the writing on that occasion. Another early settler, the
first one in the back concessions was Wm. Ketcheson. Reference is made
to him elsewhere. His son, now almost 90 years of age, remembers full
well the days of their coming, and settling. The 400 acres of land was
bought of Martin Hambly, who lived by the Napanee River, at one dollar
per acre, in 1800. Gilbert’s Cove was the place of landing, which was
for many years a central spot. Here the batteaux unloaded their
contents, and the provision was stored. William Ketcheson, my informer,
says, “he used to come every Saturday during the season, through the
trackless woods, some seven-and-a-half miles, and carry upon his back
provisions of pork, peas and flour, sufficient to serve three of them
for a week.” After a while they would come to the Front by the way of
the River Moira. To do this they constructed a scow which was kept near
the present village of Smithville, in which they crossed the river.

In the western part of the township is the River Trent, which empties
into the Bay, somewhat to the west of the boundary line between Sidney
and Murray. This river possesses no little interest as one of the
original routes of Indian and French travelers; and as the way by which
Champlain entered the Bay, and discovered Lake Ontario. The Indian name
we find upon an old map was _Ganaraske_. Upon many ancient maps the bay
and river are very imperfectly distinguished. It is named Quintio
occasionally.

The Trent being a stream of considerable size, it formed a barrier to
journeying up and down, from Kingston to York. A ferry was established
here about the beginning of the present century, by the Bleekers, after
which the main road between Kingston and York gradually became fixed to
the north of the Bay, instead of by Prince Edward.

The construction of a bridge across the Trent, which took place in 1834,
was a great benefit. It was 750 feet long and 32 broad. It was for many
years “the best bridge in Upper Canada.” The _Hastings Times_, of
Belleville, has an advertisement for tenders by the Commissioners, &c.,
C. Wilkins, Reuben White, and James G. Bethune, dated River Trent, 9th
March, 1833.

At the mouth of the Trent there naturally sprung up a village. Up to
1808 the site of the village was a dense cedar swamp. Two years before
A. H. Myers had removed from Belleville and erected a mill about a mile
from the mouth of the river, first a saw mill, afterward a flouring
mill. Excepting the mills, and a very narrow road, the place was a
perfect wilderness. The land upon the west side, where the village
stands, originally belonged to “old Squire” Bleeker. The portion of land
between the river and Sidney was held by Dr. Strachan. The first lot in
Sidney was owned by Judge Smith.

Old Squire Bleeker was probably the very first settler between the Trent
and the Carrying Place. He was a trader with the Indians, and was
probably Indian Agent. At all events he was a man of considerable
authority among them.




                              CHAPTER LV.

  CONTENTS—Ninth town—Thurlow—Name—When surveyed—Front—Indian burying
    ground—Owner of first lots—Chisholm—Singleton—Myers—Ferguson—
    Indian traders—To Kingston in batteau—Singleton’s death—Ferguson’s
    death—Distress of the families—Settled, 1789—Ascending the Moira—
    Taking possession of land—Fifth concession—John Taylor—Founder of
    Belleville—Myers buying land—Settlers upon the front—Municipal
    record—Town officers—1798—Succeeding years—Canifton, its founder—
    Settling—The diet—Building mill—Road—River Moira—Origin of name—
    Earl Moira—Indian name—Indian offering—“Cabojunk”—Myers’ saw-mill—
    Place not attractive—First bridge—The flouring-mill—Belleville—
    Indian village—Myers’ Creek—Formation of village—First inn—
    Permanent Bridge Street—In 1800—Growth—A second mill—McNabb’s—Sad
    death—Captain McIntosh—Petrie—Inhabitants, 1809—Dr. Spareham—
    Naming of Belleville—Bella Gore—By Gore in council—Petition—
    Extract from Kingston Gazette—Surveying reserve—Wilmot—Mistakes—
    Granting of lots—Conditions—Board of Police—Extent of Belleville—
    Muddy streets—Inhabitants in 1824—Court-house—First Court, Quarter
    Sessions—Belleville in 1836.


                        THE NINTH TOWN—THURLOW.

The oldest map in the Crown Lands Department, states that this township
was surveyed in 1787, by Louis Kotte; perhaps only the front concession.
By this map, we learn that at the mouth of the river had been, probably
on Zwick’s Island, an Indian burying ground; and a lot is reserved for
the Indians, for a burying ground. The map informs us that lot No. 1, in
both the first and second concessions, was at first given to John
Chisholm. Lot No. 2, in first and second concession, to David
Vanderheyden; No. 3, to Alexander Chisholm; No. 4, the reserve for the
“Indian burying ground;” Nos. 5 and 6, to Captain John Singleton. These
are the only names which appear upon the map; but it is likely that lot
No. 7, was granted at first to Captain Myers. The late George Bleeker,
Esq., told the writer that Captain Myers having stayed in Lower Canada
three years, came and settled upon lot 7, where he built a hut and lived
for a year, before going to Sidney. This was probably in 1787, when the
surveying was proceeding. Thus it was that Captain Myers, who afterward
gave a name to the river and place, was the first squatter. About this
time, Captain Singleton, who had been a first settler in Ernesttown,
came to Thurlow with a brother officer, Lieutenant Ferguson, both having
recently married and settled upon lot No. 6. Their object in coming was
to carry on a fur trade with the Indians, who regularly descended the
River Sagonoska to barter, and subsequently to get their presents. The
single log house which was first built, was shortly added to, by a
second compartment, into which was stored furs and goods for barter. The
life of these first settlers of Thurlow was a brief one, and the
termination a sad one. Both had just married, and with their faithful
servant, Johnson, and his wife, they hoped for a future as bright as the
wood and water which so beautifully surrounded them. It mattered not to
them that no human habitation existed nearer than the Mohawk settlement,
and the Napanee River. Many trips with the batteau were necessary to
obtain a complete outfit for Indian trading, and ample provisions had to
be laid up, with stores of rum. These articles were procured at
Kingston. Singleton had rented his farm in the second town; but reserved
a room, where he might stop on his way up and down. In September, 1789,
Captain Singleton, his wife, child, some eight months old, with
Lieutenant Ferguson, his wife, and the servants, Johnson and wife, set
out for Kingston and Ernesttown in a batteau. The women were to visit in
Ernesttown, while the men proceeded to Kingston to purchase flour and
other articles. Not long after starting, Singleton was taken ill. They
stopped at Captain John’s, at the Mohawk settlement, and Indian
medicines were given him; but he continued to grow worse, and when he
reached his home, in Ernesttown, he was dangerously ill. A doctor from
Kingston was procured; but Captain Singleton died nine days after, from
what seems to have been a malignant fever. His faithful servant,
Johnson, contracted the disease and also died. Thus, Lieutenant Ferguson
was left with three women and a child, away from home, which could only
be reached after much toil. Captain Singleton was spoken of as a
“pleasing gentleman, and beloved by all who knew him.” His infant son
grew to man’s estate, and became one of the first settlers of Brighton,
where his widow, now far advanced in years, and descendants reside.

Lieutenant Ferguson went to Kingston, exchanged his load of furs for a
barrel of flour, then very dear, and other articles, and returned with
his charge to Thurlow. But Ferguson’s days were also numbered; and, in
three months’ time, he died, and there were left in the depth of winter,
alone, upon the front of Thurlow, three widowed women, and an infant;
with but little to eat, beside the barrel of flour; which, before long,
was to be the only article of food, and used by cup-fulls to make spare
cakes.

Lieutenant Ferguson, the associate of the first settler in the township,
was at first a refugee from the Mohawk valley in New York, and latterly
served, probably in Johnson’s regiment. He had lived a short time at
Sorel before coming to Thurlow. His body was buried upon a pleasant
elevation, between their house and the plains to the east of the river.
The first one of the loyalists to die in Thurlow, his body was the first
to be interred in the “Taylor burying ground.”

In the spring of 1789, a party of about fifty, reached the bay. They
were all refugee loyalists, and most of them had been since the close of
the war in the States, looking up their families, and arranging to take
them “to Cataraqui.” This party settled in Sidney and Thurlow. Those who
settled in Thurlow, finding no land available at the front, prepared to
ascend the river. Among them were John Taylor, William Reed, with four
sons, John, William, Samuel, and Solomon; Richard Smith, Cavelry, Robert
Wright, John Longwell, Sherard, Zedie Thrasher, Asa Turner, Stephen and
Laurence Badgley, Solomon Hazleton, Archibald McKenzie, McMichael,
William Cook, and Russell Pitman. The party reached the mouth of the
river late in the day, and pitched their tent among some cedar shrubs
upon the east bank of the river, just by the site of the upper bridge.
The following day, they followed the bank of the river, searching for
indications of good land The surveyor had not yet laid out any but the
front lots; but the pioneers had been assured that any land they should
choose to occupy, would be granted them. When they reached the point
where now is the fifth concession, they felt that they had reached their
destination, and proceeded to take possession of such land as struck
their fancy. William Reed, and his four sons, possessed themselves of
600 acres in a block, through which the river wound its way. The land
here was unmistakably good; and four generations have now reaped the
fruit of the soil, while two generations lie buried there. But the first
years of pioneer life with those first settlers of the fifth concession,
were years of great hardship and want (see First years of Upper Canada).
They all went to Napanee at first to mill. Sometimes took articles to
exchange for flour.

John Taylor settled in the fifth concession, where he remained a year,
when he came down to the mouth of the river. A sketch of this old
soldier is elsewhere given. Among the settlers who came in, a few years
later, were Richard Canniff, and Robert Thompson.

In some respects, the settlers of these townships, at the western
extremity of the bay, suffered in a peculiar manner. They were far
removed from Kingston, and from the necessaries of life to be procured
there. And they were settling after the period when Government allowed
provisions.

The name of Captain Myers must ever stand identified with the early
history of Thurlow. He cannot be regarded as the founder of Belleville;
yet he was the first to give a name to the village at the mouth of the
river. Captain Myers saw service during the revolutionary war (see Royal
Combatants). At the close of hostilities, having tarried for a time at
Lower Canada, he came to the bay, and squatted at first upon the front
of Thurlow. He first became a settler upon the front of Sidney, a few
miles east of the Trent River. Being a man of enterprise, and with
forethought, he did not content himself with clearing a farm and
cultivating its soil. He saw the wants of the settlers, that they
required sawed lumber, and greater conveniences for grinding grain.
Hence he is found, even before 1790, erecting a sawing mill upon a small
stream on his land in Sidney. The waterpower was very inefficient, and
he looked about for a more suitable place. The waters of the Moira
presented the inducements he sought. A bargain was effected with John
Taylor for the rear half of lot No. 5, which embraced a portion of the
stream, affording the desired mill-site. It was, most probably, in the
year 1790, that Captain Myers came to Thurlow, and built his log hut
upon the banks of the river, a few rods above the present mill-dam.
Within a year, the first dam erected upon the river was finished, and a
log saw mill built upon the east bank.

The late Colonel Wilkins, of the Carrying Place, says, that when he came
to the bay, in 1792, Myers had his mill built, the one farthest west,
until they came to where is now Port Hope.

The following are the names of those who settled upon the front, as
supplied by the late G. Bleeker, Esq. Commencing at lot No. 1, the first
settler was John Chisholm; No. 2, Coon Frederick; No. 3, Crawford, the
lot having been drawn by A. Chisholm. Coming to No. 7, it was settled
upon by A. Thompson, who sold the right to Schofield; No. 8, by Arch.
Chisholm; No. 9, by Samuel Sherwood, who was an Indian trader. Then
Fairman, William Johnson, Edward Carscallion, J. Carscallion, Fairman,
Biddell.

There is no record of the first municipal transaction. Most likely, no
record was kept. The following, however, takes us back a long way:—

“At the annual town meeting, for the township of Thurlow, held the fifth
day of March, 1798, whereat the following persons were chosen town
officers, viz., John McIntosh, Town Clerk, John Chisholm and William
Reid, Assessors; Joseph Walker, Collector; Samuel B. Gilbert, John Reed,
William Johnson, Path-masters; John Cook and Daniel Lawrence, Town
Wardens; John Taylor, Pound-keeper; John Fairman, Constable.”

John McIntosh, remembered as Capt. McIntosh, was Town Clerk for three
years, and was succeeded by Jabez Davis. The following year, the
occupant was Caleb Benedict. The year succeeding, Roswell Leavens was
appointed, and continued to hold the office for three years, when John
Frederick was chosen, who held the place two years, when John McIntosh
was again selected; he held it two years. Then John Thompson was
appointed, who held it one year. The next year it was Roswell Leavens;
the next, John Frederick; the next, R. Leavens, who continued
uninterruptedly in office for twelve years, up to the year 1826. During
that time very many changes are observed in the names of those holding
the other municipal offices in the Township. The Town Clerk, in the year
1826, was Daniel Canniff, who held it two years; the next was James
McDonnell, who filled the post seven years. In 1835, D. B. Sole was
appointed, who held it two years. The year ensuing, Dr. Hayden was
appointed. It would seem that during the year following, Dr. H. escaped
as a rebel, while his wife refused to hand over the township records.

CANIFTON.—Up to the year 1806, the way from Myers’ mill up the river to
where stands Corby’s mill, a distance of four miles, was unbroken by a
single clearing. There was but a poor waggon road, which had been cut by
the two individuals who alone could afford the comfort of a waggon. But
in that year another settler was added to Thurlow, and a third waggon to
the community. John Canniff, having bought some 800 acres of land from
one McDougall, and one Carle, in the third concession, commenced the
work of clearing upon the present site of the village of Canifton. John
Canniff was a U. E. Loyalist, and was born at Bedford, in the County of
Westchester, in the present State of New York, in the year 1757. There
is no reliable statement handed down as to the part he took in the war
against the rebellion. That he took an active part is believed by those
most capable of judging. The name of Lieut. Candiff appears among the
officers of a New Jersey regiment, which is thought to have been one of
the family. John Canniff was a refugee at the close of the war in New
Brunswick, where he remained a few years. He then came to Canada, in
1788, and first settled in Adolphustown, where he lived until his
removal to Thurlow. He had witnessed and experienced the suffering of
the year of the famine. And it is known that he actually saved one
family from death by starvation. Before bringing his family to Thurlow,
in 1807, he had cleared a considerable piece of land, on the east side
of the river, around the present site of the bridge; built a mill-dam, a
saw-mill, and a frame house, which stood a short distance above the site
of the Methodist Church. Although this took place near the end of the
first decade of the present century, yet the settlement was attended by
no little hardship. The necessaries of life were not always to be had,
and it is authentically related, that for a time pea bread constituted
the principle article of diet, while a fish, now and then caught, was a
great luxury.

About the year 1812, Canniff erected a flouring-mill, having for
mill-stones those made on the spot, out of hard granite; the man who
made them yet lives. These relics of the past may yet be seen. But in
two years he procured a pair of Burr stones from the Trent.

In the year 18—, Mr. Canniff removed to the front of Thurlow, and lived
upon lot number eight, where he continued to dwell until his death, 21st
Feb., 1843. He was in his 87th year when he died. His remains are buried
near the front of the Episcopal Church, in Belleville. He was a great
uncle to the writer.

Up to the year 1715, there was but one small house in Canifton, beside
that occupied by Mr. Canniff, this was occupied by a cooper, named
Ockerman.

For four years after John Canniff settled upon the river, there was an
unbroken wood between his place and Myers’ mill, while but a rough road
existed, which followed the river’s bank. In the spring of 1811, James
Canniff, the writer’s father, commenced to clear land, midway between
Myers’ mill and John Canniff’s. At this time, the road remained almost
impassable, for the half-dozen waggons, owned in the township. Some
years later, the road was somewhat straightened and improved; but
although now, and for a long time, so great a thoroughfare, the road
continued to be, for many years, the most execrable.

THE RIVER MOIRA.—This river is named after the Right Hon. the Earl of
_Moira_, afterward Marquis of _Hastings_, and previously, when a
soldier, serving in the American war, known as Lord _Rawdon_. At his
death the title became extinct. His body was buried in his native town
in Ireland. While in America, he formed a strong attachment to Brant.

The Moira takes its rise in the township of Tudor, and in its windings
to the Bay Quinté, passes through the townships of Madoc, Marmora,
Rawdon, Huntingdon, Hungerford, Tyendinaga, and Thurlow. It was well
known, and yearly ascended by the Indians for the excellent hunting
which it afforded. They called it _Sagonasko_, which name may be found
on the first maps issued by the surveyor. It was sometimes spelled
_Saganashcocon_.

The Indians, when about to pass up on their hunting expeditions, leaving
many of the women and children in wigwams upon the plains near its
mouth, would make an offering to their pagan god, of tobacco, which was
dropped upon the east shore, near its mouth, just below the site of the
first bridge. A thank offering was repeated upon their return.—(B.
Flint).

When the first mill dam was erected by Capt. Myers, the obstruction was
called by them _Cabojunk_.

When the land was surveyed, the Government reserved at the mouth of the
river 200 acres, ostensibly, for an Indian burying ground. But the place
of burying was upon Zwick’s Island, in the Bay, near the river’s mouth.

Upon the old maps, this river is called Singleton’s River, after Capt.
Singleton.

About the year 1790, Capt. Myers settled upon the river, and erected a
dam and log saw mill. It consequently took the name of Myers’ Creek,
which it retained, until after the war of 1812, and by some, to within
the writer’s recollection, thirty years ago. The writer remembers to
have seen the Indians, in their birch canoes, ascending and descending
the river. The fact that the word Moira has some resembling sound to
that of Myers, has led some to suppose that the latter name became
gradually changed into the former. But the fact is as stated above.

The appearance of the place, presented to the first adventurers in
pursuit of land on which to settle, was not attractive. It was a barren
plain with a cedar swamp covering the shores on either side.

There were, however, on the east side, at the mouth, some tall and good
sized oaks, indicating deep soil, while the land around was rock; this
land, like the two islands upon which mills are built, was rich, and had
been made from the washings of the river’s sides for centuries, and
carried down from the back country.

The first bridge upon the Moira, was a floating structure, and was
placed quite at the mouth of the river, with the view of escaping the
current; but it was soon carried off. The bridge was built about 1800;
prior to which time there had been a ferry for foot passengers, when the
stream was not fordable. At certain seasons, crossings could take place
almost anywhere. The first spring freshet carried away the bridge. In
the winter of 1802, according to Mrs. Harris, who then lived in the
place, a more substantial structure was commenced; but again it was
carried off by ice breaking over Myers’ dam. Possibly, this may be the
first one. The first permanent bridge must have been completed in 1806
or 7.

The excellent water power was first employed by Capt. Myers, and the
second person to use it was the Reeds, at the place where is now
situated Corby’s mill. The benefit of a flouring mill to the Reeds will
be understood when it is known that they had previously, to carry on
their back the grist to the Napanee mills, a distance of some forty
miles, and thus occupying four days.


                              BELLEVILLE.

The early _voyageurs_, passing along in their birch canoes, bound for
the far west, by the way of the River Trent to Lake Simcoe, were never
attracted to the low, thick woods, which bordered the river, called by
the Indians _Sagonoska_. It is true, there was generally an Indian
village upon the plains situated to the east of the river’s mouth. But
the collection of rude tents offered no special invitation. While the
French, it would seem, never ascended the river; the Indians of the
Mississauga tribe inhabited the region, and mostly always had a village
upon the bay shore. As we have seen, the Government, at the time of
surveying, reserved lot number four, which included the river and the
plains, for the Indians. About 1789 or 90, Captain Myers, having
purchased a part of lot number five, of John Taylor, for $100,
endeavored to obtain a lease of the Indian lot for a long period of
years; and he subsequently claimed the lot, averring that it had been
leased him for ninety-nine years. This claim of Capt. Myers, it has been
stated, led to the name which so long obtained, Myers’ Creek. But the
claim was never recognized by Government, although there is some reason
to think that the Indians did actually bargain it away. The settlement
upon the river, by Captain Myers, very soon came to be known as Captain
Myers’, and the inhabitants up and down the bay, spoke of the
settlement, as well as of the river, as Myers’ Creek. But, at the same
time, Myers’ mill and house were quite remote from the first collection
of houses at the mouth of the river. Apart from the water privileges,
there was nothing to attract to the place, and, until the beginning of
the present century, there was not even a hut at the mouth of the river.
If public meetings were held, they were up the front, or back near the
fifth concession, afterward known as Hayden’s Corners.

The village began to form upon the east bank of the river, a little
distance below Dundas street, and, for many years, it did not extend
further north than that street. The first place of habitation so far as
can be learned, was a log house, built and occupied by Asa Wallbridge, a
trader, who was well known by the early settlers. Then came John
Simpson, in the year 1798, and constructed a log hut, 20 × 12. This
house, the first public house in Thurlow, was for many years known from
Kingston to York, as a place of public entertainment. Within its rough
walls rested many an important traveler, and here, in later days,
convened the men of dignity and office, to discuss matters of great
import concerning the village. Here met, in jovial companionship, the
inhabitants of the village at night. Around this rude public house
centered the crowd upon training days, or when the race course was a
point of attraction. For many years, the heart of the village was at the
corner of Dundas street. At this place was the ferry, and afterwards the
first bridge.

John Simpson, who was Sergt.-Major of the Militia when first organized,
died shortly after coming to Myers’ Creek; but his widow, Margaret,
continued the hostess for many years. She endeavored to keep pace with
the wants of the growing village, and made one improvement after
another, and finally had built the frame structure now converted into
the agreeable residence of the Hon. Lewis Wallbridge. About the year
1800, a second inn was opened in the village, the descendant of this is
the present Railroad House.

When it became necessary to build a bridge across the river, about
1806–7, the question of site was one of no little consideration. It
seemed the most natural that it should be erected on Dundas Street,
which was the great mail road between Kingston and York; and those
living in the heart of the village could see no reason in having it
placed elsewhere. But a majority of those having a voice in the matter,
looked at the question in a more practical light; and rightly thought a
bridge would cost less where the river was the narrowest, while it
should not be too far for convenience. The result was that it was built
on the site of the present lower bridge, and so gave to the street the
name of Bridge Street.

Retracing our steps to the beginning of the present century, we present
the statement of Mr. William Ketcheson, who settled in Sidney, and also
of James Farley, both of whom say that there was not then even a village
at the mouth of the river, there being but two or three shanties, among
them Simpson’s tavern, at the rude bar of which the sole drink was a
home brewed beer, which, however, possessed intoxicating properties.
Another building was an ash house, owned by Asa Wallbridge.

During the first years of the present century, the place grew to the
importance of a village, whose inhabitants, with those of the adjacent
farmers, made up nearly a hundred persons. Important additions had been
made, and enterprise was at work. Two noble and loyal Scotchmen had come
to the place several years before, and purchased lot number three, and
had built a second mill dam and mills. These were Simon and James
McNabb. They subsequently took an active part in everything relating to
the village. James McNabb became Collector of Customs, and the first
Post-Master and Registrar, and both were officers in the militia. The
melancholy death of James McNabb, is hardly yet forgotten. During the
rebellion of 1836, there was an alarm in Belleville, and Capt. McNabb,
while running through an unlighted hall, was fatally wounded by a
careless militiaman, who was trailing his musket with bayonet fixed.

Capt. McIntosh was an early settler in Belleville, as well as a pioneer
with sailing vessels. He built the first frame store house at
Belleville, which was taken down in 1867. The house he built is still
standing, a quaint edifice, at the lower extremity of front street.
Within its walls rested General Brock, when on his way westward, at the
commencement of the war of 1812; also General Gore, after the close of
the war. Capt. McIntosh met an untimely death by drowning while
attempting to swim from his schooner, which was wind-bound off Ox Point,
to the shore, 23rd Sept, 1815.

In the year 1809, Alexander Oliphant Petrie, came to live at Myers’
Creek. He found the following persons living in Belleville at that time.
Commencing at the lowest part; there first lived Capt. John McIntosh,
who kept a store; John Johnson, a saddler; Dr. Sparehan; John Thompson,
who had been a soldier in the King’s Rangers; Peter Holmes, a carpenter,
who had also been in the Rangers; Mrs. Margaret Simpson, inn-keeper;
Roswell Leavens, a blacksmith; John Simons; one Ames, a cooper; Hugh
Cunningham, store-keeper, at Mrs. Simpson’s; Simon McNabb, who lived
across the river; Ockerman, a cooper; Benj. Stone, a sawyer; Wm. Maybee,
and Abraham Stimers. In the neighborhood of the village lived John
Taylor; James Harris, a hatter, and Capt. Myers. The only road was along
the river, while foot paths led to the different dwellings. Respecting
Dr. Spareham, there is the following notice in the Kingston _Gazette_:
“Died, Friday 20th, 1813, Dr. Thomas Spareham, at Kingston; aged about
88. He was one of the first settlers in the country.”

The McNabbs had a flouring-mill, and there was a small cloth factory on
the west side of the river, at Myers’ dam. Harris had a small shop on
the bank of the river; and just below the present market, back from the
river, stood a little frame school house, where taught one John Watkins.
About the year 1810, Mr. Everitt, from Kingston, erected a fine building
for a hotel, outside of the village, near Coleman’s, formerly McNabb’s
mills. This was near the Victoria buildings.

The naming of Belleville took place in 1816. The circumstances attending
it were as follows: There met one evening at Mrs. Simpson’s tavern,
Captain McMichael, the two McNabbs, Wallbridge, R. Leavens, and S.
Nicholson. These gentlemen, at the suggestion, it is said, of Captain
McMichael, determined to invite Lieutenant-Governor Gore, to name the
newly surveyed town. The request was complied with, by calling it after
his wife _Bella_. In reference to this, we find in the _Kingston
Gazette_, Aug. 24, 1816, the following: “The Lieutenant-Governor, in
council, has been pleased to give the new town (formerly known by the
name of “Myers’ Creek”) at the River Moira, the name of “BELLEVILLE,” by
the request and petition of a great number of the inhabitants of that
town and the township of Thurlow.” In the issue of 7th September, the
_Gazette_ remarks, “We mentioned in our paper of the 24th ult., that the
new town at the River Moira, was now called “Belleville,” &c. We were
under the impression, from the very pleasant situation of that town that
its name was derived from the French; but we have since been informed
that it has been given the name of Bellville, in honor of lady Gore at
the request of the inhabitants.” We have it also, on the authority of
Mr. Petrie, who could not be ignorant of the facts, that the name is
after Lady Bella Gore. It will be observed that the name was originally
spelled Bellville, instead of Belleville, as at the present time. In all
letters and public documents where the town was mentioned, we find it
spelled Bellville for many years. The writer will now, quote himself
from another work. “The same year (1816) the Government instructed
surveyor Wilmot to lay out the 200 acres of Indian reserve, lot number
four, into town lots of half an acre each. It cannot be recorded that
Mr. Wilmot discharged his duty to his credit or the advantage of the
town. In the first place he made the serious mistake (it has been
questioned whether it was a mistake) of placing the line between Sidney
and Thurlow, upwards of sixty feet to the east of that marked by the
original survey. The consequence was, that the line between lots numbers
three and four (at the front) instead of being mainly in the river,
where it ought to have been, was established where now is Front Street,
and thereby, a valuable strip of land belonging to the Reserve, was
added to private property on the western side of the river; while the
owner of lot number five, Mr. Taylor, was a loser to a corresponding
extent. Another mistake was the very few cross streets laid out, the
inconvenience of which is felt daily by many; although some new ones
have been opened latterly. A third error was the respect he made to a
hotel which stood a little to the east of where now stands the Victoria
buildings. This hotel had been erected on the ground, where the street,
in surveying, happened to come. The result is the unseemly turn in its
course at Pinnacle Street. While the hotel gave a name to the street,
the name commemorates the cause of its ugliness. The town lots were
disposed of by Government to petitioners, true subjects of His Majesty,
on a payment of a fee of thirty dollars. No one could obtain more than a
single lot. Seven plots were reserved: one for a hospital, one where
stands the Catholic Church, the Grammar School, the English Church,
also, the Parsonage house, the old Market Square, and the Jail.”

The lots were granted to applicants upon presenting a petition signed by
two citizens, to Government. The grantee was obligated to build, in a
given time, a house, one story and a half high, and 18 × 30 feet.

Belleville is the oldest town in Upper Canada. At the time it was named,
where now stands Cobourg, were but three houses. In 1816 the _Kingston
Gazette_ says, “A Post Office is now established in the new and
flourishing town of Bellville, S. McNabb. Esq., Post Master.”

In the year 1834, a petition was submitted by the inhabitants of
Belleville to Parliament, the result of which was “An act to establish a
Board of Police in the town of Belleville, passed 6th March, 1834.”

It would seem that the act passed did not come into operation, for in
1836, an act was passed repealing the former one. This latter act was in
many respects the same, but making further provisions. The same year the
town record begins. The boundaries were, “commencing at the limits
between lots number five and six, in the first concession, so as a line
at right angles will run on the northerly side of Wonnacott’s bridge,
thence south seventy-four degrees, west to the limits between lots
numbers two and three, thence sixteen degrees east to the Bay of Quinté,
thence easterly following the winding of the bay to the limits between
lots numbers five and six aforesaid; thence north sixteen degrees, west
to the place of beginning, together with the island and the harbour.”
There were two wards, each of which elected two members of the Board of
Police, and the fourth selected a fifth. The body then selected one of
themselves for President. Those elected the first year were, Wm. McCarty
and Asa Yeomans, for first ward; Zenas Dafoe, and Wm. Connor for second
ward; Billa Flint was elected the fifth member, and was also chosen
President; Geo. Benjamin to be clerk to the Board.

Up to this time there had been no sidewalks, and at the same time there
was no drainage. The consequence was, that in the rainy season the
streets were almost impassible, quite as bad as those of Muddy York are
said to have been. The first pavement was laid in 1836, the stones of
which were taken from the river.

It is impossible to say definitely what was the number of inhabitants at
any one period. These were, however, in 1818, according to Talbot, about
150; about 500 in 1824; 700 in 1829, and in 1836 more than 1,000. But
McMullen, writing in 1824, says that between Kingston and York, there
are two or three very small villages, the largest of which is
Belleville, containing about one hundred and fifty inhabitants.

After this the town increased more rapidly in size and importance. Steps
were taken to have built a Court House and Jail, as the nearest place of
confinement of prisoners was at Kingston; and, in 1838, just at the
close of the rebellion, the present building was finished.

The first court of Quarter Sessions held at the Court House in
Belleville, was November, 1839, Benjamin Dougall presided; Edmund
Murney, Clerk of the Peace; J. W. D. Moodie, Sheriff. The principal
business of the court was to organize, and take the oaths of office. The
second court was held in March, 1840, in the Court House; there were the
same officers, except that W. H. Ponton was Clerk of the Peace.

A writer in the _Intelligencer_, in 1836, says, Belleville is said to
contain about 1,800 inhabitants. There is an English and Scotch Church,
a Roman Catholic and Methodist Chapel, also a congregation of Episcopal
Methodists, and one of American Presbyterians; 25 merchants’ shops, 2
Apothecaries and Druggists’, 12 huxters’ and grocery shops, 9 taverns, 3
breweries, 3 butchers’, 2 flouring mills, 4 saw, and 2 fulling and
carding mills, 1 pail factory, 7 blacksmiths’ shops, 3 tanneries, and
mechanics of almost every description. In Front Street there are a
number of spacious brick, stone, and frame buildings; being the most
central part of the town for business. The town has recently being
called East and West Belleville; separated by the river Moira. The
latter has been laid out in town lots by the present owners; and the
streets and lines defined. On Coleman Street there are already erected a
handsome brick and other stone and frame buildings; a Trip-Hammer Forge
and Axe manufactory carried on by Mr. Proctor, celebrated for making the
best axes in the province. A saw mill in operation and a flouring mill
for four run of stone now erecting, and another for six run in
contemplation of being built next summer by our enterprising townsman,
Mr. Flint. A cabinet-maker, blacksmith’s shop, and a tavern, together
with a variety of lots unsold, some of which are calculated for
hydraulic purposes; and for which there are abundance of materials for
stone buildings. The same street leads to the extensive wharfs and store
houses belonging to Mr. Billa Flint.




                              CHAPTER LVI.

  CONTENTS—Tenth township—Richmond—Origin—Quantity of land—Shores of
    Mohawk Bay—Village on south shore—Original land holders—Names—
    Napanee—The falls—The mill—Salmon River—Indian name—Source of
    Napanee River—Its course—Colebrook—Simcoe Falls—Name—Clarke’s
    Mills—Newburgh—Academy—The settlers—“Clarkville”—No records.


                      THE TENTH TOWNSHIP—RICHMOND.

This township is called after the Duke of Richmond, and contains about
50,000 acres.

At an early period, the shores of the Mohawk Bay were occupied by
settlers. At first, upon the Fredericksburgh side, and shortly after
upon the north shore. The facilities for erecting a flouring-mill at the
falls, upon the river which empties into the Mohawk Bay, attracted the
attention of Government so early as 1785, in which year the first mill
was erected. The existence of this mill caused something of a village to
spring up on the south shore. About the same time, the land upon the
north shore of the bay and river, was taken up by the loyalists. We can
find nothing to indicate the year in which this township was originally
surveyed; but it was most probably done in the latter part of 1785, or
in the spring of 1786, after the front of Thurlow had been surveyed.
Upon the old chart of this township in the Crown Lands Department, may
be seen the names of certain officers, as claimants of land near the
mouth of the river. The names are in the main, now unknown, and it seems
that the land passed into other hands. The second and third concessions
seem to have been settled at a comparatively early date. We believe that
some of the first settlers on Mohawk Bay, were, Alexander Nicholson,
Woodcock, Peterson, Campbell, Richardson, Detlors.

_Napanee_, a name given to the river, and to the town upon its banks, is
of Indian origin. Originally it was Appanee, which signifies, in the
Mississauga language, flour, or the river where they make flour. This
designation, it has been supposed, arose from the existence of the
flouring-mill, built here at an early date (see first days of Upper
Canada). The place was first visited by loyalists, in 1784. The beauty
of the scenery, the waters of the river, tumbling over the rocks, down a
distance of thirty feet, and sweeping down through a muddy bed, and
widening into Mohawk Bay, and the surrounding hills clothed in nature’s
rugged habiliments, would naturally attract the settler. Then, when
Government placed a mill, at which the settlers could get their grain
ground, a consideration of great importance, the land in the vicinity
would be eagerly sought, upon which to settle. And, it can readily be
inferred, that the more valuable lots in the township of Richmond were,
at an early date, appropriated and settled upon.

Running across the back part of this township, from east to west, and
continuing across the township of Tyendinagua, is the Salmon River. It
takes its rise in Crow Lake, in the Township of Kenebec. It empties into
the Bay Quinté, at the border line between this township and Thurlow.
Near its mouth is the Village of Shannonville. The Indian name of the
Salmon River was _Gosippa_.

The Napanee River, of which we have spoken, takes its rise in the
townships of Hinchinbroke, Bedford, Loughborough, Portland, which are
thickly strewn with beautiful lakes and streams, all connected so as to
form a sort of net work. The Napanee then crosses the front part of
Camden, and pursues its way along, forming the southern boundary of
Richmond, to empty into the Mohawk Bay. Along the course of the stream
are several villages, all possessed of more or less beauty. There is the
village of Colebrook, having upward of 300 inhabitants; Simcoe Falls
comes next, beautiful and picturesque, with some 250 of population. The
village is named after the Falls, which are some forty feet high. The
name is derived from Governor Simcoe, who at one time owned here 1000
acres of land. Four miles further down the stream is the pleasant
village of Clark’s Mills, after a family name of which we have elsewhere
spoken, as a distinguished U. E. Loyalist. Continuing down the river we
come to Newburgh, a village picturesquely situated, and of considerable
importance. Beside its grist-mills, saw-mills, factories, machine shop,
foundry, and other machinery worked by the water; Newburgh has a very
respectable academy. Perhaps there is no stream in Canada which
possesses the same number of mill privileges as the Napanee. There are
numerous rapids and several falls along its course, and the banks on
either side are often strikingly beautiful. The original settlers along
the stream were mostly the children of loyalists.

NAPANEE.—The settlement of Napanee is pretty fully given in the chapter
upon the first flouring-mills. We there have stated that Sergeant Major
Clark of the 84th regiment, was ordered to Napanee to act as
superintendent of the works in connection with the building of the mill;
second flouring-mill in Upper Canada. The mill was situated upon the
Fredericksburgh side of the river. Upon an early map of the township, by
P. V. Elmore, a village is marked here by the name of Clark ville.

Napanee was incorporated in the year 1854.

We regret our inability to procure the township record of Richmond.




                              DIVISION IX.
                 THE EARLY GOVERNMENT OF UPPER CANADA.




                             CHAPTER LVII.

  CONTENTS—Military rule—Imperial Act, 1774—French Canada—Refugees—
    Military Government in Upper Canada—New Districts—Lunenburgh—
    Mecklenburgh—Nassau—Hesse—The Judges—Duncan—Cartwright—Hamilton—
    Robertson—Court in Mecklenburgh—Civil Law—Judge Duncan—Judge
    Cartwright—Punishment inflicted—First execution—New Constitution
    of Quebec—1791, Quebec Bill passed—Inhabitants of Upper Canada.


   UPPER CANADA FROM 1783 TO 1792—THE GOVERNMENT, MILITARY AND CIVIL.

For three years after the conquest the Province of Quebec was governed
by military laws, but in 1774, the British Government introduced a Bill,
conferring civil rights upon the Canadian French, with a governing
council of not more than 23, nor less than 17. The laws, religion and
language were secured to the Province, as before the conquest, so that
in most respects, excepting the presence of an English Governor, Canada
remained a French Colony. The timely concessions of the British
Government, and the natural antipathy felt by the Canadians to the New
Englanders, prevented in a most positive way, any desire or intention,
on the part of the Canadians, to take sides with the revolting British
Provinces. When the loyalist refugees began to pick their way into
Canada they found themselves as it were in a foreign country. A colony
it is true, under the government of an English Governor, but
nevertheless consisting of a people entirely dissimilar to themselves.
While the war continued the presence of a large number of British troops
made the country seem less foreign in its character; but the close of
the war, and the disbanding of many of the companies, and withdrawal of
others, left the unhappy refugees in a society to them altogether
unnatural. It was under such circumstances that steps were taken to
survey land upon the upper waters, to which the loyalists might go. The
plan pursued by Government was, not to extend the operation of the laws
belonging to Lower Canada, and therefore French and unnatural, to the
settlements in Upper Canada; but to marshal the pioneer in bands under
officers, with the necessary appointments, to secure order, protect
interests, and administer justice. The first settlers of Upper Canada,
then came in military order, by word of command, and were directed to
the point where each should find the land allotted him, and meet his
wilderness foe.

All alike were governed by military law, until 1788. Says the historian
of Dundas, “It was decided by Government that the first settlers should
live under MARTIAL LAW, till such times as it should be rescinded, and
replaced by competent courts of justice. But by martial law was meant
only, that the English laws, having by the settlement of this part of
Canada, been introduced, should be its laws for the present, and that
these laws, which very few knew, should be martially executed by the
Captain in command, having the superintendence of the particular
locality.”

Upon the 24th July, 1788, Lord Dorchester issued a proclamation, dated
at the Castle of St. Louis, Quebec, forming a certain number of new
districts in the Province of Quebec. Upper Canada was formed into four
districts, viz.: _Lunenburgh_, which extended from the borders of Lower
Canada “to the River Gananoque, now called Thames;” _Mecklenburgh_,
which included the settlement from Gananoque to the Trent River;
_Nassau_, extending from the Trent to Long Point on Lake Erie; _Hesse_,
which embraced the remaining parts of Western Canada, including Detroit.
The division was based upon the number of settlers rather than the
extent of territory.

To each of these districts was appointed a Judge, a Sheriff, &c. The
Judge seems to have been clothed with almost absolute power. He
dispensed justice according to his own understanding or interpretation
of the law, and a Sheriff or Constable stood ready to carry out the
decision, which in his wisdom, he might arrive at. These four courts of
Common Pleas constituted it seems the whole machinery of the law in
Upper Canada, after the people ceased to be under military jurisdiction.
It may have been, however, probably was, that appeal could be made
against the Judge’s decision, to the Governor and Council. There were no
other magistrates, and no lawyers in those primitive happy days.

Of the four Judges appointed to the districts, positive knowledge can be
obtained but of three; these are Richard Duncan, Judge of Lunenburgh,
Richard Cartwright, Judge of Mecklenburgh, and Robert Hamilton, Judge of
Nassau. Not unlikely, William Robertson, of Detroit, was Judge of Hesse.
This opinion is ventured from the fact that this gentleman was the most
successful and prominent man in that locality; the same as Duncan,
Cartwright, and Hamilton were in theirs.

Respecting the Judgeship of _Mecklenburgh_, the Rev. Mr. Stuart writes,
1788, that “our new settlements have been lately divided into four
districts, of which this place (Kingston,) is the Capital of one called
_New_ Mecklenburgh. I had a commission sent me as first Judge of the
Court of Common Pleas, which I returned to Lord Dorchester, who left a
few days ago.” The office thus refused was subsequently filled by Mr.
Richard Cartwright. In a letter before us, written by John Ferguson,
dated 29th December, 1788, it is stated that “our Courts are opened, but
they have done nothing particular, but I suppose will in a few days.”
This was the commencement of other than martial law at the Bay of
Quinté. 1788 then, is the year in which civil law began to be
administered. This was considered a boon by the British Americans, who
objected quite as much to military law, when the individual might not by
education, be qualified to dispense judgment and justice, as they did to
the French laws of Lower Canada. Indeed the loyalists of Lower Canada
complained very much that they had lost the protection of British laws.
And probably many were induced to ascend to Upper Canada where the
British law was in operation. At the same time Upper Canada remained a
part of the Province of Quebec.

Reference is made in the History of Dundas, to Judge Duncan, of
Lunenburgh as follows: “As a soldier he was generous and humane.” The
Court sat at Mariatown, of which he was the founder. He “seemed to have
monopolized every office. A storekeeper, and holding a Captain’s rank,
he dealt out law, dry goods and groceries alternately.” The court room
was at the place of Richard Loucks, who kept a store and tavern, about a
mile below the present eastern limits of the County of Dundas. The name
of the Sheriff was Munro, probably John Munro, who was subsequently
called to the Legislative Council.

With respect to Judge Cartwright, the reader is referred to individual
U. E. Loyalists for a notice of his history. The fact that he was
selected as the Judge after the office was refused by Mr. Stuart, shows
that he was a man of influence, education and wealth, and persons are
now living who remember him as a “big man,” along the Bay. From all that
we can learn, it is most probable that Judge Cartwright held his court
at Finkle’s tavern, Ernesttown. It is stated that he convicted the first
man that was hanged in Canada. The crime charged against him for which
he was executed was watch stealing. The article was found upon him, and
although he declared he had bought it of a pedlar, yet, as he could not
prove it, he was adjudged guilty of the crime, and sentenced to be
hanged. Dr. Connor, of Ernesttown, stood up in court and appealed
against the decision of the Judge, but he was hissed down, and the law
took its course. The man was hanged, and subsequently the pedlar from
whom the watch had been purchased came along and corroborated the dying
words of the unfortunate man.

The most common punishment inflicted upon those convicted of high
offences, was that of banishment for a certain number of years, or for
life, to the United States, “a sentence next to that of death, felt to
be the most severe that could be inflicted.” “Minor offences were atoned
for in the pillory. For a long time there stood one such primitive
instrument of punishment, at Richard Louck’s Inn, the centre of law and
Justice for the Lunenburgh District.” (History of Dundas).

The first person executed at Niagara was in 1801, a woman by name of
Loudon, who was convicted of poisoning her husband, at Grimsby.

The difference between the French and British in Canada, as to religion,
language and laws, was so great that, although efforts were earnestly
made to unite the two races, the divergence of views continued to
increase. And the result was, that a Bill was introduced into the
Imperial Parliament, by the Government, which duly became law.

On Friday, 4th March, 1791 Mr. Chancellor Pitt moved, “that His
Majesty’s message concerning the New Constitution for Quebec might be
read. It was read accordingly.”

“GEORGE R.—His Majesty thinks it proper to acquaint the Commons, that it
appears to His Majesty, that it would be for the benefit of His
Majesty’s subjects in the Province of Quebec, that the same should be
divided into separate provinces, to be called the Province of Upper
Canada and the Province of Lower Canada; and that it is accordingly his
Majesty’s intention so to divide the same, whenever His Majesty shall be
enabled by Act of Parliament to establish the necessary regulations for
the government of the said Provinces. His Majesty therefore recommends
this object to the consideration of this House,” &c., &c. The discussion
which arose in connection with the passage of this Bill was of unusual
interest, and produced that historic scene between Burke and Fox, during
which “tears trickled down the cheeks” of the latter, as “he strove in
vain to give utterance to feelings that dignified and exalted his
nature.” The Bill passed its third reading on the 18th May.

At this time there were distributed along the St. Lawrence, the Bay of
Quinté, Niagara frontier, Amherstburgh, with the French settlement on
the Thames, and the Indians at Grand River, about 20,000 souls, or
double the number, who came at the first as refugees, and disbanded
soldiers.

For a list of the Governors of Upper Canada see Appendix.




                             CHAPTER LVIII.

  CONTENTS—Simcoe—His arrival in Canada—Up the St. Lawrence—An old
    house—“Old Breeches’ River”—Simcoe’s attendants—The old veterans—
    “Good old cause”—“Content”—Toasting—Old officers—Executive Council
    of Upper Canada—First entry—Simcoe inducted to office—Religious
    ceremony—“The proceedings”—Those present—Oath of office—
    Organization of Legislative Council—Assembly—Issuing writs for
    elections—Members of Council—Simcoe’s difficulty—At Kingston—
    Division of Province—The Governor’s officers—Rochfoucault upon
    Simcoe—Simcoe’s surroundings—His wife—Opening Parliament in 1795—
    Those present—Retinue—Dress—The nineteen counties—Simcoe’s
    designs—Visit of the Queen’s father—At Kingston—Niagara—A war
    dance.


      ORGANIZATION OF THE UPPER CANADA GOVERNMENT BY SIMCOE, 1792.

Colonel John Graves Simcoe, the pioneer Governor of Upper Canada, and
the Lieutenant-Governor under Lord Dorchester, entered upon the duties
of his office, July 8, 1792.

His arrival in Canada was signalled by much rejoicing, as he passed
along in a fleet of bark canoes from Lower Canada, by the St. Lawrence.
A writer, in 1846, relates some interesting facts respecting this
passage. He speaks of one house then remaining in Johnstown, which
remained in all its original proportions. “It is built in the Dutch
style, with sharp-pointed roof, and curious gables.” This house was
framed of oak of the finest growth; and, considering that it has been
drawn from lot to lot, until it has traveled almost the entire extent of
the bay, (at Johnston) within the last half century, it certainly is a
remarkable edifice. It is now a hostelrié, as it has always been, and no
sign of repentance can be yet seen in its huge sign-board, exhibited at
the top of a taper pine, on which some cunning disciple of Michael
Angelo, hath depicted a tolerably sized square, and a pair of
exquisitely expansive compass, striding classically, in imitation of the
Collosus of Rhodes, with the staring capitals of “_Live and let live_—
St. John’s Hall—_Peace and plenty to all mankind_”—thrown in as a sort
of relief to the compass, and as a sweet inducement to the weary and
dust-begrimmed traveler to walk in, and make himself as comfortable as
the little peculiarities of the lazy-eyed landlord, and the singular
temperament of the land-lady, will allow.

“This house is Governor Simcoe’s house. In it John Graves Simcoe, the
first Governor of the U. E. Loyalists, himself a hearty, brave old
colonel, who fought in the cause of these men, held his levee, on his
first arrival in Upper Canada. Time hallows all. Young Canada has her
antiquities—although she may be more prone to look forward to the future
with hope, than back on the past with regret. Yet the house in which
John Graves Simcoe reposed himself, and cast his martial eye over the
gracefully curving bay, the sparkling river, and the dilapidated
fortifications of the old French fort, built during the French
ascendancy; on the point and islands below, may still be an object of
interest to more than those who reside in the vicinity, in a Province,
which owes so much of its present prosperity to the good commencement
made by one possessed of his historic heroism, humanity, and noble
self-denial in the cause of an exiled race. The house stood on a point
of land formed by the bay, and a small stream which passes from the
north westward, called formerly by the French, “Riviere de la Vielle
Culotte,” which being translated, probably means “Old Breeches’ River.”
Governor Simcoe had, but a short half-hour previously, taken his
departure for Niagara, in one of the large bark canoes with which the
passage on the St. Lawrence, and along the shore of the lakes, was then
generally made. A brigade of smaller canoes and boats followed him,
conveying his suite, and a few soldiers; and never since the year 1756,
when Montcalm led his army upward to the attack of Oswego, had the
swelling bosom of the wild forest river borne so glad a sight as on that
sparkling morning.

“The old piece of ordnance, obtained from the island fort below, had
ceased to belch forth its thunders from the clay bank; whereon, fort
want of trunnions it had been deposited. The gentry of the surrounding
country, collected together for the occasion, and looking spruce, though
weather-beaten, in their low-tasselled boots, their queer old
broad-skirted military coats, and looped chapeaux, with faded feathers
fluttering in the wind, had retired to the inn, and were toasting in
parting goblets, the “good old cause for ever,” previously to betaking
themselves to their woodland path homeward, or embarking in their canoes
to reach their destinations by water, above or below.

“Now I am content—content, I say, and can go home to reflect on this
proud day. Our Governor—the man of all others—has come at last—mine eye
hath seen it—drink to him gentlemen—he will do the rest for us,”—cried
Colonel Tom Fraser, his face flushed and fiery, and his stout frame
drawn up to its full height at the head of the table.

“We do—we do!” vociferated young Kingsmill, emptying his glass, and
stamping to express joy. “Bonhomme” Tom Fraser then got on his legs, and
shouted a brawny young soldier’s echo to the toast of his relative.

The mild, placid countenance of Dr. Solomon Jones, was lighted up by the
occasion, and he arose also, and responded to the toast, recounting some
of the services performed by the newly appointed Lieutenant-Governor in
the late war.

Captain Elijah Bottum, a large portly person, having at his side a
formidable basket-hilted claymore, then addressed them in brief military
phrase, and gave one of the old war slogans. Major Jessup followed in
the same strain, and proposed a sentiment which was received with
vociferous cheers by the younger portion of the company. Captain
Dulmage, Captain Campbell, Pay-master Jones, Commissary Jones, Captain
Gid. Adams, Lieutenant Samuel Adams, Ephraim Webster, Captain Markle,
Captain Grant, and numerous other captains and officers, managed to make
themselves heard on the joyful occasion, until finally the meeting broke
up, and the company separated not to meet again until the next fourth
day of June, in the following year.

The first entry in the journals of the Executive Council of Upper
Canada, gives an account of the induction of Colonel Simcoe into the
gubernatorial office at Kingston. The event was made one of solemnity
and religious observance, the proceedings taking place on a Sunday, in
the old church of wood, which stood opposite the market-place. We quote
an extract from the proceedings of the Executive Council.

                                                 Kingston, July 8, 1792.

“His Excellency John Graves Simcoe, Esq., Lieutenant-Governor of the
Province of Upper Canada, colonel, commanding the forces in the said
Province, &c., &c., having appointed the Protestant church, as a
suitable place for the reading and publishing of his Majesty’s
commissions, he accordingly repaired thither, attended by the Hon.
William Osgoode, Chief Justice; the Hon. James Baby, the Hon. Peter
Russell, together with the Magistrates and principal inhabitants, when
the said commission appointing his Excellency (Grey) Lord Dorchester,
Captain-General and Governor-in-chief, &c., &c., of Upper and Lower
Canada, and also the commission appointing the said John Graves Simcoe,
Governor of the Province of Upper Canada, were solemnly read and
published.”

The oaths of office were then administered to his Excellency. According
to the Royal instructions to Governor Simcoe, he was to have five
individuals to form the first Executive Council. The five named were
William Osgoode, William Robertson, James Baby, Alexander Grant, and
Peter Russell, Esqs. The next day, Monday, Osgoode, Baby, and Russell
were sworn into office, as Executive Councillors. Robertson was not then
in the Province; Grant was sworn in a few days after.

Upon the 17th of July, a meeting of the council was held at the
Government House, at Kingston, when the first steps were taken to
organize a Legislative Council, and assembly writs were issued,
summoning the gentlemen who were to form the first Legislative Council.
These were, in addition to those forming the Executive Council, Richard
Duncan, Robert Hamilton, Richard Cartwright, Junr., John Munro, and we
believe, Thomas Fraser. These constituted the Legislative Council.

Two of the nine, it would seem, never took upon themselves the duties of
the high place thus allotted them. One was Richard Duncan, who lived at
Mariatown, County of Dundas. He was a captain, and had, in 1788, been
appointed Judge of the Lunenburgh district. When Upper Canada became a
separate province, Judge Duncan, as well as Cartwright, Judge of
Mecklenburgh, were appointed Legislative Councillors. Duncan was a man
of extensive business, and highly respected; but “some transactions in
connection with banking business, were so imprudent,” that “he left the
country somewhat abruptly for the United States,” and “never dared to
return,” (Croil). This unfortunate affair, whatever its nature may have
been, probably occurred about the time of the above mentioned
appointment, as he shortly after removed to Schenectady, New York, where
he continued to live until his death. The other was Mr. Robertson, a
resident of Sandwich, where he had become a successful merchant. He
never took his seat in the council, the reason of which does not appear.

It is stated that, according to the despatches of Simcoe to the Imperial
Government, he found no little difficulty in obtaining suitable persons
to fill the offices of the Executive and Legislative Council, who would
absent themselves from home for the purpose.

The Executive Council continued to hold meetings at Kingston up to the
21st July, when Simcoe proceeded westward, and determined to make the
village at the mouth of Niagara River, his capital.

Upon the same day that the Governor and Council issued summonses to the
gentlemen of the Legislative Council, the 16th July, a proclamation was
likewise issued, forming the Province into Counties, and specifying the
number of representatives to be elected by the people to constitute the
Legislative Assembly. And these proclamations were speedily conveyed and
posted in every settlement.

The following were the officers connected with the Governor while at
Newark. “Military Sec. Major Littlehales; Provincial Aide-de-Camp,
Thomas Talbot; Solicitor General, Mr. Gray; Clerk of Executive Council,
Mr. Small; Civil Secretary, William Jarvis; Receiver General, Peter
Russell; Surveyor General, D. W. Smith; Assistant Surveyor General,
Thomas Ridout and William Chewitt.” The Council Chamber was a building
near to Butler’s barracks on the hill, where the Episcopal and Catholic
Churches assembled occasionally, and alternately. The first meeting of
the Executive at Newark, was held on the 29th September. Ten days after
this was the opening of Parliament. Peter Clark was appointed Clerk of
the Legislative Council; John G. Law, Usher of the Black Rod. The
superintendent of the Indian department, was Colonel John Butler, of
Butler’s Rangers of the Revolutionary war.

John White, the first Attorney-General of Upper Canada, came to the
country, accompanied by Thomas Ward, in 1792.

The Duke de la Rochefoucault, Linancourt, a French nobleman, traveling
in America, in 1795, visited Governor Simcoe, and remarks in his
writings that “Upper Canada is a new country, or rather a country yet to
be formed. It was probably for this reason General Simcoe accepted the
government of it. He was fully aware of the advantages which his native
land might derive from such a colony, if it attained perfection; and
imagined that means might be found adequate to this purpose. This hope
was the only incitement which could impel a man of independent fortune,
to leave the large and beautiful estates he possesses in England, and to
bury himself in a wilderness, among bears and savages. Ambition, at
least, appears not to have been his motive; as a man, in Gen. Simcoe’s
situation, is furnished with abundant means of distinguishing himself by
useful activity, without removing to a great distance from his native
country. But, whatever have been his motives, his design has been
attended with consequences highly beneficial. The plan conceived by
General Simcoe for peopling and improving Upper Canada, seems, as far as
he has communicated to us, extremely wise and well arranged.” The same
writer says, that Simcoe had a hearty hatred against the United States,
that he had been a zealous promoter of the war, in which he took a very
active part. “In his private life Governor Simcoe is simple, plain, and
obliging. He inhabits a small miserable wooden house, which formerly was
occupied by the Commissaries. His guard consists of four soldiers, who
every morning come from the fort, and return thither in the evening. He
lives in a noble and hospitable manner, without pride. Mrs. Simcoe is a
lady of thirty-six years of age. She is bashful, and speaks little, but
she is a woman of sense, handsome and amiable, and fulfils all the
duties of a mother and wife with the most scrupulous exactness. The
performance of the latter she carries so far as to act the part of
Secretary to her husband. Her talents for drawing, the practice of which
she confines to maps and plans, to enable her to be extremely useful to
the Governor.” “The Governor is colonel of a regiment of Queen’s
Rangers, stationed in the Province. His servants are privates of this
regiment which is stationed elsewhere.”

“During our residence at Navy Hall, the Session of the Legislature of
Upper Canada was opened. (This was 1795). The Governor had deferred it
till that time, on account of the expected arrival of a Chief Justice
from England, and from a hope that he should be able to acquaint the
members with the particulars of the treaty with the United States. But
the harvest has now begun, which in a higher degree than elsewhere
engages, in Canada, the public attention. Two members of the Legislative
Council were present instead of seven; no Chief Justice appeared who was
to act as Speaker; instead of sixteen members of the Assembly only five
attended. The law requires a greater number of members for each House,
to discuss and determine upon any business, but within two days a year
will have expired since the last Session. The Governor has therefore
thought it right to open the Session. The whole retinue of the Governor
consisted in a guard of fifty men of the garrison of the fort. Dressed
in silk, he entered the Hall with his hat on his head, attended by the
Adjutant and two Secretaries. The two members of the Legislative Council
gave, by their Speaker, notice of it to the Assembly. Five members of
the latter having appeared at the bar, the Governor delivered a speech,”
&c.

When Simcoe undertook the administration of the newly established
Province, a proclamation was issued which divided the Province into
nineteen counties. In the creation of this division, Simcoe had a view
to military organization. Rochefaucault says, “The maxims of government
professed by Gen. Simcoe are very liberal and fair; he detests all
arbitrary and military government, without the walls of the fort; and
desires liberty in its utmost latitude, so far as is consistent with the
constitution and law of the land. He is, therefore, by no means
ambitious of investing all power and authority in his own hands; but
consents to the Lieutenants, whom he nominates for each county the right
of appointing the Justices of the Peace, and Officers of the Militia.”

“A Justice of the Peace could assign, in the King’s name, 200 acres of
land to every settler, whom he knew to be worthy, and the surveyor of
the district was to point out to the settler the land allotted him.”—
(Rogers). Simcoe desired to populate the Province as speedily as
possible, no doubt he felt anxious the United States should not get too
far ahead. The schemes conceived by him for the settlement, government,
and defence of the Province, have received the approval of most men
capable of judging. But he remained not to carry out the plan intended.
In 1796, shortly after the close of the first session of the second
Parliament, he was instructed by the Imperial authorities to repair to
St. Domingo, to assume the same duties; and the Hon. Peter Russell,
President of the Council, was delegated to discharge the duties
belonging to the office of Governor, and he enjoyed all the emoluments
and perquisites arising therefrom.

During the occupancy of Simcoe, an event came to pass which may be here
appropriately referred to. It was a visit to Upper Canada of the Duke of
Kent, father of our much loved Queen. Prince Edward was stationed at
Quebec with his regiment, having arrived a short time before the
division of the Province of Quebec, and consequently before Simcoe came.
Desiring to see the Upper Province, he set out in a _calash_, drawn by a
French pony, accompanied by his suite. At Montreal he took a batteau,
manned with Frenchmen, for Kingston. At Oswegotchie, “the royal party
was met by a pleasure barge from Kingston, manned by seamen and
military, accompanied by Peter Clark, of the Naval Department at
Kingston.” From thence they were speedily rowed to Kingston, where the
King’s schooner, the ‘Mohawk,’ Commodore Bouchette, commander, was in
waiting to receive him. The Prince went on board, and after a tedious
passage, safely reached Newark, where he was received by the firing of
guns. As soon as horses and saddles could be mustered, the royal party
wended their way by a narrow river road on the high banks of the Niagara
river to the Falls. The only tavern, or place of accommodation, was a
log hut for travelers to refresh themselves. There, the party alighted,
and, after partaking of such refreshments as the house afforded,
followed an Indian path through the woods to the Table Rock. There was a
rude Indian ladder by which to descend to the rocks below, 160 feet.
This consisted of a long pine tree with the branches cut off, leaving
length enough at the trunk to place the foot upon, and hold on by the
hands, in ascending or descending. (This Indian ladder continued in use
several years later, when it was superseded by a ladder furnished from
money, given by a lady from Boston to the guide). Our illustrious
traveler availed himself of this rude mode of descent. The Prince and
party lunched at the Hon. Mr. Hamilton’s on their way back. In the
evening, the Prince was amused by a war dance by the Mohawks, headed by
Brant himself. The next day, the Prince re-embarked, and proceeded to
Quebec. There is a tradition in Marysburgh that he stopped on his way
down in Smith’s Bay, to admire the beauty of that place.




                              CHAPTER LIX.

  CONTENTS—General Hunter—Peter Russell—Francis Gore, 1806—Alex.
    Grant—Brock—1812—United States declare war—Prompt action—
    Parliament—Proclamation—The issue—Second proclamation—General
    Hull—His proclamation—Bombast and impertinence—The Indians—
    Proclamation answered—Hull a prisoner—Michigan conquered—To
    Niagara—At Queenston heights—“Push on York Volunteers”—Death of
    Brock—McDonnell—War of 1812, the Americans—Extract from Merritt—
    What Canadians did—Brock’s monument—General Sheaffe—General
    Drummond—Invading the States—What Canada will do—Lord Sydenham—A
    tribute by Dr. Ryerson—Union of the Provinces.


      THE GOVERNORS OF UPPER CANADA, FROM SIMCOE TO LORD SYDENHAM.

Lieutenant General Peter Hunter, who had been Colonel of the 24th
Regiment stationed at Newark, was the second Governor for Upper Canada;
his accession to office was on the 17th August, 1799. During the two
previous years, Hon. Peter Russell had been President. He continued to
hold the position until his death, which took place at Quebec, 21st
August, 1865. His age was sixty-nine.

The third Governor of Upper Canada was His Excellency Francis Gore, who
assumed the gubernatorial functions on the 25th August, 1806. In the
interim between this period and the death of Hunter, the Hon. Alexander
Grant having been President. The reign of Gore was one of ease. No
conflicting parties as yet disturbed the political arena of the
Province. Year after year he convened Parliament, which enacted laws for
the growing requirements of the colony, with a degree of harmony not
subsequently present. In 1811, he resigned, when _Sir Isaac Brock_
became _President_, upon the 30th September. Although but the President,
and not a Lieutenant-Governor, he requires some notice.

GENERAL BROCK.—In the year 1812, in June, the United States declared war
against Great Britain, ostensibly, on the question of the right of
England to take her seamen from American vessels to which they had
deserted; but, in reality, the object of the war was to acquire Canada,
and as England was engaged with an European war, it was deemed a
favorable opportunity by President Madison, to subjugate the people whom
they had once dispossessed of their inheritance. The declaration of war
was quickly made known to General Brock, even sooner than the enemy
thought possible, who promptly took necessary steps to secure the
defence of the Province, against the dastardly intentions of the
invader. On the 20th June, he issued orders to Captain Roberts, at St.
Joseph, which issued in the capture of Fort Michilmacinac, with seventy
men, beside valuable cargoes of furs. On the 28th July, he met the
Parliament at York, which continued in session eight days, and sent
forth a proclamation to the people, with these concluding remarks: “We
are engaged in an awful and eventful contest. By unanimity in our
councils, and by vigor in our operations, we may teach the enemy this
lesson, that a country defended by freeman, enthusiastically devoted to
the cause of their King and constitution, can never be conquered.”
Remarkable words! How true the sentiments. And so, animated by this
belief, strong in the consciousness of right, indignant at an
unprincipled foe, he went on his way showing to all an example of
“vigor,” and displaying the bravery which freemen alone know how to
practice, until in the hour of victory, death overtook him on Queenston
Heights. The address of General Brock was supplemented by one from the
Legislative Assembly, and no excuse need be offered for introducing it
here _in extenso_. It ought to be read by every Canadian, and the truths
it contains made known to the rising generation, that they may know the
history of the fathers of those who support Fenianism. Know how
unscrupulous the neighbours we have upon our southern borders, have ever
been.

“Already have we the joy to remark, that the spirit of loyalty has burst
forth in all its ancient splendour. The militia in all parts of the
Province have volunteered their services with acclamation, and displayed
a degree of energy worthy the British name.

“They do not forget the blessings and privileges which they enjoy under
the protection and fostering care of the British Empire, whose
government is only felt in this country by acts of the purest justice
and most pleasing and efficacious benevolence. When men are called upon
to defend everything they call precious, their wives and children, their
friends and professions, they ought to be inspired with the noblest
resolutions, and they will not be easily frightened by menaces, or
conquered by force. And, beholding as we do, the flame of patriotism,
burning from the one end of the Canadas to the other, we cannot but
entertain the most pleasing anticipations. Our enemies have indeed said
that they can subdue this country by proclamation; but it is our part to
prove to them, that they are sadly mistaken; that the population is
determinedly hostile, and that the few who might be otherwise inclined,
will find it their safety to be faithful. Innumerable attempts will be
made, by falsehood, to detach you from your allegiance, for our enemies,
in imitation of their European master, trust more to treachery than to
force, and they will, no doubt, make use of many of those lies, which
unfortunately, for the virtuous part of those States, and the peace and
happiness of the world, had too much success during the American
rebellion; they will tell you that they are come to give you freedom,
yes, the base slaves of the most contemptible faction that ever
distracted the affairs of any nation,—the minions of the very sycophants
who lick the dust from the feet of Bounaparte, will tell you that they
are come to communicate the blessing of liberty to this Province; but
you have only to look at your situation to put such hypocrites to
confusion. Trusting more to treachery than open hostility, our enemies
have already spread their emmissaries through the country to seduce our
fellow-subjects from their allegiance, by promises as false as the
principles on which they are founded. A law has therefore been enacted
for the speedy detection of such emmissaries, and for their condign
punishment on conviction. Remember when you go forth to the combat, that
you fight, not for yourselves alone, but for the whole world. You are
defeating the most formidable conspiracy against the civilization of man
that ever was contrived. Persevere as you have begun, in your strict
obedience to the laws, and your attention to military discipline; deem
no sacrifice too costly, which secures the enjoyment of our happy
constitution; follow, with your countrymen in Britain, the paths of
virtue, and like them, you shall triumph over all your unprincipled
foes.”

This address was followed by a second one from General Brock, on the
22nd July, 1812, in which he reviewed an address which had been issued
by the American General, who had invited the Canadians to seek
voluntarily, the protection of his government; also the threat to show
no quarter if the Indians appeared in the ranks; Brock eloquently
defended their right to defend their homes against an invading foe.

General Brock having prorogued Parliament, pushed on to the scene of
Hull’s invasion, where he had issued a proclamation to the Canadians
characterised by absurdity, falsehood, and Yankee brag. Indeed, it seems
quite impossible for any American General to indite, an address or
proclamation, without exposing himself to ridicule. Having already
collected an army at Detroit, General Hull, the commanding officer,
crossed over to Sandwich on the Canadian side, and issued the following
modest address to the

“INHABITANTS OF CANADA.”—“After thirty years of peace and prosperity,
the United States have been driven to arms. The injuries and
aggressions, the insults and indignities of Great Britain, have once
more left them no alternative but namely, resistance or unconditional
submission. The army under my command has invaded your country, and the
standard of Union now waves over the territory of Canada. To the
peaceable and unoffending inhabitants it brings neither danger nor
difficulty. I come to find enemies, not to make them. I come to protect,
not to injure you. Separated by an immense ocean, and an extensive
wilderness, from Great Britain, you have no participation in her
councils, nor interest in her conduct. You have felt the tyranny, you
have seen her injustice, but I do not ask you to avenge the one or
redress the other. The United States are sufficiently powerful to afford
you every security consistent with their rights, and your expectations.
I tender you the invaluable blessings of civil, political, and religious
liberty, and their necessary result, individual and general prosperity;
that liberty which gave decision to our councils, and energy to our
conduct, in our struggle for independence, and which conducted us safely
and triumphantly through the stormy period of the Revolution. That
liberty which has raised us to an elevated rank among nations of the
world, and which has afforded us a greater measure of peace and
security, of wealth and improvement, than ever fell to the lot of any
people. In the name of my country, and by the authority of my country,
and by the authority of my government, I promise protection to your
persons, property, and rights. Remain at your homes, pursue your
peaceful and customary avocations; raise not your hands against your
brethren; many of your fathers fought for the freedom and independence
we now enjoy. Being children, therefore, of the same family with us, and
heirs of the same heritage, the arrival of my army of friends must be
hailed by you with a cordial welcome. You will be emancipated from
tyranny and oppression, and restored to the dignified station of free
men. Had I any doubt of eventual success, I might ask your assistance,
but I do not. I come prepared for every contingency, I have a force
which will look down all opposition—and that force is but the vanguard
of a much greater. If contrary to your own interests, and the just
expectation of my country, you will be considered and treated as
enemies, the horrors and calamities of war will stalk before you. If the
barbarous and savage policy of Great Britain be pursued, and the savages
are let loose to murder our citizens, and butcher our women and
children, this war will be a war of extermination. The first stroke of
the tomahawk, the first attempt with the scalping knife, will be the
signal of one indiscriminate scene of desolation. No white man found
fighting by the side of an Indian, will be taken prisoner; instant
destruction will be his lot. If the dictates of reason, duty, justice,
and humanity, cannot prevent the employment of a force which respects no
right, and knows no wrongs, it will be prevented by a severe and
relentless system of retaliation. I doubt not your courage and firmness;
I will not doubt your attachment to liberty. If you tender your services
voluntarily, they will be accepted readily. The United States offer you
peace, liberty, and security. Your choice lies between these and war,
slavery, and destruction. Choose then, but choose wisely; and may he who
knows the justice of our cause, and who holds in his hands the fate of
nations, guide you to a result the most compatible with your rights and
interests, your peace and prosperity.”

But it was not long till the same Gen. Hull was a prisoner among them,
and in his journey from Detroit to Quebec he had abundant opportunity of
seeing not only the loyalty of the Canadians, but that they knew how to
treat a conquered foe with consideration—that without crying it out they
could grant every “protection” to their ancient foe, notwithstanding the
cruel treatment they had sustained when made exiles.

On the 18th July, with the intrepidity characteristic of the British
officer, Brock crossed the Detroit, advanced upon the town with his
brave militia and handful of regular troops, and demanded of Gen. Hull
the surrender of the place, following up the demand with preparations to
assault; but soon the white flag appeared, and Gen. Hull, so brave in
writing proclamations, with the whole American army, became prisoners of
war. They were conveyed to Quebec in parties, some going by vessels of
war from York to Kingston, some in small boats along the shore and
across the Carrying Place, by the Bay of Quinté. Most of them were
confined in hulks in the St. Lawrence, at Quebec, where they remained
until exchanged. Gen. Brock after this brilliant conquest of Detroit,
which included the whole of Michigan, lost no time in hastening to the
Niagara frontier, where another army was threatening to invade.

Upon the 12th October the Americans were preparing to cross from
Lewiston to Queenston. Gen. Brock was at Fort George, Niagara, and
hearing the cannon’s sound, hurried to the field of battle. He placed
himself at the head of the troops, and triumphantly led them up the
heights of Queenston, against the enemy, who had obtained a footing
there; but with the deep river between them and safety, the enemy
rallied for a time in a struggle for life, and Brock’s men, inferior in
number, retired, until his reinforcements had come, for which he would
not previously wait. Then again he essayed to lead them on, but his hour
had come, and while his cheering voice was ringing out “Push on York
Volunteers,” a musket ball struck him down. But the spirit of the brave
General was infused into every Canadian. As soon as Gen. Sheaffe had
arrived they advanced to conquer the polluters of Canadian soil. Again
the whole American army became prisoners of war, and had the privilege
of marching the length of the Province to Quebec, and Gen. Scott among
the rest, who was favored with a passage down the Bay of Quinté.

Gen. Brock’s Aide-de-Camp, McDonnell also fell, mortally wounded. Brock
was buried in a bastion of Fort George, but subsequently his remains
found a resting place upon the heights where he fell, and where now
rises the monument to his memory. This illustrious Chief was much
beloved by the Canadians, and he was held in great veneration. To him—to
the energetic and heroic Brock is due to a great extent the subsequent
success by which the enemy, ever boasting, was kept at bay, so that when
peace was sought by the United States, after three years of war, because
England, no longer at war at home, was about to deal heavy blows, there
was not a foot of Canadian territory in the enemy’s possession.

Of Gen. Brock the Hon. William H. Merrit, in 1853, speaks as follows:

“It will be in the recollection of many now present, that in the
commencement of the war of 1812, only one regiment of British troops,
the 48th, was left to defend Upper Canada, from Kingston to
Michilimackinac, a distance of one thousand miles, and during the whole
campaign, only two companies of the 48th could be spared on this
frontier. Although this fact is one of the most striking events
connected with that war, it has never yet been brought prominently
before the public; yet it clearly proves that the defence of Canada,
then rested with its inhabitants. We find that though they consisted
principally of the old U. E. Loyalists and their descendants, the native
Indians who had been dispossessed of their possessions in the United
States, and their descendants, together with residents from the United
States—emigration from the Mother Country not having been commenced to
any extent,—a population thus composed, not exceeding in Upper Canada,
at most 90,000, without troops, without munitions of war, without
resources, and without the least expectation of any timely aid from the
mother country, with a few troops, unable to contend against a powerful
nation, numbering about 8,000,000, with munitions of war, and resources
without limit, within a comparative short distance from maritime cities,
also numerous forces at command, of which they were not slow of
apprising us, in the proclamations circulated from time to time,—it was
under those circumstances that the character and ability of Sir Isaac
Brock were brought to light. Well knowing on whom he had to depend for
the defence of the country, he directed his personal attention to the
clothing, arms, equipment, mess, and personal comfort of the militia,
and took every opportunity of gaining the good will of the Indians.”

The estimation in which General Brock was held by the people of the
Province, was duly evinced by Parliament in passing an act, 14th March,
1815, “to provide for the erection of a monument to the memory of the
late president, Major General Sir Isaac Brock.” The value of his wisdom,
his councils, his energy, his wise plans, as well as his bravery, and
the effects thereof, are fully set forth in the preamble. It was
resolved to grant £1,000 for the purpose referred to, and erect the
monument at Queenston Heights. Thomas Dickson, Thomas Clark, and Robert
Nichol, Esquires, were appointed commissioners to carry out the act. In
January, 1826, an act was passed granting £600 more “to complete the
monument on a scale which appears to the commissioners worthy of the
object.”

_Major General Sheaffe_, became President, 20th October, 1812, and
continued in office until January 19, 1813, when Major General de
Rottenburgh assumed the office, and remained until December 12, of the
same year. At this date

_Lieutenant General Sir Gordon Drummond_ was inducted as President. It
was immediately after this that the infamous American General McClure,
set fire to Newark when unprotected, burning 150 houses, and leaving 400
women and children homeless in the middle of December. This act of
villany was fully avenged by General Drummond. Having occupied Fort
George, a night attack was made upon Fort Niagara, with brilliant
success. Then, the burning of Newark was remembered, and from Lewiston
to Buffalo the frontier was laid waste, including those two towns. In
this connection, we would remark, that in the event of another war with
the United States, it would be no doubt the policy of Canada to make
frequent disastrous raids into the States, wherever the opportunity
presented. The Americans may as well understand that destruction of
property will not be all on one side.

These brief sketches of the first Lieutenant-Governors of Upper Canada,
will be finished by alluding to one who devised the scheme of uniting
the two Canadas, who successfully accomplished that noble design, and
became the first Governor of United Canada. He fixed the capital at
Kingston, as the most central place suitable for both Provinces, indeed,
it is generally understood, that it was a part of the plan when the
union was made, that Kingston should become the permanent seat of
government. “It virtually formed part of the contract between the
respective provinces.” But with the death of Lord Sydenham, also died
the opportunity of Kingston remaining the capital of Canada.

Lord Sydenham died at Kingston, in September, 1841, and was buried
beneath St. George’s Church. Says Dr. Ryerson, in an affecting letter
communicated to the public at that time: “Unlike the close of the
session of legislature, which was ever held in either Province of
Canada, the termination of the late session will produce throughout
Canada the opposite feelings of grateful joy, and melancholy grief. The
same post which conveys to the people of Canada, the tidings of the
harmonious and happy conclusion of a session unprecedented in the
productiveness of comprehensive and valuable measures for the general
improvement and social and intellectual elevation of the province,
conveys to them the appalling announcement that death has terminated the
earthly career of the noble mind which conceived those improvements and
originated those institutions which will form a golden era in the annals
of Canadian history, by laying the foundation of Canadian prosperity and
greatness. While blessings are multiplied us, the agent of those
blessings is removed from us, and our country is, at the same moment,
thrilled with joy and consternation—and on the same day vocal with
thanksgiving and clothed in sackcloth; luminous with hope and involved
in mourning. Thus do the strokes of Providential chastisement accompany
the out-beamings of Providential munificence; and the brightest picture
of human life is shaded with disappointment, suffering, and bereavement.
It is in heaven only that death is unknown, that pain is never felt, and
tears are never shed.

“Lord Sydenham belongs essentially to Canada. His nobility was fairly
earned in her service; the ripest fruits of his experience and
acquirements are embodied in her institutions; his warmest and latest
sympathies are blended with her interests; his mortal remains repose, by
choice, among her dead; and his name is indelibly inscribed in the
affectionate esteem and grateful recollections of her inhabitants.

“It is not easy to determine which is most worthy of admiration, the
comprehensiveness and grandeur of Lord Sydenham’s plans, the skill with
which he overcame the obstacles that opposed their accomplishment, or
the quenchless ardor and ceaseless industry with which he pursued them.
To lay the foundations of public liberty, and at the same time to
strengthen the prerogative; to promote vast public improvements, and not
increase the public burdens; to promote a comprehensive system of
education upon Christian principles, without interfering with religious
scruples; to promote the influence and security of the government by
teaching the people to govern themselves; to destroy party faction by
promoting the general good; to invest a bankrupt country with both
credit and resources, are conceptions and achievements which render Lord
Sydenham the first benefactor of Canada, and place him in the first rank
of statesmen. His Lordship found a country divided, he left it united;
he found it prostrate and paralytic, he left it erect and vigorous; he
found it mantled with despair, he left it blooming with hope. Lord
Sydenham has done more in two years to strengthen and consolidate
British power in Canada by his matchless industry, and truly liberal
conservative policy, than have been done during the ten previous years
by the increase of a standing army, and the erection of military
fortifications. His Lordship has solved the difficult problem, that a
people may be colonists and yet be free; and, in the solution of that
problem, he has gained a triumph less imposing, but not less sublime and
scarcely less important, than the victory of Waterloo; he has saved
millions to England, and secured the affections of Canada.

“In the way of accomplishing these splendid results, the most formidable
obstacles oppose themselves. At the foundation of these lay the hitherto
defective theory, and worse than defective system of Colonial
Government; a system destitute of the safety-valve of responsibility, of
the attributes of freedom, and of the essential materials of executive
power; a system which was despotic from its weakness, and arbitrary from
its pretences to representation; a system inefficient in the hands of
good men, and withering in the hands of mistaken or bad men.”




                              CHAPTER LX.

  CONTENTS—Kingston—First capital—First act of government—Niagara—
    Selecting the capital—Niagara in 1788—Carrying Place—Landing
    Place—Newark—In 1795—Mr. Hamilton—The inhabitants—Little York—The
    Don—The Harbor—Survey—De la Trenche—London—Inhabitants of the Don—
    Yonge Street, a military road—Governor at York—Castle Frank—York
    in 1798—The Baldwins—In 1806—Buffalo—York, 1813—Taken by the
    Americans—The Combatants—Toronto—“Muddy York”—A monument required.


                     THE CAPITALS OF UPPER CANADA.

The site of the old Fort Frontenac, the first township to be surveyed,
and the place whereon to form the first village in Western Canada, was
in reality the first capital of Upper Canada. Here the first Governor
was inducted solemnly upon a Sabbath to his office; here he formed his
first cabinet, the Executive Council; here he selected the gentlemen to
form his first Legislative Council; here he issued his proclamations
forming the province into counties and arranging the representation.
Although the first Parliament did not meet here, the first acts of
government were here performed, and public documents were dated at “the
Government House, Kingston, 1792.”

We have elsewhere spoken of Niagara River and the early French Fort here
erected, and its capture by the English. We have learned that the place
was garrisoned by troops during the rebellion, and that many refugees
here found a safe retreat.

Lord Dorchester desired Simcoe to make Kingston the capital of the new
province. But he was unwilling to do so until he had informed himself of
the advantages which other places might offer. It seems that he became
impressed with the belief that the seat of government should be placed
in the peninsula of Upper Canada, and finally determined to fix it at
the mouth of the River Niagara, notwithstanding the recommendation of
Dorchester, the wishes of Bouchette, the Commodore of the Navy, and the
urgent requests of the Kingston merchants.

Collins in his report 1788, speaks of Navy Hall, near Niagara; that the
buildings of Navy Hall, are for the most part in exceeding bad repair,
and the wharf is in ruins. Of the Ranger’s Barracks one pile has been so
far dismantled as to be past re-establishing, one end indeed, might
perhaps, with some fitting up, be made to serve for some time as a
blacksmith’s shop to the Indian Department, which they say is much
wanted; the other pile is capable of being repaired, and might also
answer for a temporary accommodation, (at least in part) this same
department, their storehouses, &c., on the Niagara side as already
observed being in absolute ruin and not repairable; the fitting up of
this pile of buildings would cost about £35. The storehouse at the
landing place, which is of round log work, is mostly rotten, and
altogether in exceeding bad repair, and should be rebuilt; the dwelling
house is much out of repair. The ways, wharf, cradle, and capstan, want
some repair, which may be done for about £20, all the picketing and
small platforms in the angles of Fort Schlosser, are rotten and in a
tottering state, part of the wharf has been washed away, and the
remainder cannot last long. The barracks and store houses are not in
much better condition, they have been kept standing by the temporary
repairs which have been annually performed, merely to keep the weather
out.

“From Niagara to the landing place, below the Falls, is about seven
miles and a quarter, there is a tolerable good road, but the
merchandise, store, &c., are carried up the river in batteaux or
vessels, there being sufficient depth of water all the way up, and also
alongside the wharf to unload, beyond this place the current becomes too
strong to proceed any further by water without great difficulty, boats,
indeed, but not vessels, go about half a mile higher, but no advantage
can be obtained from it as the shore then becomes impracticable, being a
precipice of loose rock about three times as high as where the present
landing is. From the wharf at the landing, goods are drawn up the side
of the bank about fifty feet high upon ways, on easy slope by a capstan
fixed at the top; from this place there is a waggon road of seven miles
to Fort Schlosser, a mile and a half above the Falls, where the goods
are again put into boats and carried up eighteen miles to Fort Erie,
from whence they are conveyed in vessels across Lake Erie to Detroit.

“I think a better situation for a landing place might be chosen below
the present one, about half a mile distant by land, and three-quarters
by water. The bank of the river here is not half the height of the
other; the water is sufficiently deep at a short distance from the shore
for vessels to unload; and by raising a wharf and lowering some of the
bank for a road, the labor and delay of hauling goods up by ways, as is
the present practice, and would be avoided; it would also be much more
convenient and expeditious for vessels to come up to, as the worst part
of the navigation would be avoided, which in passing round a point
between this place and the landing. The length of road to be made from
this proposed landing place, will be about half a mile, but it is mostly
good ground and will not require much expense. The real length of land
carriage, however, to Fort Schlosser, will not be increased, or at most
more than 100 or 150 yards.”

The original British fort at Niagara was upon the east side of the mouth
of the Niagara River, upon the present site of the American Fort. By a
treaty entered into in 1794, Great Britain was to vacate this fort, with
others situated to the south of the lakes, namely, Oswego, Detroit,
Miami, and Michilmacinac, which was done in 1796. Upon the west side of
the river, upon a point known as Mississauga Point, had sprung up a
small village. This, it is said, was the largest collection of houses
after Kingston when Governor Simcoe arrived, and here he decided to make
his residence, and the permanent capital of the new province. He lived
“in a small frame house, half a mile from the village.” To this place he
gave the name of _Newark_. There was up the river, at the end of
navigation, and at the commencement of the portage around the falls to
Lake Erie, a small village which had arisen from the course of travel
upwards to the western lakes. The boats which left Kingston, on their
way westward, were here unloaded. And this place had taken the name of
Queen’s Town, a name which it retains to the present day. Rochefoucault
says, in 1795, “The different buildings, constructed three years ago,
consist of a tolerable inn, two or three good storehouses, some small
horses, a blockhouse of stone, covered with iron, and barracks. Mr.
Hamilton, an opulent merchant, who is concerned in the whole inland
trade in this part of America, possesses in Queen’s Town, a very fine
house, built in the English style; he has also a farm, a distillery, and
a tan-yard. The portage was formerly on the other side of the river; but
as this, by virtue of the treaty, falls under American Dominion,
government has removed it hither.” The same writer, speaking of Newark
says, “About a hundred houses, mostly very fine structures, have already
been erected, but the progress of building will probably be arrested by
the intended removal of the seat of government. The majority of the
inhabitants, especially the richest of them, share in the
administration; and consequently will remove to whatever place the
government may be transferred. In point of size and elegance, the house
of Colonel Smith, of the 5th Regiment, is much distinguished from the
rest, being constructed, embellished, and painted in the best style.”

YORK.—Governor Simcoe was thoroughly English; unlike Governor Maitland,
who gave foreign names in his time, he was intent upon erecting another
England in America. One new England had alienated itself, and he
determined another should arise in its place, and hence he gave to his
new capital the name of York. The present New York had been named York,
after James Duke of York, brother to Charles the II. The term new being
prefixed to distinguish it from old York of England. To distinguish the
new capital of Canada from both of the others he designated it _Little
York_.

As soon as Simcoe learned that the Niagara fort was to be delivered to
the United States, he saw the necessity of removing the capital, as it
would never do to have it under the guns of a foreign government. The
extreme dislike with which he saw the fort pass into the Republic’s
hands no doubt led to the haste with which he set about the removal of
the Seat of Government. After examining several points upon the upper
lakes, and Lake Ontario, he selected the present site of the City of
Toronto, back of which was a fort of the same name, or rather Taranto.
Upon this spot, which then had for inhabitants but two families of
Mississauga Indians, Governor Simcoe immediately quartered one division
of his old regiment, the Queen’s Rangers, which came the 1st July, 1793.
The same summer Bouchette, of the Royal Navy, surveyed the harbour or
bay.

The harbour of Toronto was first examined, by Deputy Surveyor Collins,
in 1788, when he made a survey of all of the waters of the Upper Lakes,
and the several forts, by instructions from Lord Dorchester. In his
report he says, “The breadth at the entrance is about half a mile, but
the navigable channel for vessels is only about 500 yards, having from
three to four fathoms water, the north of the main shore the whole
length of the harbour, is a clay bank from 12 to 20 feet high, and
rising gradually behind, apparently good land and fit for settlements.
The water is rather shallow near the shore. The shoalness of the north
shore as before remarked, is also disadvantageous as to creating wharfs,
quays, &c. In regard to this place as a military post, I do not see any
striking features to recommend it in that view, but the best situation
to occupy for the purpose of protecting the settlement and harbour
would, I conceive, be on the point A, near the entrance thereof.”

Subsequently however, Simcoe relinquished the intention of making York
the Capital, and determined to erect one at a central point in the
peninsula lying between Lakes Ontario, Erie and Huron. He selected a
site upon the river De la Trenche, which he named the Thames, and, to
the intended Capital he gave the name of London. He also gave the name
to the town of Chatham, a place intended by him, in carrying out his
plan of forming a navy, for a navy yard, which he intended to have
communicate with a route between Lake Huron and Lake Ontario. In the
mean time he kept troops to work, to cut a military road to the Thames,
which he called Dundas Street after the Home Minister. At the same time
he “intended York the centre of the naval force on Lake Ontario.” In
1795 there had not been more than twelve houses built in York, which
stood on the bay near the Don. This year the land was surveyed into
lots. “The inhabitants” says Rochefoucault do not possess the fairest
character, to which Gourlay adds, in spite, “Nor have they yet mended
it.” The River Don was an old Indian route to the waters of Simcoe Lake
and the Huron. The portage to a Lake, subsequently named after the
Governor, was thirty miles. The barracks, where Simcoe’s regiment was
stationed, was two miles from the Don, the present site of the old
barracks. At that time, in a circumference of 150 miles, the Mississauga
Indians were the only neighbours of York.

The desire of Simcoe to fix the capital at London was overruled by Lord
Dorchester, who, although a true friend of Canada, seemed to oppose
Simcoe. Having decided upon Toronto as the capital, Simcoe proceeded to
have constructed a military road from the waters of Lake Ontario to Lake
Simcoe. This road is now Yonge Street. From 1794 the Governor resided at
York, part of which time was in his camp tent, until his departure.

Governor Simcoe caused to be built at York, upon the Don River, about
three miles up, on a beautiful eminence, a somewhat large frame
building, which he named after his son, Castle Frank. This building was
standing in 1829.

By the kind favor of Mrs. Murney, relict of the late Hon. E. Murney, of
Belleville, and her most estimable parent, Mrs. Breckenridge, sister of
the late Hon. Robert Baldwin, we are able to give some particular notice
of the appearance of York at a later date. Mrs. Breckenridge’s father,
with his family of three sons and four daughters, arrived from Ireland
after innumerable delays and losses, dangers, and escapes by sea and
land, at York in 1798. They found it composed of about a dozen houses,
“a dreary dismal place, not even possessing the characteristics of a
village. There was no church, school-house, nor in fact any of the
ordinary signs of civilization, being in fact a mere settlement. There
was not even a Methodist chapel, nor does she remember more than one
shop. There was no inn; and those travelers who had no friends to go to,
pitched a tent and lived in that so long as they remained. My
grandfather and his family had done so during their journey. The
Government House and the garrison lay about a mile from York, with a
thick wood between. After remaining a few days at York, the family
proceeded to take possession of a farm in the township of Clarke. They
traveled in an open batteau, when night came pitching their tent on the
shore of the lake.” The following year Mrs. Breckenridge, then a young
girl, accompanied her father and sister to New York, whither the latter
was going to be married to Mr. Morgan, grandfather of Gen. Dix, the
United States Minister to France. She returned in 1806, and found many
changes and improvements—“where cities now stand, there was then only
woods,” for instance, at Buffalo, where she passed a night, was a
solitary inn with a swinging sign. But York was mostly changed, there
was a church, a jail, a light-house building, and many nice houses, and
the woods between the garrison and town were fast disappearing. Governor
Gore was then there.

On the 27th April, 1813, 2,700 Americans landed a little west of
Toronto. Two companies of the 8th, or King’s Own, with some Indians, one
company being the grenadiers, the other being the 3rd company, under
Capt. J. H. Eustace, both being led by Capt. McNeale, were sent to
oppose the landing. The portable magazine of the advance battery was
accidentally blown up killing some twenty of the grenadiers, Capt.
McNeale, was also killed. This accident led to Sir R. H. Sheaffe’s
retreat, and the destruction of the magazines. The total loss was 97,
including two officers and four non-commissioned officers. “The force
engaged, including the two companies of the 8th, consisted of one
company of Newfoundland Fencibles, one company of Glengarry Light
Infantry, a detachment of Royal Artillery, Militia, Volunteers, and
Indians—in all about 600 men. Among the volunteers was the present
highly esteemed Chief Justice of Upper Canada, Sir J. B. Robinson, and
Sir Allan McNab.” The gallantry of these two gentlemen was most
conspicuous. The unequal contest continued for 4 hours. The month
following the remnant of the 8th was nearly annihilated at the attack
upon Sackett’s Harbour. The above facts and eulogium upon two
distinguished Canadians are derived from Edward Hincks, who was Lieut.,
and who was present in charge of a two gun battery, and “Another of the
surviving officers of the 8th regiment,” published in London in 1860,
upon the discovery of human remains near the old fort at Toronto, which
proved to be some of the grenadiers who were killed by the explosion of
their magazine.

The name of York continued to belong to the capital till 1834, when it
received the more appropriate name of Toronto, an Indian word we are
told, which signifies “trees growing out of the water,” referring to the
low level shore, with the trees at the waters edge. For many years
before the name was changed; from the vast quantity of mud which made
the streets almost unpassable, the place obtained the designation of
“Muddy York.”

In 1820 a Parliament House was built near the site of the present County
Jail, at the front of the present Parliament Street; this building was
burned down in 1824.

In 1830 an address was carried by the House, to be presented to the
Governor, “to remove the Seat of Government from York to a place of
security,” but no action was taken in the matter.

The wisdom in the choice of selecting this situation upon which to found
a capital for Upper Canada cannot be questioned. The proof is found in
the handsome and richly circumstanced City of Toronto. Should not
Toronto, now again the Capital of Ontario, the seat of learning, of
magnificent Universities, the home of refinement, the abode of wealth,
erect a monument to the memory of its founder, the illustrious first
Governor of the Colony?




                              CHAPTER LXI.

  CONTENTS—Parliament—Simcoe’s Proclamation—Nineteen counties formed—
    Names, and boundaries—First elections—Names of members—Officers of
    the House—A Quaker member—Chaplain—Meeting of Parliament—The
    Throne, a camp stool—Address—To both houses—Closing address—Acts
    passed—Simcoe’s confidential letters—A contrast—A blending—2nd
    Session The Acts—Quarter Sessions—3rd, 4th, 5th Sessions—New
    division of Province—1798—Modes of punishment—Burning the hand—
    Whipping—Salaries of officers—Revenue first year—The members of
    Parliament—Education—Offering for Parliament—A “Junius”—Early
    administration of justice—“Heaven-born lawyers”—First magistrates.


                       THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.

Upon the 16th July, 1792, Lieutenant-Governor Simcoe issued a
proclamation in the name of the King, having for its object the
organization of a Legislative Assembly composed of persons, to be
elected by the people, of which there should be sixteen, and dividing
the province into counties. It was as follows:

“Know ye, that our trusty and well-beloved John Graves Simcoe, Esquire,
our Lieutenant-Governor of our Province of Upper Canada, hath, and by
this our proclamation doth, divide the said Province of Upper Canada
into counties, and hath and doth appoint and declare the number of
representatives of them, and each of them, to be as hereinafter limited,
named, declared, and appointed,” &c.

Nineteen counties were formed, namely: “Glengary, Stormont, Dundas,
Grenville, Leeds, Frontenac, Ontario, Addington, Lenox, Prince Edward,
Hastings, Northumberland, Durham, York, Lincoln, Norfolk, Suffolk,
Essex, Kent.”

For the purpose of representation in Parliament, the following
arrangements were made: Glengary was divided into two ridings, each
riding to send a representative to the Legislative Assembly; Stormont,
to send one member; likewise Dundas and Grenville each to have a
representative; Leeds and Frontenac together, to send one
representative; Ontario and Addington to send one representative; Prince
Edward, together with the late township of Adolphus, in the County of
Lenox, to send one member; Lenox (except Adolphustown) with the Counties
of Hastings and Northumberland, to elect one member; Durham and York,
and the first riding of Lincoln, to be represented by one member; the
second riding of Lincoln to have one member; the third riding of Lincoln
to have one member; the fourth riding of Lincoln, and the County of
Norfolk, to have one member; Suffolk and Essex to have one member; the
County of Kent, which included all the west not Indian territories, to
the Hudson’s Bay, to have two members. The proclamation was dated
Government House, Kingston, 16th July, 1792, William Jarvis, Secretary.

The elections must have followed hard after the issuing of the
proclamation, as Parliament met on the 17th of September following. They
probably took place in August. Simcoe writing in November, to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, speaks of the elections in these
words:—“On my passage from Montreal to Kingston, I understood that the
general spirit of the country was against the election of half-pay
officers into the Assembly, and that the prejudice ran in favour of men
of a low order, who kept but one table, that is, who dined in common
with their servants.”

The names of those first elected to Parliament were John McDonnell, who
was elected Speaker; Joshua Booth; Mr. Baby; Alexander Campbell; Philip
Dorland, (but being a Quaker, he would not be sworn and did not take his
seat, and Peter VanAlstine was elected in his place); Jeremiah French;
Ephraim Jones; William Mocomb; Hugh McDonnell; Benjamin Pawling;
Nathaniel Pettit; David William Smith; Hazleton Spencer; Isaac Swazy; ——
Young; John White—16. Simcoe, in a despatch, spoke of the last
mentioned:—“It was by good fortune that the temporary residence I made
at Kingston created sufficient influence to enable us to bring the
Attorney General White, into the House.

The oaths to the members were administered by the Governor’s Civil
Secretary, William Jarvis, Esq., who was also the first registrar of the
Province. McDonnell, the member for Glengary, was unanimously elected to
the speakers chair. Angus McDonnell was clerk to the Assembly; George
Law, Sergeant-at-arms. In the matter of Philip Dorland, of Adolphustown,
a Quaker, who refused to take the oaths, a resolution was unanimously
passed by the House, that he was incompetent to sit and vote in
Parliament unless he took the necessary oath, and consequently a writ
was issued for a new election.

A chaplain, the Rev. Mr. Addison, was elected to the House of Assembly,
and he, on the day of prorogation, preached a sermon to them before they
were summoned to meet the Governor in the Legislative Council Chambers.
Mr. Addison continued a chaplain for thirty years, and was then granted
a yearly pension of £50.

This first Upper Canadian Parliament assembled at Newark, now Niagara,
on the 18th September, and was prorogued 15th October following. The
circumstances of this infant legislation were well fitting the new-born
colony. The Governor himself was a soldier by profession. Most of the
members elect had been inured to the life of the camp, though
subsequently to the settling of the wilderness, and they could, with no
ordinary interest, and with appropriate intelligence, direct themselves
to the work of legislation. The first Parliament of Upper Canada met in
no stately hall; the proceedings must have borne some resemblance to a
court-martial. The collective wisdom of Upper Canada assembled in a
camp-tent on the plains of Niagara. On the 18th September, the Governor,
with his Secretary, and probably adjutant, took his seat, not upon the
throne, but a campstool, and delivered the following address:

  HONORABLE GENTLEMEN, &C.—I have summoned you together under the
  authority of an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain, passed last
  year, which has established the British constitution, and all the
  forms which secure and maintain it in this distant country.

  “The wisdom and beneficence of our most Gracious Sovereign and the
  British Parliament, have been eminently proved, not only in
  importing to us the same for government, but also in securing the
  benefit, by the many provisions that guard this memorable act. So
  that the blessing of your invaluable constitution, thus protected
  and amplified, we may hope will be extended to the remotest
  posterity. The great and momentous trusts and duties which have been
  committed to the representatives of this Province, in a degree
  infinitely beyond whatever, till this period, distinguished any
  other colony, have originated from the British nation, upon a just
  consideration of the energy and hazard with which its inhabitants
  have so conspicuously supported and defended the British
  constitution.

  “It is from the same patriotism, now called upon to exercise with
  due deliberation and foresight, the offices of civil administration
  that your fellow-subjects, of the British Empire, expect the
  foundation of that mien of industry, and wealth of commerce and
  power, which may last through all succeeding ages.

  “The natural advantages of the Province of Upper Canada are inferior
  to none on this side of the Atlantic; there can be no separate
  interest through its whole extent. The British form of government
  has prepared the way for its speedy colonization; and, I trust, that
  your fostering care will improve the favourable situation; and that
  a numerous and agricultural people will speedily take possession of
  the soil and climate, which, under the British laws, and the
  munificence with which His Majesty has granted the lands of the
  Crown, offer such manifest and peculiar encouragement.”

The session was closed the 15th October. The Governor delivered the
closing speech.

  “HONORABLE GENTLEMAN, &C.—It is with very great satisfaction that I
  have considered the acts which you have found it expedient to frame,
  and to which, in consequence of the power delegated to me, I have
  this day given my assent, that they shall become laws of the
  Province of Upper Canada.

  “As the division which His Majesty, in his wisdom, thought proper to
  make of the late Province of Quebec, obviated all inconveniences,
  and laid the foundation for an establishment of the English laws in
  the Province, it is natural to presume, that you would seize the
  first opportunity to impart that benefit to your fellow-subjects;
  and by the act to establish trials by jury, and by that which makes
  the English law the rule of decision, in all matters of controversy,
  relative to property and civil rights, you have fully justified the
  public expectation. Your other acts seem calculated to promote the
  general welfare and commerce of the Province, &c.

  “HONORABLE GENTLEMEN, AND GENTLEMEN.—I cannot dismiss you without
  earnestly desiring you to promote, by precept and example, among
  your respective counties, the regular habits of piety and morality,
  the rarest foundations of all private and public felicity; and, at
  this juncture, I particularly recommend to you to explain, that this
  Province is singularly blest, not with a _mutilated constitution_,
  but with a constitution which has stood the test of experience, and
  is the very image and transcript of that of Great Britain, by which
  she has long established and secured to her subjects, as much
  freedom and happiness as is possible to be enjoyed, under the
  subordination necessary to civilized society.”

The modest and matter-of-fact Parliament passed eight Acts at this the
first session. Chapter I., An Act to Repeal certain parts of an Act,
passed in the fourteenth year of His Majesty’s Reign, entitled, “An Act
for making more sufficient provisions for the Government for the
Province of Quebec, in North America, and to introduce the English Law
as the rule of decision in all matters of controversy relative to
Property and Civil Rights.” Chapter II., “An Act to establish Trials by
Jury.” Chapter III., “An Act to establish the Winchester Measure, and a
Standard for other Weights and Measures.” Chapter IV., “An Act to
Abolish the Summary Proceedings of the Court of Common Pleas in actions
under Ten Pounds Sterling.” Chapter V., “An Act to prevent Accidents by
Fire.” Chapter VI., “An Act for the more easy and speedy Recovery of
Small Debts.” Chapter VII., “An Act to Regulate the Toll to be taken in
Mills, not more than one-twelfth for Grinding and Bolting.” Chapter
VIII., “An Act for Building a Gaol and Court-house in every District
within the Province, and for altering the names of the said Districts.
The District of Lunenburgh to be henceforth called the Eastern District;
Mecklenburgh, the Midland District; Nassau, the Home District; Hesse,
the Western District.”

Thus was the new-born colony, whose germ had been planted in the
wilderness eight years previous, ushered into life, and thus the
functions thereof were commenced.

Simcoe, it would seem, wrote frequent despatches to the Colonial
Secretary; and in one he gives his opinion of this first meeting of the
representative body of Upper Canada: “At this first meeting they were
active and zealous for particular measures, according to the promises
they had made, or the instructions they had received. Many bills were
accordingly framed, which required only a little time to evince their
impropriety or futility. Having offices to create and salaries to
bestow, they were rather too liberal of their patronage, and pledged
their credit to £174 annually to different officers. The Legislative
Council made no engagements, but, of course, their expenses must be
equal. The sum of £348 was, therefore, the first item.” “Upon the whole,
I have no reason to be dissatisfied with the disposition and conduct of
the Assembly, considering that it is composed of persons of not any
restrictive method, and unacquainted with power. I hope that by treating
them with temper and moderation, they may become a beneficial
establishment to the Province.” McMullen says, by way of contrast, that
“the Upper Canadian Parliament, with its “home-spun” members, took five
weeks to do what had taken the Lower Canadian Seigniors seven months to
accomplish.”

How great the change wrought by seventy-five years! As the log hut in
the wilderness has been superseded by the elegant mansion, handsome
villa, with thriving towns and cities, so has the tented capital of
Newark been forgotten in surveying the magnificent proportions of the
buildings at Ottawa; and the camp stool, and nature’s carpet of green,
in the elegant halls. And as the Legislature, whose infant days were
passed within the sound of the majestic Niagara, where its waters are
precipitated over a stupendous fall, and sweep on to fill a mighty lake,
has, after numerous mutations, and many uncertainties, found a safe home
upon the rugged cliffs overlooking the Ottawa, where still may be heard
the swelling sound of falling waters, as they rush down the Chaudiere;
so may the confederated Provinces forming the New Dominion, after many
changes, and frequent political uncertainties—hope alternating with
fear, not alone meet in formal union,—not as incompatible elements of an
unwise and unequal connection, but as one people; even as the waters of
the great Ottawa, mighty in itself, meet and unite with the farther
coming St. Lawrence, and, commingling, form the grand stream of the
Lower Lawrence, upon whose bosom the proudest ships rest, and which is a
highway of trade, unsurpassed in the world.

The _second session_ of the parliament of Upper Canada, was opened at
Newark, 31st May, 1793; prorogued 9th July, following. At this sessions
were passed thirteen bills, most of which were important and useful
measures. The first was “for the better regulation of the Militia;” the
second, respecting the appointment of town officers; the third, having
respect to assessments and rates, and payment of assembly-men; the
fourth, about highways; the fifth, concerning marriage; sixth, of courts
of Quarter Sessions within the several districts; the seventh, a most
important one—an everlasting one of honor, “to prevent the further
introduction of slaves,” and to limit the time of servitude of those in
slavery; the eighth, respecting courts of Probate; ninth, to establish
regulations about duties between Upper and Lower Canada; tenth, for
paying salaries of officers of Legislative Council and Assembly;
eleventh, to encourage the destruction of wolves and bears; twelfth,
returning officers of the several counties; thirteenth, also about
officers, and taxing wine and spirituous liquors.

The places fixed for the holding of Quarter Sessions were Cornwall, New
Johnson, Kingston, Adolphustown, Newark, and Michilmacinac. For the
Midland District, it was enacted that they should “commence and be
holden in Adolphustown, on the second Tuesday in the month of July, and
on the second Tuesday in the month of January; and in Kingston on the
second Tuesday in the month of April, and on the second Tuesday in the
month of October.”

The _third session_ of the 1st parliament met at Newark, on the 2nd
June, 1794, and prorogued 9th July following. At this session there was
a continuation of that wholesome legislation which had characterized the
two previous sessions. Twelve acts were passed.

The _fourth session_ was at Newark, commencing 6th July, 1895, when four
acts were added. It was prorogued 10th August, following.

A _fifth session_ of first parliament met at Newark, 16th May, 1796, and
was prorogued 3rd June following. Seven acts were passed. This was the
last meeting of parliament under the governorship of Simcoe.

The second parliament opened at York, 16th May, 1797, under the
presidency of the Hon. Peter Russell. It was prorogued 3rd July,
following. Eighteen measures passed.

Second session under Hon. P. Russell, met at York, 5th June, 1798,
prorogued 5th July. Passed eight bills. Among these bills was one “to
ascertain and establish the boundary lines of the different townships of
the province.” Stone or other durable monuments to be set up, to mark
the corners of lots; and any person wilfully defacing or removing such,
to “be adjudged guilty of felony, and to suffer death without the
benefit of the clergy.” Another important act, which the growing
province demanded, was “for the better division of the province,” into
townships, counties and districts. According to this, there were formed
eight districts, with twenty-three counties, and one hundred and
fifty-eight townships. The districts were the Eastern, Johnson, Midland,
Newcastle, Home, Niagara, London, and Western. The Midland district,
with which we have more particularly to do, “was composed of four
counties, with land in their rear to the northern limits of the
province.” The first county was Frontenac. In this we have Kingston, as
well as the townships Pittsburgh, Loughborough, Portland, Hinchinbroke,
Bedford, and Wolfe Island. The second county, the incorporated counties
of Lenox and Addington; consisted of the townships of Ernesttown,
Fredericksburgh, Adolphustown, Richmond, Camden, Amherst Island,
Sheffield. The third county, Hastings; contained Sydney, Thurlow, Mohawk
land, Tyendinaga, Hungerford, Huntingdon, and Rawdon. The fourth, Prince
Edward, had Marysburgh, Hallowell, Sophiasburgh, and Ameliasburgh.

The third session met at Newark, 12th June, 1799, and was prorogued 29th
of the same month; five acts having been passed.

The fourth session met at York, 2nd June, 1800, prorogued 4th July,
under Lieutenant-General Hunter. Six acts were passed, the first of
which was “for the further introduction of the criminal law of England,
and for the more effectual punishment of certain offenders.” The third
clause is as follows: “That whereas the punishment of burning in the
hand, when any person is convicted of felony within the benefit of
clergy, is often disregarded and ineffectual, and sometimes may fix a
lasting mark of disgrace and infamy on offenders, who might otherwise
become good subjects and profitable members of the community; be it
therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from, and after the
passing of this act, when any person shall be lawfully convicted of any
felony, within the benefit of clergy, for which he or she is liable by
law to be burned or marked in the hand, it shall, and may be lawful for
the court before which any person so convicted, or any court holden for
the same place with the like authority, if such court shall think fit,
instead of such burning or marking, to impose upon such offender such a
moderate pecuniary fine as to the court in its discretion shall seem
meet; or otherwise it shall be lawful, instead of such burning or
marking, in any of the cases aforesaid, except in the case of
manslaughter, to order and judge, that such offender shall be once or
oftener, but not more than three times, either publicly or privately
whipped; such private whipping to be inflicted in the presence of not
less than two persons, besides the offender and the officer who inflicts
the same, and in case of female offenders, in the presence of females
only; and such fine or whipping so imposed or inflicted, instead of such
burning or marking, shall have the like effects and consequences to the
party on whom the same, or either shall be imposed or inflicted, with
respect to the discharge from the same or other felonies, or any
restitution to his or her estates, capacities, and credits, as if he or
she had been burned or marked as aforesaid.”

In 1801 the salaries of the officers of the parliament stood thus; per
annum.

Clerk of Legislative Council, £145. Usher of the Black Rod, £50. Master
in Chancery, attending the Legislative Council, £50. Chaplain of the
Legislative Council, £50. Door-keeper of ditto £20. Speaker of the House
of Assembly, £200. Clerk of ditto, £125. Sergeant-at-Arms, £50. Chaplain
of the House of Assembly, £50. Door-keeper of ditto, £20. Copying
Clerks, £50. Total, £805.

The first tax raised by statute in the province, was to pay the members,
who received $2 per day.

The revenue of the whole province the first year was £900.

Elsewhere the fact has been stated that many of the settlers were devoid
of a liberal education; while the stern duties of pioneer life precluded
the possibility of any mental culture whatever. At the same time
competent school teachers for the young were not to be had. With a
population made up of such material, the question might be asked with
becoming seriousness, “Where are we to get our representative men to
carry out responsible government as accorded to the young province of
Upper Canada?” Many of the first Assembly men were not possessed of book
learning, and all along the list of those who have been M.P.P.’s, up to
the present, may be found very many who were limited in their education.
Yet, the first members convened in the tent, on the green slopes of
Niagara, discharged their duty with much decorum and despatch.

It would be an interesting chapter to introduce some account of the
first members of Parliament, and the political contests in the early
days of Upper Canada. In the absence of complete information, we give
such items relating thereto as have come under notice. We have already
given the names of those elected to the first Parliament.

Among the early members was James Wilson, of Prince Edward, he was first
elected in 1808, or 9, and remained a member for some twenty-four years.
Simeon Washburn, was also a member for a time. Allen McLean, in a notice
dated Kingston, 18th May, 1812, says “To the independent electors of the
County of Frontenac. Having had the honor of representing you at three
successive Parliaments, I again make you a tender of my services, and
beg leave to solicit your votes and interest at the ensuing election.”

Amos Ansley, Esq., says, in an address, dated at Kingston, May 20, 1812:
“To the Electors of the County of Frontenac. Having had the honor to
represent this County in the first foundation of its happy constitution,
I again make you a tender of my services, and beg leave to solicit your
votes and interest, &c.” James Cotter, of Sophiasburg, was elected to
Parliament in 1813, and served four years.

A man of sterling integrity, and good common sense may make a useful
Member, if he be not egotistical. In recording the early events of the
Bay, we must not hesitate to mention an incident which, at the time,
created no little comment with the public, but brought chagrin to an M.
P. P. A member, who shall be nameless, whose early advantages for
education had been extremely limited, but with any amount of
self-confidence, was, on one occasion, sarcastically, but humorously,
brought to task in the Kingston _Herald_, by an anonymous writer. The
member replied, and in so doing, “copied verbatim, nearly the whole of
the first part of Sir William Draper’s letter to Junius, dated Jan. 26,
1769, in defence of his friend Lord Granby, over his own signature.
Macaulay, a young lawyer of Bath, noticed the plagiarism, and exposed
the M. P. P.,” which we believe, resulted in the political demise of
that individual.


                  THE EARLY ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.

For two years, Upper Canada, after becoming a distinct Province, was
without any lawyers. But, in 1794, such a number of Acts were found upon
the statute books, that it was necessary to create some to interpret,
not mystify the law. It was provided that his “Majesty should appoint
not more than sixteen, whom he should deem, from their probity,
education, and condition of life, best qualified to receive the license
to practice law.” This appointment of lawyers by the Executive, gave
rise to an expression of derision in after days, of “heaven-born
lawyers.”

The first lawyer appointed in Johnson District, was Samuel Sherwood, who
had studied law two or three years with lawyer Walker, of Montreal.
Jacob Farand, was the first lawyer in the Eastern District. Allen
McLean, the first lawyer for Kingston, and Mr. Hagerman, the first for
the Bay Quinté.—(See U. E. Loyalists). James Clarke was appointed for
Niagara District; also, William Dickson, of Niagara, and Angus McDonald
for Cornwall.

After the formation of Upper Canada into a Province, a number of
magistrates were appointed to each District, to form a Court of Quarter
Sessions. The four gentlemen who had been the judges of Lunenburgh,
Mecklenburgh, Nassau, and Hesse, respectively, no longer had so
extensive a jurisdiction. We have no further information of Robertson,
in this respect, and Duncan left the Province. But Cartwright and
Hamilton continued to fill the same positions, as chairmen of the
Quarter Sessions, in their respective Districts. After the death of
Cartwright, in the Midland District, Colonel Thompson was appointed to
the office, and his successor was Alex. Fisher, of Adolphustown. John
Ferguson was also Judge of the District Court.

Among the first appointments for magistrates, was Thomas Sherwood, of
Leeds. Also, Dr. Solomon Jones, who was afterward Judge of the District
Court.

Charles Stuart, Esq., was, for many years, Sheriff of the Midland
District; he died while yet young, in 1816. The first Sheriff of Niagara
District, was Alex. McDonnell; the next was Barrack-master Clark, and
afterwards Thomas Merritt was appointed.

Among the first, probably the first, magistrates appointed in Thurlow,
were Col. Wm. Bell, Col. Hazelton, and James McNabb. Most likely Bell
had the commission before the others. Bell generally held his Court of
Requests at Mrs. Simpson’s Inn. On 19th April, 1822, it was held at the
house of John Taylor.




                              DIVISION X.
                   THE EARLY MILITIA OF UPPER CANADA.




                             CHAPTER LXII.

  CONTENTS—Militia Act, 1792—Simcoe—No faith in the Americans—His
    views—Military Roads—Division of Districts—Military purposes—The
    officers—Legislation—The expenses—Repeated Legislation—Aggressive
    spirit—The Enrolment—Hastings Battalion—“Something brewing”—List
    of Officers—Col. Ferguson—Col. Bell—Leeds Militia—Officers’
    Clothing—The Midland District—Prince Edward—Training Places.


                              THE MILITIA.

Any magisterial power that the military commanders of the first settlers
may have possessed was lost by the proclamation of Lord Dorchester, in
1788, forming Upper Canada into districts, and appointing to each a
staff of civil officers. From this period until 1792, after the meeting
of the second session of the First Parliament, the military organization
was a dead matter, although there must have been in force some law
relating to such, inasmuch as the first Act passed at this Session was
“for the _better_ regulation of the Militia in this Province.”

Governor Simcoe was a man of a military turn of mind. He had taken an
active part against the American rebels, and he continued to entertain
strong feelings of hostility to the American cause, believing not in the
integrity of their professed principles. In many respects he was a well
chosen person to take charge of a people who had been under a military
rule, and who shared his antipathy to the republican people. Not only
did Simcoe conceive schemes of settling the forests, and improving it,
but also for securing the country against attack, likewise of drawing
into the country many who he believed remained in the States because
they could not help themselves, and to whom the Republican form of
government was exceedingly distasteful. Simcoe never felt any doubt
about his ability to defend the Province against the Americans, and he
even had vague ideas that he might concentrate a force of sufficient
strength upon Upper Canada soil, to enable him to invade the States,
with a good prospect of success. Imbued with these views, and animated
by such feelings and desires, he lost no time in taking the necessary
steps to organize and train the Militia, and to establish a Naval force
for the Lakes. The regular soldiers under his immediate command were put
at work to cut roads, one from Lake Ontario to the Thames, which was
called the Dundas road, the other from Lake Ontario to the Lake Simcoe,
which has received the name of Yonge Street.

The four districts of Upper Canada were subdivided into counties. This
division was, according to Rochfoucault, who visited Simcoe, and
procured his information from him, “into counties is purely military,
and relates merely to the enlisting, completing and assembling of the
Militia. The counties are about twelve in number. The Militia of each
county are assembled and commanded by a Lieutenant; they must be divided
into regiments and companies. They assemble once a year in each county,
and are inspected by the Captains of the different companies, at least
twice a year. Every male inhabitant is considered a militia man from the
age of sixteen to fifty. He is fined four dollars if he does not enlist
at the proper time; and officers, both commissioned and
non-commissioned, who do not join their regiments at the time the
militia is assembled, pay a fine, the former of eight dollars, and the
latter of two. An officer who, in case of insurrection, or an attack,
who should not repair to his assigned post, would be punished with a
pecuniary penalty of £50, and a petty officer with a fine of £20. A
militia man who sells either the whole, or a part of his arms,
ammunition or accoutrements, is fined £5, and in default of payment,
imprisoned for two months. The Quakers, Baptists, and Tunkers, pay, in
time of peace, twenty shillings a year; and during a war of
insurrection, five pounds sterling for their exemption from military
service. Out of these fines and ransoms the Adjutant-General of the
Militia receives his pay, and the remainder is at the Governor’s
disposal. This is nearly the substance of the first act of the
legislative body of Upper Canada, passed in 1793.”

The following year an additional Act passed, relative to the Militia,
the chief regulations of which tended to improve and define more
accurately the internal form of the regiments, battalions and companies,
and to render the assembling of detachments more easy and expeditious.
This Act determines, that, in time of war, the obligation to carry arms
in defence of the country shall not cease before the age of sixty, and
that, of consequence, Quakers and others who enjoy exemption from
military service, shall pay for their immunity up to that age. It also
obliges the militia to serve on board of ships and vessels, to act as
cavalry, and to extend their service beyond the Province, on condition,
however, that the same men be not bound to serve more than six months
successively. The exemptions from military service are confined to the
officers of justice, and other public functionaries, whose number is
very small. The whole militia is estimated at nine thousand men. All the
expenses of the civil and military administration of Upper and Lower
Canada are defrayed by England. The expense, including money and
presents to the Indians, “amounts for Upper Canada to one hundred
thousand pounds.”

In all the measures introduced by Simcoe and passed into law by
Parliament, can be discovered a military mind actively at work. The
arrangements by which he endeavored to settle the country—to secure it
against invasion—to keep alive a spirit of military ardor—to keep aglow
the flame of patriotism, a love for the mother country, were eminently
judicious and commendable. There is no doubt that the military spirit of
Simcoe was pleasing to the old soldier-farmers, and in them he found
willing and zealous abettors of his military schemes. Had it not been
for the short-sighted policy of Lord Dorchester, who, it is averred,
became envious of his Lieutenant-Governor, and tried to thwart the
designs, and had he not succeeded in having him re-called before time
allowed for carrying out those designs, there can be no doubt that Upper
Canada would have advanced more rapidly than she subsequently did
advance, and would have far surpassed any State in the Union.

In 1797, an act for still further regulation of the militia was passed;
but the nature of it does not appear in the statutes.

There was also passed an “Act for the better securing the province
against the King’s enemies.”

In 1801, there was still further legislation, and again in 1808, when
there was “an act to explain, amend, and reduce to one act of Parliament
the several laws now in being for the raising and training of the
militia.” And a suitable salary was to be allowed to the
Adjutant-General. Legislation at this time was deemed necessary, because
of the aggressive spirit manifested by the United States. The game of
conquest was already begun by the selfish statesmen of America, and even
foul means were being adopted to subvert British power on the continent.
The year prior, Lower Canada had taken steps under Mr. Dunn, to protect
themselves against a wily enemy. General Brock was earnestly engaged in
perfecting the defences of Quebec. In 1809 an act was passed respecting
billeting Her Majesty’s troops, and the Provincial Militia, and
furnishing them on the march, and impressing horses, carriages, oxen,
boats, &c.

Respecting the enrolment of the militia in accordance with the acts
first and subsequently passed, comparatively little can be said by the
writer. The earliest, and indeed the only account of an official nature
to be obtained, refers to the organization of the Hastings’ Militia.
Through the kindness of Mr. Sager, of the front of Thurlow, grandson of
the late Colonel William Bell, we have had placed in our possession, a
portion of the papers left by Colonel Bell, of an official and
semi-official character. In a communication dated at Kingston, 29th
November, 1798, John Ferguson, of that place, writes to Mr. William
Bell, of the Mohawk village as follows: “Having been appointed
Lieutenant of the County of Hastings, and being ordered to enrol the
militia without delay, I must request you will immediately proceed with
the enclosed notices, and cause them to be put up as directed. This is
the beginning of your duty, as I have recommended you to be Adjutant, as
well as captain of a company, and I have the satisfaction of telling you
that the President has assured me he will approve of my appointments.”
In a separate communication, Lieutenant Ferguson authorizes Captain Bell
“to give notice to the inhabitants of the county to attend a meeting of
Lieutenancy on Saturday, the 8th December next, at ten o’clock, at the
house occupied by David Harris, on lot 34, in the first concession of
Sidney, for the purpose of enrolment.”

It would seem that the second in command of the Hastings battalion, was
Major A. Chisholm.

Ferguson, writing 22nd February, 1799, says, “It appears from the
President’s letter, that there is something brewing to the westward.”

On the 25th February, 1799, Ferguson writes to Adjutant Bell, to require
the officers commanding companies “to cause the volunteers and drafts in
their respective companies to assemble, with such arms as they may have,
at the house of Ferguson, on the point of Sidney, lot 23, to be made
acquainted with the purport of a letter received from the Hon. Peter
Russell, President.”

Colonel Ferguson writing again on February 26, to Captain Bell, informs
him that the President has been pleased to approve of the appointments
made, and that he must meet him at Sidney, 5th of March, to receive his
commission. On the 1st March, he further writes thus, “there is some
appearance of the militia being embodied next spring, and that Captain
Bell is appointed to take command of the detachment should such an event
take place.”

In a communication dated, 10th March, 1799, Colonel Ferguson refers
Captain Bell to an inclosure from President Russell, giving directions
as to teaching the volunteers and drafts, “who are to assemble at
Wallbridge’s every other Saturday,” for platoon exercise, &c.

“List of officers of the Hastings Militia, as approved of by His Honor,
the President, with the dates of their commission.”

“John Ferguson, Lieutenant of County; date of commission, 1798. The
following officers were commissioned in December following:—Major
Alexander Chisholm, Captain Wm. Bell, Captain Samuel Sherwood, Captain
George W. Myers, Captain Lieutenant Matthias Marsh, Lieutenant Gilbert
Harris, Lieutenant John Stuart, Lieutenant John Chisholm, Lieutenant
John Fairman, sen., Lieutenant L. W. Myers, Ensigns David Simmons, Jacob
W. Myers, Alexander Chisholm, Robert Fairman, Samuel B. Gilbert,
Adjutant William Bell, Quarter-Master, John McIntosh.”

At the commencement of the war of 1812, John Ferguson, of Kingston, was
Colonel; William Bell, of Thurlow, Lieutenant-Colonel, and Alexander
Chisholm, Simon McNabb, S. B. Gilbert, Jacob W. Myers, L. W. Myers,
David Simmons, Gilbert Harris, John McIntosh, were Captains of 1st
Regiment Hastings Militia. John Thompson who had been a soldier in the
King’s Rangers, was Major.

In May, 1810, a notice was posted in Hastings to “all persons of the
battalion having in their possession arms and accoutrements belonging to
Her Majesty, to bring them in good order on the 4th of June, and they
will be furnished with powder and ball to shoot at a mark.”

We are informed by Mr. Adiel Sherwood, that James Breakenridge, who had
been an officer in Rogers’ corps, was appointed the first Lieutenant of
the County of Leeds under Simcoe, with authority to organize the body
and appoint the officers. Mr. Sherwood received his first commission as
Ensign, from him, to the first regiment of Leeds Militia in 1796. He was
shortly after commissioned a Lieutenant, which he remained until 1808,
when he was made Captain.

OFFICERS’ CLOTHING.—No sooner had the officers received their
commissions than the matter of military clothing came into
consideration, and steps were promptly taken to obtain suitable outfits,
in the way of scarlet coats, swords, and so forth. Reading the letters
which have come under notice, one is struck with the fact of men putting
themselves to trouble to procure costly uniform, when very many of them
could scarcely collect money enough to meet their wants. At that time
money was scarce and bartering was the ordinary mode of proceedings
between the farmer and dealer. The merchants of Kingston did not find it
necessary to keep material for officers’ dress, and consequently it had
to be procured at Montreal. The officers without money and unknown, in
Montreal, could scarcely expect to get credit there. It was under such
circumstances that Colonel Ferguson, the Lieutenant of the County of
Hastings, undertook to assist the officers under him. Concerted action
on their part was necessary, that all the coats might be alike, and
moreover, they might expect to have them supplied at a cheaper rate. The
following will now become intelligible:

“We, the following officers of Militia of the County of Hastings, having
agreed to have uniform clothing, do empower John Ferguson, Samuel
Sherwood, Matthias Marsh, and John McIntosh, to agree with any person to
furnish the materials, and we will pay for it as agreed upon by the
above persons—the uniform to be red coats with blue facings; long yellow
buttons and white lining with shoulder-straps—the Light Infantry to have
short coats with wings. Thurlow, 7th October, 1800.” (Signed)—John
Ferguson, William Bell, John Chisholm, Daniel Rose, John McIntosh, David
Simmons, John Fairman, Junr., Samuel Sherwood, Matthias Marsh.

A few days later Colonel Ferguson supplies a memorandum to Major Bell,
recommending James Dawson, Kingston, as the person to be employed to
make the coats, the material, or at least the cloth, to be bought at Mr.
Cumming’s. Ferguson also suggests that each person give his note of hand
for the sum until paid, from which it seems evident that he wished to be
free from personal responsibility. Three months later, and no steps had
been taken except by Ferguson, who, it appears, applied at Montreal for
his coat. He writes, “I have received my coat pattern from Montreal,”
and the cost of cloth and trimmings amounted to £4 7s. 7d., and “the
common price of making a regimental coat” was £1 3s. 4d., the epaulets
ready-made were £3 each. In another place, Colonel Ferguson says, “if
any of those gentlemen wish to have a coat from Montreal, and will put
into my hands sixteen bushels of wheat, as a part payment, I will send
for them, and they will surely find their profit in it”.

The following were among the first Militia officers connected with the
force in the Midland District.

Thomas Dorland, one of the first settlers of Adolphustown, was the first
captain commissioned in the township. He commanded a company in 1812, at
Kingston. His company partook of the loyal spirit which actuated the
captain, who indignantly said of the Americans, “they drove us from our
homes once and now come after us.” Captain Dorland was much liked, as an
officer, by his men.

Captain Trumpour, who commanded a company of horse, was generally
estimated as a commander.

Christopher Hagerman, a native of Adolphustown, arose by promotion from
an Ensign, to be Aide-de-Camp. The following is from the _Kingston
Gazette_:—“Head Quarters, Upper Canada, York, 15th December, 1813.
District General order. The Lieutenant-General commanding and President,
has been pleased to appoint Christopher Hagerman, Esq., to be Provincial
Aide-de-Camp to his Honor, and to enter the Provincial Rank of
Lieutenant Colonel on Mr. Hagerman.”

Major Spencer, who had been Colonel in Major Rogers’ regiment during the
Revolutionary war, died at the breaking out of the war of 1812, and was
buried in Fredericksburgh on his own place with military honors, he was
succeeded by Captain Thompson. Crawford was Colonel of a regiment of
Militia.

The following were officers in Ernesttown: Lieutenant Colonel James
Parrot, Captain Joshua Booth, C. Fralick, Noris Briscoe, Peter Daly,
Robert Clark, Sheldon Hawley. Lieutenants: Davis Hamby, Henry Day, John
Richards, Daniel Fraser, Robert Worlet. Ensigns: Isaac Fraser, David
Lockwood, Daniel Simmons, Abraham Amey, Solomon Johns, John Thorp, Senr.

Major Young, formerly ensign in Sir John Johnson’s regiment, was an
officer in the Prince Edward Militia for some time. He was at Kingston
in 1812, and died while on duty. Captain McDonnell of Marysburgh, was
also on duty at Kingston at that time. Captain Young, of the Carrying
Place, was likewise there, as well as his Ensign, W. H. Wallbridge, who
became Captain in 1831, Owen Richards being the Colonel. Lieutenant
Richard Howard, of Sophiasburgh, died March 1, 1814. Dengin Conger held
a commission in the first battalion of the Prince Edward Militia during
twenty-four years, fourteen of which he was Captain. William Ketcheson,
of Sidney, was commissioned Ensign in 1804; Lieutenant in 1812: Captain
toward the close of the war, served nine months at Kingston. Coleman, of
Belleville, was Captain of Provincial Light Dragoons.

The Militia of Adolphustown, Fredericksburgh, Ernesttown, and probably
of Kingston, were accustomed to meet on Finkle’s Place, below the wind
mill, before the war, 1812. Strange as it may now seem, the place for
training of the Prince Edward Militia was, for many years, at Grassy
Point, in the Sixth Town. All the way, not only from the extreme point
of Marysburgh, but from Amherst Island, and from the western part of
Ameliasburgh, the sparsely settled inhabitants were wont to come, by
anything but even roads, to this point for their stated training. They
met at this place until the year 1800, after which they all met at
Hallowell, Picton. Those from Ameliasburgh required two days to reach
the training place. Some years later a second place was allowed.




                             CHAPTER LXIII.

  CONTENTS—In 1812, around Bay Quinté—The declaration of war—The news
    at Kingston—The call to arms—Hastings—Events of Kingston—In 1813—
    Attack upon Sacket’s Harbour—Oswego—American Fleet before
    Kingston—Royal George—Kingston prepared—Chrysler’s farm—A
    “Postscript”—Along the St. Lawrence—Ribaldry—The Commissary—Capt.
    Wilkins—Quakers—Rate of pay—American prisoners—The wounded—
    Surgeons, Dougal, Meacham—Jonathan Philips—Militiamen’s reward—
    Militia orders—Parliamentary grants.


                            THE WAR OF 1812.

The call to arms was promptly and loyally responded to by the
inhabitants of the Midland District, including the militia of
Northumberland. The old veterans of former days, who had for so many
years been engaged in the peaceful occupation of farming, were aroused
to a high degree of indignation that their old enemies, who had driven
them away from old homes, should now threaten them in their hard earned
new ones. No wonder that these old sturdy loyalists and their sons
quickly obeyed the call to come in defense of their homes. To a certain
extent the Bay region was free from immediate danger. Excepting at
Kingston the inhabitants were not alarmed by the trumpet blast. There
was not here enacted such stirring events as transpired at Detroit, upon
the Niagara frontier, and below upon the St. Lawrence. Nevertheless
there was diligent preparation made for any contingency that might come
with the tide of war. The several regiments of militia called out, were
taken to Kingston and prepared for service whether it might be offensive
or defensive. Kingston being a naval station and having a dock-yard as
well as a military depot; and at the same time situated within a short
distance of the enemies’ territory, it was necessary that it should be
well garrisoned, and the surrounding country constantly watched. And
here the raw militia man was drilled for service, while they were ready
to defend the place.

The news of the declaration of war reached Kingston by a private letter
to Mr. Forsyth, from the States, and an hour and a half afterwards, says
one who was there, a letter having been conveyed to Col. Benson, the
drum beat to arms, and couriers were on their way with all haste to warn
out the militia along the Bay and in Northumberland. The belief was
entertained that Kingston would be a place of attack at once, and the
flank companies were ordered there immediately.

Upon the 27th June, 1812, John Ferguson, Colonel commanding 1st regiment
Hastings Militia, wrote from Kingston, to Lieut.-Colonel William Bell,
of Thurlow, “to cause the volunteers of the battalion who already
offered their services, to hold themselves in readiness for actual
service, and to apply to the Quartermaster for such arms as are in his
possession, to be used by the volunteers until others were got from
Kingston. Capt. John McIntosh to take command, the other Captain will be
J. W. Myers. Notice to be given at once, be it night or day, to meet on
the Plains—and be drilled by the Sergt.-Major.” Col. Bell received the
letter at sunset on the 29th, by the hands of John Weaver. A postscript
to the letter says “War is declared by the United States against Great
Britain.”

The militia of Hastings were hurried to Kingston, but after a few weeks
when it was seen that Kingston would not be immediately attacked, they
were ordered home. The next year the Northumberland Militia was ordered
to York, and soon saw service.

In connection with Kingston were two events which may be alluded to, one
was a hostile demonstration against Sacket’s Harbour, which had for its
object principally the destruction of a man-of-war, there building; the
other was an attempt, on the part of the Americans, to destroy the
British frigate, Royal George, lying at Kingston.

It was in May, 1813, that Sir George Prevost and Sir James L. Yeo,
arrived at Kingston, where were Capt. Barclay Pring and Furnis,
preparing for service the few vessels stationed there; among them one
lately launched, the Sir George Prevost of 30 guns, greeted them with a
salute from the vessels. The American fleet was at the head of the lake,
bombarding Fort George. Under these circumstances it was resolved to
make an attack upon Sackets Harbour, About 1000 men were embarked on
board the Wolfe of 24 guns, the Royal George of 24 guns, the Earl of
Moira, of 18 guns, and four armed schooners each carrying from 10 to 12
guns, with a number of batteaux, so that no time might be lost in the
debarkation. Two gun-boats were placed in readiness as a landing escort.
The boats were under the direction of Capt. Mulcaster, of the Royal
Navy, and the landing under the immediate superintendence of Sir George
Prevost and Sir James Yeo. The following account is from A. O. Petrie,
Esq., of Belleville, who was present as a volunteer, being then clerk to
Capt. Gray, Assistant Quartermaster-General. So quickly was the
expedition arranged that Petrie had no knowledge of it until about to
start. By permission of Capt. Gray, Mr. Petrie formed one of the party,
who, although forgetting to procure a red coat, did not forget his gun.
“Was in a batteau with Capt. Gray the greater part of the night, which
was crowded with men. Capt. Gray told Petrie that the object of the
expedition was to burn the ship there building, and told him he might
have a hand in it, Petrie said he would be there as soon as any one.
They landed about four o’clock in the morning, and Mr. Petrie carried
Capt. Gray on his back to the shore through the water. But before they
had landed the Americans fired upon them; they were soon relieved
however, by the gun-boat. They then advanced and was not far from the
ship when the bugle sounded the retreat. When he regained the boat he
found that his friend Capt. Gray had been killed.”

There is abundant evidence that the retreat was unnecessary, that the
enemy were fleeing; but one of those fearful mistakes occurred by which
the British and Canadian troops lost a victory which had been won. This
expedition exhibited the bravery of the militia men in the fullest
degree, and had the mind of Prevost remained unclouded, due reward would
have been secured. But the precipitate retreat of the Americans was
misunderstood by Prevost, he thought it a trap set. Says a writer, “It
was true that Fort Tomkins was about to fall into British hands. Already
the officers in charge of Navy Point, agreeably to orders, and supposing
the fort to be lost, had set on fire the naval magazine, containing all
the stores captured at York. The hospital and barracks were illuminating
the lake by their grand conflagration, and the frigate on the stocks had
been set on fire only to be extinguished when Prevost’s mind became
unsettled as to the ulterior design of the enemy. In the very moment of
fully accomplishing the purpose of the expedition, he ordered a retreat,
and the troops reached Kingston in safety.”

But, the following year an expedition left Kingston on the 4th May,
which arrived at Oswego on the following day, and took the fort; but the
stores had been removed.

About five miles from Kingston lies what is called Herkimer’s Point. It
was thought a thing not improbable that the Americans might land upon
this point and endeavor to enter Kingston. Here was a telegraph signal,
and two cannon had been planted there; afterward one, a very good one
was removed, lest it should fall into the hands of the enemy. From this
point a fair view of the Upper Gap was to be had. At last, one morning,
the Yankee fleet composed of some 14 sail, large and small, appeared off
the Upper Gap. A shot it is said was fired from the old windmill by some
militia men there, which was replied to. A schooner, the Simcoe was
chased, but escaped by running over a bar between some islands at
Herkimer’s Point. She received several shots, and subsequently sank when
she had reached Kingston. The inhabitants along the coast were ordered
into the interior with all their stock. The fleet passed along not far
from the shore, and the field artillery moved along at an equal pace,
and a firing was kept up between them. The writer’s father was present
on the occasion. He was Sergt. in Capt. Dorland’s Company from
Adolphustown, and was this morning on duty with his Company at
Herkimer’s Point. He was standing a short distance from the shore. The
brass artillery sent a ball through one of the enemy’s vessels, he saw
her haul off from the rest. The fleet fired back, and he saw the first
ball from them as it passed near him. The Governor’s horse being held by
a negro near by, while the Governor stood a little off, squatted to the
earth and the ball passed over his back, the ball then struck the top
rail of the fence, near by him, and went bounding and plowing up the
ground. All this he remembers distinctly. The artillery and troops
marched along opposite the fleet on their way to Kingston, and were
there paraded in a concealed spot behind the jail. It was a general
expectation that the enemy would attempt to land, and he fully
anticipated going into action. He could see the balls flying over the
buildings.

It was a natural expectation that the enemy would endeavour to possess
themselves of Kingston with its garrison and naval depot, and dock yard.
Every necessary step was taken to frustrate any designs that might be
entertained by the Americans against the place. In the Gazette of Oct.
9, 1813, is the following:

“By all accounts we understand that the Americans are on the eve of
attacking this place. It is our province to observe that their
intentions have become completely anticipated, and every necessary
preparation has been made to give them a warm reception. We are happy to
announce the arrival of Lieutenant-Colonel Drummond, with the first
detachment of the 104th Regiment, from Burlington Heights. This regiment
the 49th, and the corps of the Voltigeurs, may be expected here in the
course of to-day or to-morrow. These three gallant regiments, together
with our brave militia, who are pouring in from all quarters, and have
already assembled in considerable numbers, will be a sufficient
reinforcement, and with our present respectable garrison will be able to
repel any force which the enemy may bring against us. We are glad to
observe that every piece of artillery is most advantageously placed, and
we must really congratulate our fellow citizens on the formidable
appearance of every defensible portion in the vicinity of this town. It
has been the general rumor for a few days past that six or seven of our
small vessels have been taken on their way from the head of the lake to
this place and sent into Sackets; which rumor we fear is too true.”

The woods around Kingston, and upon Point Henry, were all cut down to
prevent a surprise. The enemy, however, did not attack Kingston, but
landed lower down the St. Lawrence. With what result the following
notice will show, _Kingston Gazette_, Saturday, November, 13, 1813.

  “POSTSCRIPT—HIGHLY IMPORTANT.”

  “The following important intelligence was received in town this
  morning by express.”

                                             CHRYSLERS, 11th November.

  The enemy attacked us this morning, suppose from 3 to 4,000 men in
  number, and has been completely repulsed and defeated, with a very
  considerable loss, a number of prisoners, and one General taken by
  us; the loss of the enemy cannot be less than 4 or 5,000. Ours has
  been severe. The Americans were commanded by Generals Lears and
  Boyd.

                                 (Signed)      WILLIAM MORRISON,
                                     Lieutenant Colonel 89th Regiment.

                          _Kingston Gazette_, Saturday, Nov. 20, 1813.

  We are assured on good authority, that the loss of the enemy in the
  late action at Williamsburgh, exceeded 1,000 in killed, wounded,
  prisoners and deserters; their flight was precipitate during the
  remainder of the day and night after the action; on the morning of
  the 12th they regained their own shore in the greatest confusion,
  and in momentary expectation of being attacked. Several officers of
  distinction were killed and wounded. Major General Covender was
  dangerously wounded, and is since dead; Lieutenant-Colonel Preston,
  noted for his ridiculous and insulting proclamation at Fort Erie,
  inviting the inhabitants of Upper Canada to place themselves under
  his protection, was dangerously wounded. One six-pounder field piece
  was taken on the charge, and about 120 prisoners, 350 or 400 stand
  of arms were collected on and near the field of action.

  “The Militia of Cornwall and the neighbouring townships have come
  forward in the most spirited and loyal manner, and are daily joining
  the troops, shewing a spirit worthy of their ancestors, and a noble
  example to their countrymen. We sincerely hope it will be followed,
  and if the inhabitants of Upper Canada are true to themselves, they
  can have no reason to fear all the efforts of the enemy.” Thus ended
  the attack which had been made with the usual boastful spirit.
  According to an American writer in the _New York Herald_, at that
  time, the American Commander-in-Chief was “a contemptible wretch,”
  guilty of “low ribaldry,” a drunkard, having to take “two drinks of
  hot rum to enable him to go through the operation of shaving,” and
  finally as given to singing

                 “I am now a going to Canada,
                 And there I will get money—
                 And there I’ll kiss the pretty squaws
                 They are as sweet as honey.”

Not alone did the Midland district supply its quota of men for the
incorporated militia; but the rich soil along the borders of the bay
gave abundantly to the commissariat department. During the first year of
the war, there was a time when the troops at Kingston had no more than a
week’s provision. Under these circumstances the Commandant enquired of
Colonel Cartwright if he knew of any one who could be depended upon to
raise the required supplies which were known to exist in the district.
Cartwright informed him that the required person could at once be
obtained in the person of Captain Robert Wilkins. Captain Wilkins, who
had raised a company in the beginning of the war, was accordingly sent
for, and instructed to prepare to undertake, as chief commissary, the
duty. He asked for written instructions and authority that he might not
be hindered in his work—that Militia Colonels, and sub-officers should
yield to his demands for men to act as batteaux men, or do any other
required duty to impress conveyances, &c. He was asked if he would be
ready to set out in a day or two. The reply was, I will start in half an
hour. “The devil you will,” said the Commandant, “so much the better,”
and Captain Wilkins quickly wrote his resignation as Captain to the
company, settled his hotel bill, and was on his way up the bay toward
Picton. Arrived there, he called upon Mr. Cummings, and desired him to
act as agent, which request was acceded to. He then pushed on to the
head of the bay, at the Carrying Place, and established an agency there,
afterwards his head-quarters. Proceeding to Myers’ Creek, he procured as
agent the services of Simon McNabb.

In the vicinity of Picton, were a considerable number of Quakers, who,
although not wanting in loyalty, would, not only, not take up arms, but
conscientiously would not sell the produce of their farms and take in
payment government bills, or “shin plasters,” then in circulation. Of
course, they could, without scruples, sell their grain to any one
without asking questions, for gold or silver but to take ephemeral paper
born of war, and its circulation recognizing a state of war, was another
thing. They absolutely refused to take it. Colonel Wilkins believing in
their sincerity, at once wrote to the Commandant at Kingston, for a
certain sum of gold, which was promptly forwarded. Thus the granaries of
the rich section of the county in Prince Edward were opened. But Wilkins
had not waited for the gold; on his own responsibility he had bought the
grain promising to pay them as they required, and Mr. Cummings had been
diligently carrying out his orders.

Commissary Wilkins had other difficulties to contend with. In some
sections there was a disposition to hold the produce until prices were
better, although pork, for instance, was fetching $14 a barrel. They
wished to get $20. The result of this was a “half martial law,” by which
provisions, wherever found, could be taken at a fair valuation. But
Colonel Wilkins says that this had rarely to be done. By kind
persuasion, showing the people that their duty should lead them to be
satisfied with a fair price, he succeeded in getting all the supplies of
provision he wanted.

The duties devolving upon him were numerous and onerous. He had to
supervise the batteaux carrying provisions up and down the bay from a
distance, and often would have to give orders for 3 or 400 men to be
collected to propel the batteaux, or assist to transport articles across
the Carrying Place.

The rate of pay given to an officer, acting as pilot, or conductor to
batteaux, was 10s. per day. Privates impressed to carry or assist
received 2s. 6d., with rations; but supplied themselves with blankets.
They were paid immediately their work was done, by Wilkins. We have
before us a requisition sent by Wilkins to Colonel Bell in April, 1814,
for 40 privates, and officer to manage the King’s batteaux, as there was
a quantity of provisions to be conveyed to Queenston Heights.

Although the foe found no footing, and made no attempt to land along the
bay, the inhabitants had the opportunity of seeing not a few of their
would be conquerors, as they passed as prisoners of war on their way to
Quebec. Many of the 1000 taken at Detroit had to march along the road
the whole length of the Province. Some were taken in batteaux, and
others were conveyed in vessels down the lake as far as Kingston. Many
of those who walked went by the way of the Prince Edward Peninsula, by
Wellington and Picton, crossing the bay at the Stone Mills, others went
by way of Napanee, and thence to Kingston. One way was as convenient as
the other, as there was no bridge across the River Trent. Persons are
now living along the routes who recollect the crest-fallen appearance of
these prisoners; the more so, because the people whom they had come to
invade, and dispossess, shewed them acts of kindness, and gave them food
to eat. One old lady, so old that she remembers the Revolutionary War in
1783, says she told them she had given the British troops all she had to
eat, as they passed up to conquer them, and she now as gladly gave food
to them. Those brought in batteaux were transported across the Carrying
Place into the bay. No doubt they appreciated the beauty of the scenery
along the route, and had their appetite affected for the land they
coveted.

On the morning of August 29, 1812, there arrived at Kingston, His
Majesty’s ships Royal George, Earl of Moira, and Prince Regent, with 400
prisoners, and General Hull.

The most of the prisoners taken at the Niagara frontier were carried in
batteaux, and by the bay, Colonel Scott among the rest.

At a later date, arrived the American prisoners, General Chandler and
Waider, captured at Stoney Creek. And again, “Arrived at this place
yesterday, March 1st, 1813, on their way to Quebec, whither they will
proceed to-day, Brigadier-General James Winchester, Colonel William
Lewis, and Major George Madison, attached to the American army, captured
by General Proctor on the River Rafine.” We copy the following:

“Quebec, November 2nd. On Friday and Saturday were escorted by a
detachment of Major Bell’s Cavalry, from their quarters, at Bauport, to
the new gaol, twenty-three American officers, and on the latter day were
also taken from the prison ships, and escorted by a detachment of the
103rd regiment to the same prison, a like number of non-commissioned
officers, making in all forty-six conformable to the General Orders of
the 27th October.”

But other sights than prisoners of war were presented during the
conflict. Owing to the exposed state of the Province in the west, after
the taking of York, a large number of the wounded were removed from the
Niagara region to Kingston, sometimes by ships, sometimes by batteau.
Many of those wounded at Lundy’s Lane were taken by schooner to York,
and thence by batteau down the lake shore, across the Carrying Place,
and along the bay. Among them was Sheriff Ruttan, who was left at his
father’s house, to the kind care of his family. In this connection it
may be observed that Surgeon Dougall, of Prince Edward Militia, served
nine months at Kingston, and Dr. Meacham, of Belleville, also served
during the most of the war.

We will here give an extract from an obituary notice taken from the
_Hastings Chronicle_.

  “A VETERAN OF 1812.—Of the Provincial troops, the Glengary regiment
  of Infantry took perhaps the most active part.” At the age of
  fifteen, Jonathan Phillips enlisted in this corps, then being raised
  throughout Canada. The urgent necessity for recruits inducing the
  authorities to accept youths even of that tender age. The story will
  best be told, as nearly as may be, in the veteran’s own words:—“I
  was born in Duchess County, State of New York, in the year 1796; my
  father came from Devonshire, England, and my mother from Edinburgh,
  Scotland. In 1809, my parents removed to Canada and settled in
  Fredericksburgh, County of Lennox and Addington. In January, 1812, I
  was working for Mr. Chapman, in Fredericksburgh, getting out square
  pine, oak, and staves; whilst thus employed, Captain Judkins,
  formerly of the 104th Regiment of the Line, asked me to enlist, and
  I joined the Glengary’s, and in a few days after was sent to
  Kingston with about twenty other recruits from Fredericksburgh,
  Richmond, and Ernesttown. We remained in Kingston till navigation
  opened, when the recruits assembled at that place, about 200 in all,
  descended the St. Lawrence in batteaux to Three Rivers, where we
  received uniforms, arms, and accoutrements, and commenced to learn
  our drill. The corps now numbered about 800.

  Towards autumn we were ordered to Quebec, in charge of about 1000
  prisoners from General Hull’s army, captured in the west. We
  remained at Quebec a month or six weeks. In October, 1812, we were
  ordered to the west, (the season is recalled from the recollection
  that as they marched from Quebec the farmers were busy cutting wheat
  on the hillsides, and the snow was falling at the time). The march
  was by the North Shore road to Montreal. Here we remained all
  winter, expecting the Americans to attack that city. In the month of
  March, before the sleighing was gone, the regiment was ordered to
  Kingston, taking with them several pieces of cannon, which were
  drawn by oxen. The men marched. The cattle that drew the cannon and
  baggage, were slaughtered at Kingston for provisions. We remained a
  month at Kingston, and then passed up the Bay of Quinté to the
  Carrying Place in batteaux. The baggage and batteaux were
  transported across the Isthmus into Lake Ontario, and we re-embarked
  for York. On our arrival at York we were forwarded with all despatch
  to Burlington Bay. We first met the Yankees at Stoney Creek, and
  then pushed on towards Fort George. We halted at the village of St
  Davids, and encamped at the cross-roads. The Yankees held Fort
  George; when they discovered we were so near them they retreated
  upon Black Creek. We followed them up, and had a battle with them at
  Lundy’s Lane, on 25th July, 1813. In this affair I was in the
  advance guard, or reconnoitering party. The enemy retreated upon
  Fort Erie, and we pursued them and had several skirmishes with them.
  They blew up the fort, and evacuated Canada. In the fall of the year
  we marched back to York; there we embarked in batteaux and came to
  the Carrying Place—thence we crossed into the Bay of Quinté, and
  thence to Kingston. From Kingston we marched to Adolphustowm Court
  House, and were billeted upon the farmers in that vicinity during
  the ensuing winter. There were from eight to ten men in each house.
  Whilst here we assembled every day at the Court House, at ten a.m.,
  for drill—we were at least 800 strong.

  On the 23rd March, 1814, all the three years’ men were paraded at
  the Court House, paid off and discharged. Each man so discharged
  drew 100 acres of land in Upper Canada, farming utensils, and a
  year’s provisions. The provisions were distributed every three
  months, at Robert Charles Wilkins’ store, at the Carrying Place.”

  From the time of his discharge till his decease, Phillips resided in
  the County of Hastings, pursuing the usual occupation of the first
  settlers of this county. For many years he followed “lumbering” in
  winter, and farming in the summer seasons, but being trustworthy,
  intelligent, and of a kindly disposition, his services were
  frequently sought after for various purposes. Several years ago, the
  farm which he drew for his military service, and which, for many
  years, afforded him a home and a support, he sold for the sum of
  $1,900, thus enjoying in his old age the well earned reward of the
  loyalty and courage of his youth. He died at his home, in the second
  concession, Rawdon, on the 15th February, 1868.


                        THE MILITIAMAN’S REWARD.

General Brock, on his way to Detroit, assembled the Legislature, and
amongst other Acts, one was passed for the organization of a battalion
of “Incorporated Militia,” a body distinct from the Sedentary Militia.
It was an inducement held out for action; and to properly fitted
persons, to raise companies and regiments for service during the war.
According to Ruttan, any one enlisting five persons was entitled to an
Ensigncy; ten, a Lieutenancy; twenty, a Captaincy; fifty, a Major; and
forty a Lieutenant-Colonel. Subsequently, in 1814 and 15, the
Legislature “voted the supplies necessary to fill up the incorporated
regiments to 800 men. A service of plate, and a pension of £20 per annum
for the wounded, or for the widows of the killed, as well as an address
to His Majesty for an allowance of 100 acres of land for each man,
whether belonging to the regiment of flank companies or the Sedentary
Militia.”

No truly patriotic and brave man will seek, or demand a promise of
reward for defending, or fighting for the interests of his country. He
requires no more than what comes from a consciousness of his duty done,
and his country’s honor maintained; the land of his birth, or choice,
preserved from the desecration of an invader’s foot. But when the deadly
conflict has incapacitated the brave one for the ordinary avocations of
life, and he is left, perhaps, with a family, unable to secure life’s
comforts; or when the torch of war—of the unchristian men, such as
President Madison, and his cold-blooded servant, Colonel McClure, at
Niagara,—leaves the homes of helpless women in ashes; or with wilful
wantonness destroys for the mere pleasure of gratifying a worse than
heathenish disposition, then the tried veteran has a right to be
rewarded in a substantial manner. The Government of Canada, as well as
that of Great Britain, has never been found remiss in affording suitable
rewards to those who were truly and knowingly worthy.

The smoke of war in 1815 had barely cleared away, after the Americans
had sought and obtained a peace, to them ignoble, ere the Canadian
Government took steps to secure a just reward to all worthy men. And to
this end the following general order appeared in the _Kingston Gazette_,
17th July, 1815, having reference to settlers.

                               “Military Secretary’s Office, Kingston.

  “Each soldier to receive 100 acres of land; officers entitled in the
  first instance to 200. To receive provisions for themselves and
  families for one year, that is those who had last or, who might
  require it on new land. Implements of husbandry, and tools to be
  supplied in sufficient quantities, and other comforts according to
  necessity to cultivate land. The land thus taken cannot be sold
  until after three year’s cultivation. Supt. Alex. McDonnell, and
  Angus McDonnell, of Glengary Fencibles, to take charge of the
  settlers.” The same date was issued as follows:

  “Acting Military Secretary, William Gibson, issued a notice at
  Kingston, 29th July, 1815, proclaiming that Boards to examine claims
  for losses met with during the American war, should meet during
  August and September, at Amherstburgh, Fort George, York, Kingston,
  and Fort Wellington.

  “All discharged soldiers, applying for lands are to give in their
  names to Edward Jones, late of the 9th Regiment, now residing in the
  old Barrack Square.” (Signed)—F. P. ROBINSON, _Secretary_, July 31.

  Again is found—“Lieutenant Governor’s Office, York, Dec. 10, 1816.

  “His Excellency, the Lieutenant-Governor has been pleased to appoint
  Surgeon Anthony Marshall, of Kingston, to examine and grant
  certificates of disability to Militiamen disabled from wounds
  received on service in defence of the Province during the late war.”
  (Signed)—EDWARD MCMAHON, _Assistant Secretary_.

  Among the Militia General Orders issued from the Adjutant General’s
  office, appeared the following:

  “His Excellency, Sir FREDERICK P. ROBINSON, Major-General
  Commanding, and Provincial Lieutenant-Governor of the Province of
  Upper Canada, has great satisfaction in publishing to the Militia of
  that Province, the following extract of a letter from Earl Bathurst,
  one of His Majesty’s Secretaries of State; addressed to His
  Excellency Sir Gordon Drummond, dated Downing-street, 13th June,
  1815.

  “I should have felt that I was acting unjustly towards you and the
  officers and men under your command, if I had forborne bringing
  under the notice of His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, the great
  meritorious exertions, so long and so successfully made by them for
  the preservation of the Upper Province. I am commanded to assure
  you, that His Royal Highness has contemplated your efforts with the
  highest satisfaction, not more on account of the skill and valor
  uniformly displayed by His Majesty’s Troops, in presence of the
  enemy, than of the patience with which the privations incident to
  the peculiar nature of the service were supported and finally
  overcome.”

  “You will not fail to convey to the Troops under your Command, the
  strongest expression of His Royal Highness’s approbation, and to
  accept for yourself and the army under your orders, that testimony
  which His Royal Highness is so anxious to bear, to the great service
  which you have rendered to your country.”

  “Nor is His Royal Highness insensible to the merits of the
  inhabitants of Upper Canada, or to the great assistance which the
  Militia of the Province afforded during the whole of the war. His
  Royal Highness trusts that you will express to them in adequate
  terms, the high sense which he entertains of their services, as
  having mainly contributed to the immediate preservation of the
  Province, and its future security.” N. COFFIN, _Adjutant General of
  Militia_.

In 1815 the Legislature granted £6,000, stg. £5,883 6s. 8d. to be
applied as follows:—To the officers, non-commissioned officers, and
privates of the incorporated militia, six months’ pay, £4,594 15s. 2d.
To the officers and non-commissioned officers of the line attached to
the incorporated militia, the well pay of their respective ranks in the
said corps, £1,000. To the officers and non-commissioned officers, and
privates of the incorporated militia artillery, six months’ pay, £288
11s. 6d. To the speaker of the House of Assembly, to purchase a sword to
be presented to Colonel Robinson, late of the incorporated militia, 100
guineas.




                             CHAPTER LXIV.

  CONTENTS—The Six Nations in 1812—American Animus—“Manifest Destiny”—
    Mohawk Indians—A right to defend their homes—Inconsistency—
    American Savages—Extract from Playter—Brock’s proclamation—Indian
    character, conduct, eloquence—Deserters in 1812—Few of them—
    Court-martials—The attempts at conquest by the Americans—The
    numbers—Result of war—Canadians saved the country—And can do so—
    Fraternal kindness.


                 THE SIX NATIONS AS CANADIANS IN 1812.

Maintaining their wonted hostile attitude to the Mohawks, and continuing
to charge, upon the British and Canadian Governments, an uncivilized
procedure, the Americans have attempted to create a belief that we waged
not a warfare according to civilized ideas. Civilization consists, in
the minds of Americans, in just those views, theories, beliefs, and
proceedings, which belong to the Great United States, and nothing can
emanate from their government that is not in strict accordance with
civilization,—their civilization. It so happens that one of their
beliefs is that destiny manifestly intends that they shall possess all
of North America. In 1812, a pretext was formed under the question of
the right to search American vessels for deserters from British service,
to declare war against England. This was regarded by Madison and the
Government at Washington, a fitting opportunity to make the already
cherished attempt to obtain the British Provinces. It was not in
accordance with their ideas of liberty and civilization, to give the
slightest heed to the wishes of the loyalists whom they had, years
before, forced away, and who had already done much to convert the
wilderness into a noble Province; the British subjects who had emigrated
to America, and preferred the yet infant colony of Canada, to the more
advanced, but distasteful, United States. And still more, the Mohawk
Indians, whom they had so cruelly treated, who had found homes under a
benign and fatherly government, were not only disregarded, but their
very right to defend their homes was denied by the very civilized
government which longed to get Canada. And hence we find attempts made
to cast obloquy, upon the Canadians, in connection with the war of 1812.
The people who strove, but vainly, to enlist the Mohawks in their
service in 1776, with wonderful inconsistency, in 1812, issue
proclamations that no quarter will be given to Indians, nor the
Canadians who were found fighting side by side. Yet, in the same war
they had all the Indians they could get to assist in their invasion of a
peaceful Province, who actually assisted in the hellish work of plunder
in the Niagara region. The Senecas took sides with them. The Indians who
had found a home in Canada, had a right to defend their country, and
willingly did they march to the field. They rendered important service
at Detroit when the immortal Brock hurled back the braggart foe, took
General Hull and his army prisoners, and conquered the territory of
Michigan. They likewise did good service at Queenston Heights.

A few instances occurred where individual Indians did lapse into the
warfare nature had implanted into their breasts. But let it be
distinctly and emphatically stated that they were exceptions. “But the
savage conduct of the white United States troops, was worse than the
employment of savages. In civilized wars, or the wars of Christian
people with each other, (alas! that Christians and war should be
associated!) the usual rule is to harm only those who aim to harm, and
to pass by the peaceable and unarmed. Considering, too, that the
Canadian people were not enemies, but had always friendly dispositions
towards the United States, that the war was merely for remote and
abstract questions, that the British Canadians never set the example,
that marauding was not the rule of the British officers and armies (as
evinced before the world in the wars with Bonaparte),—the United States
Government selecting the province as a battle field, should have treated
the inhabitants without arms as mere spectators of the conflict. Shame
on President Madison, and his cabinet of Christian “(?)” gentlemen, for
ordering their General, McClure (under the name and seal of John
Armstrong, Secretary of War), to burn up the Town of Niagara, and turn
400 women and children into the snow and icy streets, on a December day
of a rigid Canadian winter! Had the cruelty been accomplished by a tribe
of Indians, no astonishment would have been felt; but for Christians
thus to treat Christians, and for people of the same ancestry, to show
such barbarity, shows that the bad passions of the human heart are the
same in the civilized as in the savage. The war might have been carried
on, so that friendship might soon be resumed; but the dreadful
aggravation, left in the bosoms of the Canadian settlers, such hatred as
remains to the present day. The writer has even heard women say, on the
banks of the St. Lawrence, that if the Americans ever invaded Canada
again, they would shoulder muskets with their husbands. The democracy of
the United States, like the democracy of the French Revolution,
proffered liberty with the left hand, and scattered the fire-brands of
savage war with the right.”—(Playtor.)

The invading general having issued a proclamation, declaring that
Canadians found fighting beside the Indians should have no quarter.
Major-General Brock, in an address, issued to the Canadians at Fort
George, July 22nd, 1812, referring to this matter, says:—

“Be not dismayed at the unjustifiable threat of the Commander of the
enemy’s forces to refuse quarter, should an Indian appear in the ranks.

“The brave bands of the Aborigines which inhabit this colony were like
His Majesty’s other subjects punished for their zeal and fidelity, by
the loss of their possessions in the late colonies, and rewarded by His
Majesty with lands of superior value in the Province. The faith of the
British Government has never yet been violated by the Indians, who feel
that the soil they inherit is to them and their prosperity, protected
from the base arts so frequently devised to over-reach their simplicity.

“By what new principle are they to be prohibited from defending their
property? If their warfare from being different to that of the white
people, be more terrific than that of the enemy, let him retrace his
steps, they seek him not, and cannot expect to find women and children
in an invading army.

“But they are men, and have equal rights with all other men to defend
themselves and their property when invaded, more especially when they
find in the enemy’s camp a ferocious and mortal foe, using the same
warfare which the American commander affects to reprobate.”

“This inconsistent and unjustifiable threat of refusing quarter, for
such a cause as being found in arms with a brother sufferer, in defense
of invaded rights, must be exercised with the certain assurance of
retaliation, not only in the limited operations of war in this part of
the King’s dominion, but in every quarter of the globe; for the national
character of Britain is not less distinguished for humanity than strict
retributive justice, which will consider the execution of this inhuman
threat as deliberate murder, for which every subject of the offending
power must make expiation.”—(Signed, Isaac Brock.)

In concluding this subject, we will quote the language of one who rose
to sublime eloquence in connection with another event.

Seeing the on-coming moment of the extinction among the Americans—vainly
resisting the inevitable fate, but still lofty and noble. Thus spoke a
Seneca chief:—“Who is it causes this river to rise in the high
mountains, and to empty itself in the ocean? Who is it that causes to
blow the loud winds of winter, and that calms them again in summer? Who
is it that rears up the shade of those lofty forests, and blasts them
with the quick lightning at his pleasure? The same spirit, who gave you
a country on the other side of the waters, gave this land to us, and we
will defend it.”

We would fail in our whole task did we not refer to one more topic; that
concerning Deserters. There were, during the time of war, a few
instances of desertion. There is every reason to believe, that the wily
Americans sent emissaries into the country with the object of tampering
with the Canadians. The following, while having a local reference, will
explain the steps taken by Government to meet the requirements of the
day in this respect:

President’s Office, Upper Canada, Kingston, 24th March, 1814.

His Honor the President has been pleased to appoint by commission,
bearing this date, the under-mentioned gentlemen to be commissioners,
for carrying into effect the provisions of an Act passed in the last
session of the Legislature of this Province, entitled “An Act to empower
His Majesty, for a limited time, to secure and detain such persons as
His Majesty shall suspect of treasonable adherence to the enemy, in the
several districts of this Province respectively:—For _Midland District_—
The Hon. K. Cartwright, Alexander McDonell, Alexander Fisher, Thomas
Dorland, Timothy Thompson, Thomas Markland, Peter Smith, John Cumming,
James McNabb, Ebenezer Washburn, Robert C. Wilkins, James Young, William
Crawford.”

In every war there will be some desertions, and during the war of 1812,
there were found a few, and a few indeed, who were base enough to desert
from the ranks of the Canadian Militia.

The several attempts at conquest of Canada were:—

  1st Invasion Gen. Hull             at Sandwich       with   3,000 men.

  2nd Invasion Gen. VanRansler       at Wodworth       with   2,000 men.

  3rd Invasion Gen. Smyth            at Fort Erie      with   3,000 men.

  4th Invasion Gen. Pike             at York           with   2,500 men.

  5th Invasion Gen. Dearborne        at Fort George    with   3,000 men.

  6th Invasion Gen. Winchester, for  at Chryslers Farm with   3,000 men.
                 Montreal,

  7th Invasion Gen. Hampden          at Chateauguay R. with   8,000 men.

  8th Invasion Gen. Brown            at Fort Erie      with   5,000 men.

  9th Invasion Gen. Brown            at Lundy’s Lane   with   5,000 men.

 10th Invasion Gen. Izzard           at Fort Erie      with   8,000 men.

 11th Invasion Gen. Wilkinson        at Lacate Mills   with   2,500 men.

                                                            ———————

                Total number of men                         45,000.

“The foregoing is an aggregate of the attempt to invade Canada by the
United States forces when they sued for peace; and, when such was
proclaimed, they did not find themselves in possession of one inch of
Canadian Territory.”—(Clark.)

This glorious result was due, in a great measure, to the loyalty and
bravery of the Canadian Militia. The first year, the Militia alone saved
the Province.

The close of the war left no unpleasant remembrance. Called to arms for
the most noble purpose, that of defending their homes, they discharged
their duty bravely, but without unnecessary violence. There were no acts
of cruelty to be laid to their charge. It was only the unprincipled foe
that could be guilty of deeds of barbaric darkness. It remained for the
American General Harrison to burn, contrary to the rules of civilized
warfare, a peaceful village, and for General McClure to apply the torch
to the building which protected the wounded men, women, and children,
from the piercing cold of a December night, an outrage only equalled by
their firing on a British flag of truce, under General Ross, before the
capital Washington. These acts of villany met a just retribution. The
former by destroying the frontier settlements from Lewiston to Buffalo,
the latter by the destruction of the Capital. Canadians—Britons can deal
out just retribution, as well as they can defend their homes. And the
Americans ought to know, and remember, that no acts of cowardly villany
toward us will for ever go unpunished. They incited rebellion among us
in 1837–8. They have encouraged Fenianism, and assisted them as a people
to invade our territory, and kill our young men. For this will come a
day of judgment. It may not be this century, but it will come. Let but
one more attempt be made to secure a footing on our soil, and the
Americans will learn that Canadians can, and will, retaliate. The hardy
honest Canadian goaded to seek justice, will play the raider also. Ours
is a frontier, over which they may come and do much mischief; but
their’s is equally lengthy, and exposed. A sheet of flame will burst
along their frontier as well as ours, the destruction will not be all
one side.

During the Crimean war, the Canadians took great pleasure in giving
contributions for the relief of the soldiers, wives and children. But
this was only returning a like kindness displayed by England at the time
of the invasion and rapine in 1812. The wanton destruction of Canadian
homes brought much distress. By the _Kingston Gazette_ of 5th December,
1813, we see “that the total sum subscribed in the City of London for
the relief of the sufferers in Canada (which has come to our knowledge),
amounts to £10,419 10s. 0d.” And the same year “The General Assembly of
Nova Scotia gave to the distressed of Upper Canada £2,500.” An act of
fraternal kindness that Canadians have been ready to return during the
last year.




                              DIVISION XI.
                        ADVANCE OF CIVILIZATION.




                              CHAPTER LXV.

  CONTENTS—Canada’s first step in civilization—Slavery in America—By
    whom introduced—False charge—Slavery in Canada—History—Imperial
    Acts—Legislation in Canada—The several clauses—In Lower Canada—
    Justice Osgood—Slavery at the Rebellion—Among the U. E. Loyalists—
    Those who held slaves—Descendants of the slaves—“A British slave”—
    “For sale”—“Indian slave”—Upper Canada’s Record—Compared with the
    States—Liberty—Why the United States abolished slavery—Honor to
    whom honor is due.


                                SLAVERY.

We devote a chapter to the subject of slavery, which may be
appropriately noticed under _advance of civilization_. There can be no
greater indication of a truly civilized people than a successful attempt
to emancipate those in bondage. In this respect Upper Canada was very
far in advance of the United States, and even of England herself.

The Americans have not unfrequently essayed to fasten the ignominy of
this domestic institution upon the British nation, by asserting that it
was the English that first brought slaves to the American continent.
Supposing this to be true, it was the most pitiable attempt at excuse
for continuing the accursed thing, after Britain had spent millions to
abolish slavery in all her broad realm, that can possibly be imagined.
But it is all untrue that slaves were first brought by the English. It
was the Dutch, who found sale for them in Virginia. This was in 1620.
“Shortly after the New England States adopted the ‘institution,’ the
colonists and merchants introducing and controlling the whole trade,
Massachusetts leading the way.” And with all the cry, for ever echoing
in the North against the South, because of slavery; it was the Yankee
owners of ships, sent out from Northern ports to engage in the
world-condemned crime of the slave trade, that kept alive the worst
feature of American slavery, until the celebrated military necessity of
Lincoln, emancipated the Southern slaves.

The present generation of Canadians are almost ignorant of the fact that
the “institution” of slavery once existed in Canada, both Lower and
Upper. The proud and pleasing appellation, which Canada enjoyed for so
many years, of a safe asylum for slaves, who had effected their escape
from the United States, is in most cases alone known to have belonged to
us. But the record of our young country is so honorable upon the
question of slavery, that the fact that slaves did once breathe among
us, casts no stigma upon the maple leaf, no single stain upon her virgin
garments. The fact is, slavery could not live in Canada; much less grow.
The leading principles which guided the settlers of the country were of
too noble a nature to accept the monstrous system of human bondage as an
appendage of the Colony. They felt the truthfulness of the words, not
long before uttered by John Wesley, that slavery was the “sum of all
villainies,” and knew they would be villains of the deepest dye to
encourage it.

The history of slavery from the time Joseph was sold by his brothers
into Egypt, by which it may be inferred that persons were already held
in bondage, up to the present, is of no little interest; but it forms no
part of our task to give even a sketch of it, except in relation to its
existence in Canada.

In the year 1732, an Act was passed in the Imperial Parliament “for the
more easy recovery of debts in His Majesty’s plantations and colonies in
America,” by which “lands, houses, negroes, and other hereditaments and
real estate, shall be liable to be taken by due process of law for any
indebtedness.”

Another Imperial Act having reference to slavery in Canada, was passed
so late as 1790. The Act is intituled “An Act for encouraging new
settlers in His Majesty’s colonies and plantations in America.” Among
other things it is provided that if any persons shall come to the West
India Islands or the Province of Quebec, from United States, with the
view of settling, it shall be lawful for such, having obtained a license
from the Governor, to import among other things “any negroes” he may
possess. Such was the law in all Canada when Upper Canada was erected
into a distinct Province.

The first Session of Parliament in Upper Canada was naturally and
necessarily occupied in arranging the machinery requisite for the
government of the body public. The second Session witnessed legislation
to secure defence of the country by organizing a militia body; and also
upon two most important subjects having reference to moral principles,
viz.: concerning marriages, and

“_An Act to prevent the further introduction of slaves, and to limit the
term of contract for servitude within this Province._”

“Whereas it is unjust that a people who enjoy freedom by law, should
encourage the introduction of slaves, and whereas it is highly expedient
to abolish slavery in this Province, so far as the same may gradually be
done without violating private property; be it enacted by the King’s
Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Legislative Council and Assembly of the Province of Upper Canada,” &c.
It is enacted “that from and after the passing of this Act, so much of a
certain Act of the Parliament of Great Britain, entitled “An Act for
encouraging new settlers,” &c., as may enable the Governor or
Lieutenant-Governor of this Province, heretofore parcel of His Majesty’s
Province of Quebec, to grant a license for importing into the same, any
negro or negroes, shall be, and the same is hereby repealed; and that
from and after the passing of this Act, it shall not be lawful for the
Governor to grant a license for the importation of any negro or other
person to be subjected to the condition of a slave, or to a bounden
involuntary service for life, in any part of this Province, nor shall
any negro, or other person who shall come, or be brought into the
Province after the passing of this Act, be subject to the condition of a
slave, or to such service as aforesaid, within this Province, nor shall
any voluntary contract of service or indentures that may be entered into
by any parties within this Province, after the passing of this Act, be
binding upon them or either of them for a longer term than a term of
nine years.”

The second clause provided that the owners of slaves, at the time within
the Province, should be secured in their property and contracts already
made should not be affected. But in the third clause it is declared that

“In order to prevent the continuation of slavery within this Province,
be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that immediately from and
after the passing of this Act, every child that shall be born of a negro
mother, or other woman subjected to such service as aforesaid, shall
abide and remain with the master or mistress in whose service the mother
shall be living at the time of such child’s birth, (unless such mother
and child shall leave such service, by and with the consent of such
master or mistress) and such master or mistress shall, and is hereby
required to give proper nourishment and clothing to such child or
children, and shall and may put such child or children to work, when he,
she, or they shall be able so to do, and shall and may retain him or her
in their service until every such child shall have obtained the age of
25 years, at which time shall be entitled to demand his or her discharge
from, and shall be discharged by such master or mistress, from any
further service. And to the end that the age of such child or children
may be more easily ascertained, the master or mistress of the mother
thereof, shall, and is hereby required, to cause the day of the birth of
every such child as shall be born of a negro or other mother, subjected
to the condition of a slave, in their service, as aforesaid, to be
registered within three months after its birth, by the clerk of the
parish, township or place wherein such master or mistress reside, which
clerk shall be authorized to demand and receive the sum of one shilling
for registering the same. And in case any master or mistress shall
refuse or neglect to cause such register to be made within the time
aforesaid, and shall be convicted thereof, either on his or her
confession, or by the oath of one or more credible witnesses before any
justice of the peace, he or she shall for such offence forfeit and pay
the sum of £5 to the public stock of the district.

“And be it further enacted, that in case any master or mistress shall
detain any such child born in their service, after the passing of this
Act, under any pretence whatever, after such servant shall have attained
the age of 25 years, except by virtue of a contract of service or
indentures duly and voluntarily executed, after such discharge as
aforesaid, it shall be for such servant to apply for a discharge to any
justice of the peace,” and the party accused may be summoned to show
cause why the servant is not discharged. The master failing to prove the
servant under age, the justice is to discharge the same, and it was
“provided always that in case any issue shall be born of such children
during their infant servitude or after, such issue shall be entitled to
all the rights and privileges of free-born subjects.”

“And be it further enacted, that whenever any master or mistress shall
liberate or release any person subject to the condition of a slave from
their service, they shall at the same time give good and sufficient
security to the church or town wardens of the parish or township where
they live, that the person so released by them shall not become
chargeable to the same, or any other parish or township.” This act which
reflects so much glory upon the Upper Canadian Legislators, was passed
July 9, 1793. We thought our readers would prefer to see the act
complete than any synopsis we might prepare.

To Robert Gray, then Solicitor-General, is Upper Canada primarily
indebted for the above act. He was an earnest friend of the African
race. He was lost in the schooner _Speedy_, on Lake Ontario.

SLAVERY IN LOWER CANADA.—According to Garneau, in the year 1689, it was
proposed to introduce negroes to the colony of France. But it was
thought the climate would prove unsuitable. That slavery was, not long
after introduced, seems certain, and that it “was legally recognized in
Canada, is plain, from an ordinance of intendant Hocquart, dated 1736,
regulating the manner of emancipating slaves in Canada.”—(Bell.)

There are extant several royal declarations respecting slaves in the
colony, bearing dates, 1721, 1742, and 1745. At the Conquest there were
slaves in the province; and slavery “then increased for an instant, only
to disappear forever.” Slavery having continued to exist in Canada until
the first decade of the present century. By a stipulation in the treaty
of Montreal, the colonists were “to be allowed to retain their slaves.”
Says Bell in Garneau’s history, “Sir L. H. Lafontaine in 1859,
investigated this matter,” (respecting the existence of slaves in French
Canada), and from the published reports of his enquiries, it appears
that in 1799–1800, the citizens of Montreal presented requisitions to
Parliament, tending to cause the Legislature to vindicate the rights of
masters over their slaves. The applicants invoked in favor of their
demand, an ordinance rendered by Jacques Roudat, 9th intendant, dated
April 13, 1709, which edict was, they urged, in force when the
definitive treaty of peace was signed, and by consequence formed part
and parcel of the laws, usages, and customs, of Canada, recognized by
the Act of Quebec. The bills, on the subject, were introduced, in 1800,
1801, and 1803; but none of them passed. Since that time no Local
Legislation sanctioned this matter; and if the act of the Imperial
Parliament of 1797, had the effect of abolishing slavery in the British
plantations, these would, of course, include Canada. “But,” says Bell,
“the act in question could have no such effect. It only enacted, that
negroes could not be taken in execution as chattels, for the debts of
their masters, as had previously been the case in His Majesty’s American
Colonies.” It appears tolerably certain from the foregoing, that slaves
were introduced by the French into Canada, about the beginning of the
18th century, and that at least in 1709 it was a recognized institution,
by virtue of an edict issued by the intendant. And, when the country was
conquered by Great Britain, the colonists were “allowed to retain their
slaves.” In 1784, when Upper Canada was first settled, the number of
slaves in Lower Canada according to census was 304.

When Upper Canada, in 1793, took the lead in the whole of Britain’s vast
domain in legislating against slavery, Lower Canada continued to regard
it without disfavour; and, even in Montreal, endeavoured to fix the
chains of bondage more firmly upon the negro. But what the Provincial
Legislature did not, although presented with the example set by Upper
Canada, was done in a different way by Chief Justice Osgood, who in
1803, at Montreal, declared slavery inconsistent with the laws of the
country, and gave freedom to the persons in that condition. And when the
British Act of Emancipation was passed, in 1833, setting free the slaves
in all parts of the Empire, there was no slaves in Canada, Upper or
Lower. Thirty years previous had the evil been crushed in Lower Canada,
and forty years before Upper Canada had declared that it was “highly
expedient to abolish slavery,” and had enacted laws to secure its
abolition.

At the time of the rebellion of 1776–83, slavery was not limited to the
Southern States.

There were a good many held by the old Knickerbocker families, both
amongst the loyalists and rebels. When the families both of English and
Dutch nationality, came as refugees to Canada, there accompanied them a
number of slaves. In many cases these slaves came of their own accord,
would not be separated from their masters, with whom they always lived;
upon whose land they had been born. Indeed, the attachment between these
faithful blacks and their owners was frequently of the most enduring
nature, and, as we shall see, in some cases, although made free, they
would not leave their old places as domestics.

The Rev. Mr. Stuart in his memoir, says, in speaking of his removal to
Canada; “My negroes, being personal property, I take with me, one of
which being a young man, and capable of bearing arms, I have to give
£100 security to send back a white prisoner in his stead.” Capt. Joseph
Allan brought with him from New Jersey, after the war had ended, to
Upper Canada, three slaves—Tom, Sam and Sal. The two men, some years
after, ran away to Lower Canada. Their owner pursued them to Montreal,
and searched for them for ten days; but failed to get them. He sold the
female, Sal, with her child, to Silas Hill. This boy was afterwards sold
to Abram Barker, who kept him until he became twenty-one, when he became
free. Freedom did not suit him, as he became a worthless fellow. Major
VanAlstine had slaves, whom he treated with patriarchal kindness, and
who lived in great comfort in the old-fashioned Dutch cellar kitchen, in
his home, in Fourth Town. The Bogarts and John Huyck also had slaves.
Capt. Myers had slaves; one, Black Bet, would never leave him, but
continued until his death, under the care of her old master.

Cartwright, Herkimer, and Everitt, each was the owner of slaves. And
Powles Claus, of the Mohawk settlement, had two slaves.

Col. Clark speaks, in his memoirs of his mother’s death, in 1789, and of
the funeral, when the negro Joe drove the favorite horses, Jolly and
Bonny, before the sleigh, painted black. Again, Col. C. says: “After the
Declaration of Independence, drovers used to come in with droves of
horses, cattle, sheep and negroes, for the use of the troops, forts, and
settlers in Canada, and my father purchased his four negroes, three
males and one female, named Sue.” In 1812, she gladly returned to our
family, having become old and decrepit. She died in our house at
Fifteen-mile Creek, in 1814.

Sheriff Ruttan says, “My uncle brought two negro servants with him, who
were very faithful, hard working fellows.” During the year of famine,
they were sent from Adolphustown to Albany, “for four bushels of Indian
corn; a dreadful hazardous journey through the forest, with no road, and
the snow very deep. They executed this mission, and returned in safety.”

These slaves were generally faithful, good natured, and occasionally
mischievous. It was the custom, in the first years of Canada, to place
the ovens in the yard upon stakes, and they could be lifted off them. It
is related that sometimes they would carry off slyly, the oven when
filled with good things.

Sheriff Sherwood says: “In answer to your letter of yesterday, as
regards slaves, I only recollect two or three which settled in the
District of Johnstown; one in particular, named Cæsar Congo, owned by
Captain Justus Sherwood, who came with his family in the same brigade of
boats that my father and family did, and located about two miles above
Prescott. They were the very first actual settlers. Well I remember
Cæsar Congo, then a stout, strong young man, and who often took the late
Justice Sherwood, of Toronto, and myself on his back to assist us along,
while the boats were drawn up the rapids. Cæsar was sold to a half-pay
officer named Bottom, who settled about six miles above Prescott, who,
after a year’s service, gave Cæsar his freedom. Cæsar, soon after
married suitably, and by his industry obtained a snug little place in
the town of Brockville, where he lived many years, and died.”

Daniel Jones, father of Sir Daniel Jones, of Brockville, had a female
slave, and there were a few others residing in the district of which I
have no personal knowledge.

Squire Bleeker, of the Trent, had a slave called Ham. Abraham Cronk, of
Sophiasburgh, bought a female slave from Mrs. Simpson, of Myers’ Creek,
for $300. After a time, she returned to Mrs. Simpson, with whom she
lived till her death. This female had a daughter, who grew up to be an
unusually “smart girl.”

Nicholas Lazier had slaves. One, named Sal, was noted for her attachment
to Methodism, and would go long distances to attend meetings. As a
female slave, Black Betty was one of the first congregation, to which
the first Methodist preacher in America preached at New York, so this
woman was one of the first Methodists at the Bay, and in Upper Canada.
John Cronk and she were the only Methodists in the Township for a long
time.

Pryne, who lived a short distance above Bath, had two slaves. Col.
Thompson also had some, and Lieut. McGinness, of Amherst Isle, likewise
possessed them. Capt. Trumpour, of Adolphustown, had two negroes.
Leavens, of Belleville, bought a female slave of Wallbridge, for $100. A
son of hers was purchased by Captain McIntosh.

The Hon. Peter Russell, when Receiver-General, had a man and his wife as
slaves, with their son and two daughters.

Samuel Sherwood, writing to a person at Kingston, from Thurlow, in Oct.
1793, says, “My negro boy, and Canadian boy have absented themselves
last night without leave. I send Jim and two Indians in pursuit of them.
I beg, if you can give any assistance, you will do me that service.
McLean’s black woman is my boy’s mother, he may call to see her.”

We have before us the copy of an assignment made in 1824, by Eli Keeler,
of Haldimand, Newcastle, to William Bell, of Thurlow, of a Mulatto boy,
Tom, in which it is set forth, that the said boy has time unexpired to
serve as the child of a female slave, namely, ten years, from the 29th
Feb. 1824, according to the laws of the Province; for the sum of $75.
Probably, this was the last slave in Canada whose service closed, 1835.

There are, at the present time, a good many of the descendants of the
early Canadian slaves. Some of them have done badly, others again have
made themselves respectable and happy. The Mink family are descended
from an old slave that belonged to William Herkimer.

When made free, they, in many instances, preferred to remain in
connection with their old masters, and even to this day, their children
manifest a predilection for the name of their father’s master. In and
about Belleville, may yet be found such as spoken of. Most, or all of
these are descendants of “Black Bess” who, at different times, was in
possession of the Wallbridge’s, Leaven’s, and McLellan.

In the _Ottawa Citizen_ of 1867, appeared the following:

A BRITISH SLAVE.—An old negro appeared at the Court of Assize yesterday,
in a case of Morris vs. Hennerson. He is 101 years of age, and was
formerly a slave in Upper Canada, before the abolition of slavery in the
British possessions. He fought through the American war in 1812, on the
side of the British; was at the battles of Chippewa and Lundy’s Lane,
and was wounded at Sacket’s Harbour. He is in full possession of all his
faculties. He was born in New York State in 1766, and was the slave of a
U. E. Loyalist, who brought him to Canada. He was brought to this city
to prove the death of a person in 1803, and another in 1804.

It would seem odd enough at the present day to see the following
advertisements in a Canadian journal. This appeared in the _Gazette_,
Newark:

“FOR SALE.—A negro slave, 18 years of age, stout and healthy, has had
the small pox, and is capable of service, either in house or out door.
The terms will be made easy to the purchaser; and cash or new lands
received in payment. Enquire of the Printer.

“Niagara, November 28th, 1802.”

  “INDIAN SLAVE.—All persons are forbidden harboring, employing, or
  concealing my Indian slave, called Sal, as I am determined to
  prosecute any offender, to the utmost extremity of the law; and
  persons who may suffer her to remain on their premises for the space
  of half an hour, without my written consent, will be taken as
  offending, and dealt with according to law.

                                         (Signed)      CHARLES FIELDS.

  Niagara, August 28th, 1802.”

“FOR SALE.—The negro man and woman, the property of Mrs. (widow)
Clement. They have been bred to the business of a farm; will be sold on
highly advantageous terms, for cash or lands. Apply to Mrs. Clement.
Niagara, January 9th, 1802.”

We have seen that the record of Upper Canada with respect to the subject
of human bondage is particularly bright and honorable. This Province, in
its very infancy, took the lead in severing the fetters which a dark and
penurious age had rivetted upon the bodies of the African. This blackest
curse of the world, which the power of England assisted to create, and
which her offspring, the United States, continued to perpetuate for so
many years, was put aside by the young Province at the first; while, but
a few years later, a Canadian Judge, of Lower Canada, declared slavery
to be inconsistent with the laws of Canada. These are facts of which
every Canadian may well be proud. It was no “military necessity” which
caused the abolition of slavery in Canada. It was a question of right,
which the Canadian Parliament experienced no difficulty in solving. How
grand the spectacle! How noble the conduct, setting an example to the
world! In striking contrast, behold the United States. Flaunting their
flag of liberty before the gaze of the world, they cried “All men are
born free and equal, with the right to pursue that course which will
lead to happiness;” yet notwithstanding these principles, enunciated
with so much boldness, and, year after year, proclaimed by wordy fourth
of July orators; they continued, not only to hold slaves, but made the
bonds tighter until oceans of blood had been shed, and the Union was
almost destroyed—when it could not be saved with slavery, as Lincoln had
declared he would wish to save it; when it became necessary to strike a
blow, which the northern legions had been unable to deal the Southern
Confederacy, then, and not until then, were the slaves declared to be
free. Lincoln said he would save the Union with slavery, if he could,
failing this, then he would enlist the African slave to assist in saving
the Union, by giving them liberty. The Southern blacks owe their liberty
to-day, to the almost superhuman courage of the people with whom they
lived, who held them in bondage, not, it is true, because their masters
wished to liberate them; but because they were unable to successfully
combat the perfect flood of men that was poured against their northern
borders, and which infested their sea-board with an unbroken circle of
armed vessels, shutting them out from all means of carrying on the
unequal combat. It was this heroic attitude that made it necessary for
Lincoln to issue the famous proclamation. Let the freedman thank the
exigency which made necessary the step which broke the back of the
Confederacy, and thereby gave efficiency to the proclamation. It cannot
be doubted that the great body of abolitionists were from the
commencement of the war, anxious to secure the abolition of slavery; but
they were impotent, their councils to the President were unheeded, their
desires disregarded. The great mass of the Northerners had no sympathy
with the poor slave, they only cared for the Union; and many of them
were even dissatisfied that Lincoln should resort to the plan of freeing
them in order to save the Union. It is abundantly easy, now to declare
that, from the first the Washington Government was determined to abolish
slavery—that, from the first, it was a war for, and against the life of
that institution; but reading the events of the war, carefully scanning
each page of its history, examining each line, studying every word;
looking with an unbiassed eye upon the whole gigantic drama, it is
submitted there is no reason for believing that the _nation_ desired to
free the slave at all; but, always excepting the Abolitionist, submitted
to the necessity of setting the negro free, rather than sacrifice the
Union, or, rather than be conquered by the South.

All honor then, to the U. E. Loyalists, in Parliament assembled, at the
young capital of Newark—the representatives of the devoted band of
refugees, who had been made such by rebels, who pretended to fight for
“liberty,” who placed on record their interpretation of the word
Freedom; that it meant not liberty to a certain class; but to all,
irrespective of color. All honor to the noble Judge, who had the probity
and moral courage to enunciate a doctrine that at once made every
supposed slave in Lower Canada conscious of being a free man. This noble
beginning in the Canadas was followed by events no less interesting.
They became the asylum of the slave, who were not only sought after by
their Southern masters, but who were chased to the very borders by
Northerners themselves.




                             CHAPTER LXVI.

  CONTENTS—Returns to the Pioneer—Bay Region—Garden of Canada—Clogs—
    False views of settlers—Result—New blood—Good example—Anecdote—The
    “Family Compact”—Partiality—Origin of the _Compact_—Their conduct—
    The evil they did—A proposed Canadian Aristocracy—What it would
    have led to—What may come—“Peter Funks.”


                     THE OBSTACLES TO ADVANCEMENT.

In the section devoted to the first years of Upper Canada there has much
been said having reference to the growth and prosperity of the Province,
and advance of civilization, but something remains to be told which
requires particular notice, and without which our sketch would not be
complete.

The privations endured, and hardships overcome by the pioneers, tended
to make them careful and prudent, and no doubt led to the more permanent
prosperity of their children. As years wore away, comforts began to
reward their toil and patience. Acre after acre was brought under
cultivation; the log house received an addition, not large, but so as to
supply a second room, which a growing family of boys and girls seriously
demanded. Stock began to accumulate, and the future brightened up before
them. In considering the rate and degree of advancement, it must be
remembered that many of the first settlers were disbanded soldiers, and
understood as little about agriculture as about clearing the land.
“Though in most instances, a man of intelligence, the U. E. Loyalist
introduced but a primitive system of agriculture; and the facilities of
acquiring lands in the western part of the Province, has in a measure
prevented that admixture among them of the more scientific and educated
agriculturist from the old countries, which has helped to improve other
parts of Canada. It has been only of late years, and since the general
establishment of agricultural societies, that the real capacities of the
Midland District has begun to be developed, and improvements introduced,
which have resulted in making, even in the neighbourhood of Kingston,
where the soil was looked upon as comparatively unproductive, some of
the best and handsomest farms that can be seen in the Province.”—
(Cooper).

The region about the Bay because of its central position, received the
name of Midland District. This district embraced, and at the beginning
of the present century was regarded as the most important and
influential part of Canada. But times have changed. Upper Canada has
grown to be the largest and wealthiest province in British America, and
although improvements around the Bay have continued to increase, yet
westward the bulk of the immigrants have found a home, so that this
section no longer holds so important a position. Nevertheless, as in
former years, so now, the Bay country may be regarded as the garden of
Western Canada. Long since the wilderness has become a fruitful field,
and the fertile land has returned to the toiler a full reward. To the
tourist passing along the Bay the appearance of the lands is exceedingly
beautiful, especially in the days of summer; in June when all things are
clothed in the richest green, and some weeks later when the golden hues
of harvest have gathered over the fields of grain. The substantial
residences of the farmers tell of prosperity and advancement. The old
log house around which clustered so many associations, made dear by the
circumstances of pioneer life, has been superseded by the more
pretending frame building, and this again has been removed to be
followed by elegant, and often stately edifices. The work of improvement
and of beautifying has gone on from year to year, and now the
inhabitants of the Bay are in most cases living in affluence. But while
we mark the advancement, it must not be forgotten that it ought to have
been greater. While we give all credit to the soldier farmer, for
achieving so much, it must be related that there were certain
landholders who were as clogs to the wheel of progress, who displayed,
not that enterprize, at an early day, which they ought to have done. Had
the greedy few who hoarded up land, and grasped for more, and still
more; who stood ready to buy up the land of every unfortunate one
compelled to sell—had such made themselves acquainted with the
improvements in the agriculture of the day; had they, instead of leaving
the hard workers to make roads across their lands, opened them up and
provided a passible way; had they endeavored to make their land
productive, and by example to show the struggling farmers a better way,
and how to increase and advance; then, instead of merely the prosperity
which now exists, there would have been great wealth. The broad acres
are old enough, the landscape charming enough, the ground productive
enough, and had the proper spirit been abroad among the class mentioned,
those who aspired to be landed aristocrats then, the Bay Quinté might
have presented, not alone a beauty rivaling that of the Hudson, but also
the palatial mansions which adorn its shores. No more suitable spot in
the wide world can be found for ornamental residences, and it is to be
hoped that many with capital and taste, will very shortly proceed to set
examples, for the wealthy farmers in some degree, to imitate. It may be
said it were better the farmers and their children should have humble
ideas, and the fact may be adduced that not a few of the descendants of
the first settlers have, by their excesses in dress, and by trying to
imitate the habits of the dwellers of towns and cities, laid the
foundation of their ruin, by getting into the books of the merchant, and
ultimately becoming helpless in his hands, so that the fathers heritage
passed away to the stranger. But it is forgotten that such was
principally the case with those who, suddenly becoming well to do,
thought, if they desired to associate with the aristocracy, they must
dress in finer clothing, and have clean hands; that their daughters must
cease spinning, and the wife no longer do housework, that it was a
disgrace to be seen working. It was such feelings and views which
creeping in, paved the way for the downfall of many a one, who had begun
to get on in the world; whereas, had gentlemen by birth and education,
and there were such among the first settlers, given their time to actual
improvement, had shewn that they considered it honorable to work with
their hands. Had they carried their refinement into the more rural parts
and shewn that agriculture and gentility may go together, and that
education is as important for the agriculturist as for any other, both
in enabling him to till the soil with success, and in providing him with
those superior means of enjoyment which a wise Providence desires us to
possess, a most valuable service would have been rendered. It was
because the farmer thought he must dress as they did in the city, in
order to associate with them, and that labor was not honorable, that
ruin came to many a household, and the names of the first owner of farms
are not now there; who laid low the forest in the infancy of the
country. There is no forgetfulness that those blamed had once been
wealthy and occupied high positions in the old colonies, and owned broad
acres. It was perhaps natural that such persons, exiled in the
wilderness, and struggling with the stern realities of their existence,
should aim to regain a position of similar power and affluence, and were
determined that, although they might not see the return of those
independent days, their children should; so they continued to bend every
energy to secure it. But alas! how rarely was the dream realized! How
few of the limited number who first ruled the country—how few of the
Family Compact are now in the higher circle of independence.

Respecting the more common settler, it was to be expected that now and
then one would fail to advance—would fall behind in the onward march of
the country. The wonder is great that so few of the old soldiers made
shipwreck of the liberal grants bestowed by a motherly government. “The
sons of some of those men who have hewn out a home in the primitive
forest, have, in some cases, through bad management or bad conduct,
suffered their possessions to pass to the stranger: the speculating
merchant has grasped their all under a mortgage, and indolence or
dissipation has completed the ruin.”—(Cooper). “These evils, however,
are rapidly curing themselves or producing an equivalent or greater
amount of good—the idle and shiftless sells out to the practical and
industrious farmer, who introduces among his neighbours the latest
improvements in agricultural skill, and implements of husbandry; new
systems of drainage, new stock, or improved breeds occupy the attention
and employ the capital of the father of a family, whilst his wife and
daughters, though well able to compete with the gayest and grandest,
readily forego, when necessary, the imported and costly silks sported by
the family of a less enterprising neighbour, and set an example of
neatness, taste and appropriateness, in attire.”

Cooper, in his essay, relates the following: He says, “The ideas of
enterprize and modern progress entertained by some, may be illustrated
by the following anecdote: When a new road was proposed leading through
some of the best portions of the counties (of Frontenac, Lennox and
Addington), opening up others, and affording many and great advantages,
the benefits of which in short were apparent to all, and the only
question involved was how to raise the money, a very wealthy landholder,
who had amassed his thousands in the City of Kingston, and part of whose
possessions lay on the route, replied to an application to take stock,
that the effect of the road would be to enable people to steal his
timber, and he declined to subscribe! It is presumed that railroads and
electric telegraphs were not in fashion when this gentleman made his
money.” It was a feeling indulged by many similar to what this person
had, that from the first, assisted to retard the judicious development
of the young country.

Reference has been made to the “Family Compact.” In speaking of Bishop
Strachan, the statement is made that he was honest in his convictions
that Church and State would best serve the interest of Canada, that in
the uneducated state of the people, Government should reside altogether
or principally in the hands of the Governor and Executive Council. But
while the honesty of the late Bishop is thus freely admitted, it must at
the same time be acknowledged that those in authority were not
disinterested dispensers of the good things which always exist in
connection with a Government; and which particularly were provided for
the loyalist settlers of Upper Canada by the British Government. For
instance, it is averred by McMullen, and sharply reiterated by Gourlay,
that “the provisions, clothing, and farming utensils, granted by the
British Government for the benefit of the poor loyalists, were in many
cases handed over to favorites, in others allowed to become useless from
negligence in the public stores.”

It was not alone provisions, clothing, and farming utensils that were
enjoyed by the favorites. Lands—choice lands, were to be had by them, by
the choosing. Settlements in Upper Canada commenced at several points,
in each settlement were a few leading men, half-pay officers, or those
who had held important positions during the Revolutionary war, with a
good sprinkling of personal friends and relatives. At the capital, those
were in excess. These leading men throughout the Province were in the
most cases closely united by consanguinity and marriage; and soon became
even more closely identified in interest—forming a strong political
body, which derived its life-blood from the Executive. Its members
surrounded the gubernatorial throne, and had the ear of the Governor,
they formed his Councillors, and managed to become his friends; and as
such secured abundantly of the bounties. It was not enough that large
blocks of land should be held in reserve for the Crown, the Clergy, and
for the Indians, which last was right; but choice bits of land were
granted to members of this strong family, compacted together, to help
one another, and the land was left uncultivated, unimproved, until the
energies of the pioneers around had made it more valuable.

With the departure of Simcoe commenced the manipulations of this
_family_. That Governor had invited by proclamation, persons from the
United States, who might wish to become Canadians, and promised them
grants of land. But he was re-called, and his promises were not attended
to, although many came to the Province on their strength. Government
ignored them, and it is stated, with abundant show of plausibility, that
the reason was; that the growing family might have the more land to
choose from, and to leave for their children; and with some, that they
might live in England upon the rents derived from Canada, and so “men of
capital and enterprise, who had come into the Province furnished with
cattle and implements to commence the settlement of townships,” were
disappointed. Some of these persons, who desired to live under the
British flag, returned to the States to become truly republicans, others
remained to form an element in the party which was in time to rise in
opposition to the Family Compact. Such, in brief was the origin of the
_Family Compact_. They aspired not alone, to possess the best tracts of
land; but to fill every post of honor and emolument, to hold the reins
of Government exclusively, and to constitute a select circle of
nobility, to act the part of Lords over vassals; and to this end desired
to possess extensive lands upon which, and around which should grow the
belongings to estated gentlemen. When eight schools were granted certain
sums of money, and the teachers were nominated by the Governor, they
were generally half-pay officers. For a long time they had everything
pretty much their own way. If any dissented from them, he was accused of
disloyalty. Did an honest farmer question their honesty, he was pointed
out as one to be suspected—as seditious, and as one of the King’s
enemies, against whom it was thought necessary to legislate. Nor did the
House of Assembly, in any respect, for a long time, interfere with the
growth and prosperity of the Family Compact, for, generally speaking, a
member of the _family_ managed to get elected. The charge is not made
that all of the members of the early Parliaments were of the Compact;
but they were more or less under their influence.

A history of the Family Compact, would be a history of the political
life of Canada for many years, including the rebellion of 1837–8. The
attempt has not been made to cast unnecessary reproach upon the old tory
party of Upper Canada. As one brought up a conservative, the writer is
free to admit all mistakes committed by the party in early times—to
acknowledge that too much exclusiveness existed among those, forming the
leaders of the party, and occasionally a disregard of justice. And it is
freely admitted, that great mistakes were made by them, mistakes from
the effects of which the country has not yet recovered. But then, they
were but mistakes, and who does not make them.

It may, then, be said, that in some respects the Family Compact retarded
the advance of civilization. An aristocracy, or nobility cannot thrive
in a new country and will certainly fail, and in its efforts to live be
a drawback on improvements. In the debate in the Imperial Parliament
upon the constitution of Canada, Mr. Pitt expresses his desire to have
established in Canada, an hereditary nobility. While never endorsing the
extreme views of Gourlay, it is thought he spake the truth when he said
that “nothing could have so exposed the absurdity, as actual trial and
consequent ridicule. By this day we should have witnessed many a
pleasant farce. We should have seen, perhaps, the Duke of Ontario
leading in a cart of hay, my Lord Erie pitching, and Sir Peter Superior,
making the rick; or perhaps, his Grace might now have been figuring as a
petty-fogging lawyer, his Lordship as a pedlar, and, Sir Knight, as a
poor parson, starving on 5,000 acres of Clergy Reserves.”

If we allowed ourselves to speak of the future of our country, with
respect to this question, we should hesitate to say that the idea of
Pitt cannot be carried out. The repulsiveness of Republicanism is to
Canadians so great that we almost entertain the belief that our Dominion
may ultimately develope into a _nation_ with a constitutional monarchy,
with all its surroundings. It would certainly be infinitely preferable
to the “Model Republic.”

In strong contrast to the Family Compact, yet likewise obstructionists
in the work of advancement, we now mention another class.

We have said that not a few came to Canada from the States to trade with
the Canadians, to do work, and that some took up lands, and that of all
these a good many became true subjects of the realm, showing their
attachment by taking up arms in 1812. But while this fact is recognized,
it cannot be forgotten, that Canada was often, is even to-day, plagued
with a certain class, styled oftentimes speculators; but who are in
reality of the Peter Funk order. The class to whom reference is made, is
recognized by the honest Americans themselves. The _New York Tribune_,
after the close of the Southern war, in speaking of the South, says
thus: “We hear that many of the blacks, thoroughly distrusting their old
masters, place all confidence in the Yankees, who have recently come
among them, and will work for these on almost any terms. We regret this;
for while many of these Yankees will justify their confidence, others
will grossly abuse it. New England produces many of the best specimens
of the human race, and along with these, some of the very meanest beings
that ever stood on two legs—cunning, rapacious, hypocritical, ever ready
to skin a flint with a borrowed knife, and make (for others) soup out of
the peelings. This class soon became too well known at home—“run out,”
as the phrase is—when they wandered all over the earth, snuffling and
swindling, to the injury of the land that bore them and cast them out.
Now let it generally be presumed by the ignorant blacks of the South,
that a Yankee, because a Yankee, is necessarily their friend, and this
unclean brood will overspread the South like locusts, starting schools
and prayer-meetings at every cross-road, getting hold of abandoned or
confiscated plantations, and hiring laborers right and left, cutting
timber here, frying out tar and turpentine there, and growing corn,
cotton, rice, and sugar, which they will have sold at the earliest day
and run away with the proceeds, leaving the negroes in rags and
foodless, with winter just coming on.”

It is unnecessary to say, that civilization was never much advanced by
this class, many specimens of which, time after time, have visited
Canada.




                             CHAPTER LXVII.

  CONTENTS—Agriculture—Natural Products—Rice—Ginseng—Orchards—Plows—
    Reaping—Flax—Legislation—Agricultural Society organized by Simcoe—
    A Snuff Box—Fogies—Silver—Want of help—Midland District taking the
    lead—Societies—Legislative help—Prince Edward—Pearl Ashes—
    Factories—Tanneries—Breweries, Carding Machines—Paper—Lumber—First
    vehicles—Sleighs—Waggons—Home-made—Roads—First Public Conveyances—
    Stages—Fare—Building Greater—Sawing Mills introduced by the Dutch—
    First Brick Building—Myers’ House—Its past history—Furniture from
    Albany—Currency—Paper Money—Banks—First Merchants—Barter—Pedlars—
    On the Bay.


                     AGRICULTURAL MATTERS—PRODUCTS.

While the dense forest everywhere yet covered the earth, the shores of
the Bay yielded some natural productions. The wild plum was plentiful in
some places, a fruit which, although in its natural state somewhat sour,
has, under cultivation, much improved in size as well as quality; and
constitutes to this day a valuable luxury; at the same time, it is
exceedingly healthy. In some places also, at the proper seasons, was the
delicious cranberries. These were often brought by the Indians, and
exchanged for some article of the settlers. In some parts of the Bay,
there grew wild rice, which was much prized by the Indians, and which
was often used by the settlers. It is spoken of as an excellent article
of diet, and when boiled with meat, very tasty as well. The grain is
much smaller than the imported article; not unfrequently, the Indians
would collect the grain and sell it to the settlers.

In the year 1716, a Jesuit discovered in the forests of Canada, the
Ginseng plant, which grew also in China, where it was in much demand
because of certain supposed virtues to which, however, it rightly has no
claim. It is of the _genus Panax_. It “became a means of enriching the
colony for a time, by its exportation to China. A pound weight of it
worth two francs at Quebec, sold at Canton for twenty-five francs. Its
price ultimately rose to eighty francs per pound. One year, there was
sent thither, ginseng yielding a return of 500,000 francs. The high
price it obtained set everybody at work to find it. The plant was not in
proper condition till August or September; but with purblind avidity,
the seekers gathered it in May. The fresh plants ought to have been
slowly dried in the shade; the gatherers, anxious to get returns, dried
them in ovens. They then became worthless in Chinese estimation; and the
trade in it ceased almost as suddenly as it began.”—(Garneau.) But,
according to other authority, the trouble consisted in the actual
destruction of the plant, from gathering it too early in the season,
whereby the plant was killed, which seems a more likely thing. Some of
the settlers of the Bay had knowledge of the value of the plant in
Chinese estimation, as the following letter will show. It is addressed
to Mr. Wm. Bell, of Thurlow, who was subsequently known as Col. Bell.
“Fredericksburgh, 16th July, 1799. Sir—I have taken the liberty of
enclosing to you an advertisement, as you will see—Respecting Ginseng
roots, having in view to get all I can—and, thinking the Indians would
be likely to collect considerable of a quantity, will thank you to
acquaint them of it, or any of the white people you may see; and set up
the advertisement in the most public place about you.—And oblige, Your
very humble servant, Eben’r Washburn.”

Another letter, dated Aug. 27, 1799, says “I have to acknowledge the
attention you have paid to mine of prior date, in respect of Ginseng. I
will thank you to keep the refusal of the 500 lbs. you mention, if
possible, and collect more if you can.” Mr. Washburn says that he is
about to set out for Montreal; and it was, most likely, to see what
market he could make of the article in question.

One of the first considerations, after the settler had attained
comparative comfort, at least secured what was requisite for life, was
the planting of fruit trees. No doubt, the thoughts often reverted back
to the old orchards which had been left behind, and although the
pioneer, in the afternoon of life, could not expect to derive any
personal return for planting orchards, he was anxious to leave them to
his children. This same spirit—this regard for offspring, constituted a
marked feature in the U. E. Loyalists. The earliest reference to apple
trees we find, is in a letter, dated “Sydney, 22rd July, 1791,” from
John Ferguson, to William Bell, Kingston, requesting the latter to bring
some to Sidney.

The implements of husbandry, like the utensils for household use, were,
for a considerable time, of the rudest description. Among the articles
granted by government, were but few to use in the tilling of land and
the reaping of crops. Here and there was one who had come at a later
date, who had fetched with them articles more essential for farm use;
but the great majority had not such things as hoes, plows, pitch-forks,
scythes, &c. Many of these were made by the settlers, and were of the
rudest order, although generally strong enough, and therefore cumbersome
enough. It was many years before these home-made implements were
substituted by others made abroad. Gourlay informs us, writing, 1817,
that most of the farmers made their own plows and harrows. The iron of
the plow costing from nine to twelve dollars.

As the thickly covered ground, with stumps, materially interfered with
the sowing of grain; so with gathering the products. For several years,
they had only in use the sickle; but, in time, the Yankee pedlar brought
in the scythe, which ultimately took the place of the sickle.

It has been observed, in connection with the “clothing” of the early
settlers, that they turned their attention to the growing of flax, and
that it was made to afford comfortable and durable habiliments for both
sexes. There was, as well, early attention given to the cultivation of
hemp, “in pursuance of two several addresses of the House of Commons.”
In 1804, £1,000 was granted, and Commissioners appointed, to carry into
effect the object thereof, cultivation and exportation. The following
year, £45 was granted for the purchase of hemp seed. Another Act was
passed in 1808, to encourage its cultivation and exportation. Again,
there was legislation in 1810, and in 1812, when £1,000 was granted for
the purchase, sale and exportation of hemp, purchase of seed, and for
bounties. In 1822, it was enacted that £300 be appropriated to purchase
machinery for dressing hemp, that the machinery should be imported free,
the place for erection to be selected by the Governor, £50 was to be
applied annually to keep it in repair. But, notwithstanding all this
legislation, and substantial encouragement, the cultivation of hemp did
not succeed. The object seems to have been to supply hemp for the
British market, which derived it from Russia. But labor being cheaper in
that country than in Canada, there was no chance for success. Gourlay
says “This absurdity we must not wholly rest on the shoulders of the
simple Canadians. They were simple indeed, to be voting away the public
money; but it was a patriotic measure, and blindness may be allowable in
matters so elevated and pure. No doubt they were spurred on by our home
ministers, who should have known better. The failure produced more
beneficial effects than would have waited on success.”

Gov. Simcoe, who had the interest of the Province so much at heart, gave
his patronage to, if indeed he did not inspire the organization of the
first Agricultural Society, at Newark. Col. Clark, of Dalhousie says “I
have a perfect remembrance of the first Agricultural Society patronized
by Governor Simcoe, who subscribed his ten guineas a year cheerfully. My
father was a member, and the monthly dinners were given by the members
during the season, with the great silver snuff-box ornamented with the
horn of plenty on its lid.” The Col. remarks that this snuff-box was the
property of the society, and was taken care of by the one who was next
to furnish the dinner; and goes on to lament that it is lost, hoping it
may be found, “that it may remain as an heir-loom to tell posterity at
what an early period the progress of Agriculture was followed up and
which has led to its present high state of perfection.” Thus we see that
in Niagara District, at the very commencement of the Government of Upper
Canada, attention was given, even by the Governor, to agricultural
matters. Although the settlers upon the Niagara frontier, established
agricultural societies at an earlier date than any found in the Midland
Districts, it may be presumed that it was in a great measure due to the
impetus given to the settlement by the presence of the seat of
Government, and the influence exerted by the Governor. And, although
steps may not have been taken to secure their establishment along the
Bay Quinté, yet, even so early as the beginning of the last decade of
the last century, individuals were to be found who sought to introduce
improvements in agriculture, and everything that would advance the art.
At the same time it must be admitted that a vast number were content to
follow in the footsteps of their fathers so long as food and enough were
yielded by the soil. The land was plentiful, and productive. The course
of events was even as a steady stream. The old men satisfied with the
abundance of to-day, and drawing a contrast between the present and the
past, when starvation was at the door, and in the cupboard, were quite
content with the primitive system of agriculture, which his soldier
father had adopted. He saw no other mode of tilling the soil, and with
no reason sought not a change, so no innovations by scientific
agriculturalists disturbed the quiet repose of many of the steady going
plodders. Their sons rarely went abroad to learn the ways of others; and
often what did come to their ears was regarded with great suspicion.
They wanted no new-fangled notions. Hence, the farms were not fully
cultivated for many a day, parts remaining in a waste state for want of
drain. But the establishment of agricultural associations and the
occasional coming of a new man upon an old farm gradually, and
frequently very gradually, dispelled the old man’s ideas.

The townships most contiguous to the town of Kingston, naturally were
the first to experience prosperity, and gradually the adjacent townships
also became productive, and means were created to transport the produce
to the market.

We are told by Mrs. P——, daughter of John Ham, of Ernesttown, now
upwards of seventy, that she remembers one occasion, about the beginning
of the present century, that her father coming from Kingston, after
selling produce, had a bag of silver dollars, as much as she could lift—
$900. By this we learn that his farm was productive, his labor well
directed, and that hard cash was paid for his produce by the Kingston
merchants. It shows, moreover, that this was over and above the cost of
what was required of merchandize by him for his family using.

One serious drawback with the farmers often was the want of assistants.
If a farmer had not a son old enough to help, he was in great trouble
oftentimes to secure the necessary help. Frenchmen were frequently
employed, yet they could not be fully depended upon to remain during the
whole season. At harvest time, when large wages would be offered, the
hired man would often, without hesitation, leave his employer to go to
another who would give for a while, larger wages. In the absence of men,
the wife and daughters took hold of the fork, cradle, and rake.

If we may credit the statements of writers who had passed through Canada
in the beginning of the present century, the Midland District took the
lead in agricultural and social progress. Mr. Talbot, whose opinion of
the Canadians, as to their intelligence, education, morals, and
religion, was anything but flattering, made a pedestrian tour from the
west to Montreal, in 1823. He says of the inhabitants of Sidney,
Thurlow, and Richmond, that they possessed more wealth than any other
people in the Province. But Mr. Talbot passed only along the Kingston
Road by Napanee, and saw not the townships of the lower part of the bay,
or he would have seen even a more advanced state of prosperity and
agricultural wealth.

The first formation of agricultural societies was initiated by an Act of
Parliament, passed March 6, 1830. The object of this Act was to give
encouragement to organize associations in the several districts, “For
the purpose of importing live stock, grain, grass, seeds, useful
implements, or whatever else might conduce to the improvement of
agriculture.” It was enacted that each society, having had subscribed to
it £50, should, upon petitioning the Governor, receive the sum of £100.
This Act was to remain in force four years.

This Act was promptly responded to by the inhabitant of the Midland
District. So early as the 27th April following, a meeting of the
inhabitants of the district was held at the Court House, Kingston, H. C.
Thompson, Esq., Chairman, and H. Smyth, Esq., Secretary, and “A form of
a constitution for an Agricultural Society was read and submitted to the
meeting for approval.” The following day, the adjourned meeting adopted
a constitution for the Midland District Agricultural Society. The
officers were to be a President, five Vice-Presidents, thirty Directors,
a Treasurer, and a Secretary—One Vice-President, and six Directors to be
elected from each of the five counties in the district. John McCaulay,
Esq., was elected President; David J. Smith, Esq., Treasurer, and H. C.
Thompson, Esq., Secretary of the Society. It was “_Resolved_” by the
Society, “that Isaac Fraser, Esq., of Addington; Allan McPherson, Esq.,
of Lennox; Asa Worden, Esq., of Prince Edward; and William Bell, Esq.,
of Hastings, be requested to call meetings in their respective
counties,” and make returns as to whom had been elected for
Vice-Presidents and Directors. The Vice-President for the County of
Frontenac was John Marks, Esq.

In the _Hallowell Free Press_ of May 31, 1831, we find that the “Annual
Meeting of the Prince Edward Agricultural Association, was held at
Striker’s Inn, in Hallowell, on the 26th instant. The following officers
were chosen for the following year:—Stephen Miles, President; James
Colter, William Cunningham, and Paul Clapp, Vice-Presidents; S. P.
McPherson, Secretary; B. Dougall, Assistant Secretary; David Smith,
Treasurer.” The Government having offered a bounty of £100 to every
society which could raise £50; the Prince Edward Society raised the
necessary amount. But judging from a communication, which subsequently
appeared in the _Press_, the townships of Hallowell and Hillier, raised
the most of the amount, £46; Marysburgh, Sophiasburgh, and Ameliasburgh,
paying only £4.

In a General Report of Midland District, 1817, it is stated that “the
assess roll gives about 3,600 horses above two years; 100 oxen above
four years; 6,185 milch cows; 1,654 head of young cattle above two
years.”

The first great obstacle to agriculture in Upper Canada was the thickly
standing trees, many of which were large and hard in substance. For the
first years, with every one, destruction of the trees was the only
consideration, not even the ashes were thought of. But after a time,
their value for the manufacture of pot and pearl ashes was recognized.
In July, 1801, an Act was passed to appoint Inspectors of flour, and pot
and pearl ashes, in order to establish the credit of those articles in
foreign markets, the fee for examining to be threepence per barrel of
flour, and one shilling for every cask of pot ash.

The following appears in the _Kingston Gazette_, April 19, 1817, after
stating that “a Pearl and Pot Barley Factory is to be established in
Ernesttown. It is said this is the first establishment of the kind we
recollect to have heard of in Upper Canada, we have seen some of the
barley, and think it equal to that imported. Such domestic manufactories
ought to be encouraged by the community.”


                    AGRICULTURE—FACTORIES—MERCHANTS.

The first Brewery and Distillery established in Upper Canada, was built
by John Finkle, of Ernesttown, on his own place. He also kept, for many
years the only tavern between Kingston and York. Mr. Finkle also built
the first Masonic Lodge of Upper Canada, at his own expense, upon the
town plot of Fredericksburgh.

It is stated in Gourlay, that in 1817, there was in Kingston township “a
machine for carding wool, at the rate of nine-pence per pound.” In
Ernesttown “there were two carding, and one fulling machines. One barley
hulling mill, together with a blast furnace. Carding is nine-pence
half-penny per pound, and fulling six-pence per yard.” In Sophiasburgh
there was one carding machine. In Hallowell, there was one carding, and
one fulling machine. Thurlow had two carding machines, and two fulling
mills. In the whole Midland District, there were twenty-four grist-mills
and forty saw-mills.

John Morden, who came to the bay about 1790, “was a man well known in
his day, being a manufacturer of general household goods, as chairs,
spinning-wheels, flax-dressers, weaver’s apparatus, and other things. In
the house of mostly every descendant of a Quinté settler, may be found
some of his work, especially those who occupy the homesteads.”

As an indication of the desire of Government to encourage home
manufactures, we find that Parliament, in 1826, granted £125 as a
premium to the first “who should set up a manufactory of paper,” and
bring it into successful operation.

The valuable timber that thickly covered the ground, was, at the first,
indiscriminately destroyed, scarcely thinking of saving the ashes; but,
in a few years, the majestic pine, oak, elm, and other trees of the
forest were sought after by the lumber merchant. For many years,
lumbering was carried on in the Bay Quinté, and rafted to Montreal, and
was a source of no little profit.

The wilderness was trackless, and of course some time elapsed before
vehicles of any kind could be used, except in winter, after the bays and
rivers had frozen. Rude sleighs, made by inferior tools, were the first
made. At first hand-sleighs; and then heavier ones, to be used with oxen
and horses. But as the beasts of burden were scarce, there was but one
here and there, who had occasion to make a vehicle of any kind, except
what could be hauled by hand. The sleighs were often used in summer to
haul in grain and hay from the field. Some constructed a sort of waggon
by sawing a hard-wood tree, of suitable size across, making four pieces
about a foot in length. Holes having been bored through the centre of
the blocks, they constituted the wheels of the waggon. The axle-tree of
hard-wood was then fashioned to suit the wheels, and in this way a
rough, but serviceable vehicle was made, which proved of great use,
especially in hauling grain and hay to the place of stacking. The
account of one is given which would carry as much as 150 sheaves.

As years elapsed, and roads were cut and made passable, waggons were
introduced. One of the first waggons brought into the Province was, it
is said, by Jacob Cronk, of Sophiasburgh. It came from Duchess County,
New York. The second one was brought by James Way. Possibly this is not
true, but at least they were the first introduced into that township.

The first public conveyance by land between Kingston and Montreal, was
made by Dickenson. He called on Judge Cartwright to consult him about
opening a line of stage travel. Consequently, in 1808, a line was
established. It ran all the year round, though not so regularly in
summer as in winter. “Lumber gentlemen from Quebec traveled through by
the stage.”—(Finkle.)

It was not until the war of 1812, that a line of stages was commenced
between Kingston and York. By an advertisement in the _Kingston
Gazette_, it is learned that in June, 1817, “A stage was commenced
running from Kingston to York, leaving Kingston every Monday morning at
six o’clock, and York every Thursday morning, same hour.” “Persons
wishing for a passage will call at Mr. David Brown’s Inn, Kingston,
where the stage-books will be kept. From twenty to twenty-eight pounds
baggage will be allowed to each passenger, over this they must be
charged for. All baggage sent by the stage will be forwarded with care,
and delivered with punctuality, and all favors acknowledged by the
public’s humble servant. (Signed), Samuel Purdy, Kingston, January 23,
1817. N.B. Stage fare, eighteen dollars.”

The same year, Lieutenant Hull, traveling in Canada, writes that there
is a stage waggon from Montreal to Prescott, which carries the mail.
From thence to Kingston the mail is carried on horseback. The stage
waggon, he remarks, is the roughest conveyance on either side of the
Atlantic.

The first buildings were of logs, generally put up in their natural
rough state; now and then, as the Government mill at Kingston, the logs
were squared. There was only one way of procuring sawed lumber, and that
was by the whip saw. But few of the settlers thought of spending the
time and labor necessary to obtain what was not strictly necessary.
Houses, barns, saw-mills, flouring-mills, even breweries and
still-houses were all alike constructed of logs. Indeed, many a one had
no barn for years; stacking his grain, and thrashing upon the ground,
made smooth and hard. When, however, sawing-mills began to spring up
here and there, sawed lumber became a more common article, and after
several years, individuals, better off than others, began to put up
framed buildings, both houses and barns, and so forth. Sawing-mills were
introduced originally into America by the Dutch, and it was their
descendants who introduced them into Canada. But it was slowly done. It
required no little capital to procure even the small amount of machinery
which was then used, and to have it brought so long a distance. Then,
millwrights were not plentiful, and often inferior in skill. Indeed
there was nothing at hand by which to erect sawing-mills, until after
many years. In the meantime, the whip saw enabled them to construct
something like a door for the house and log barn; and rough sort of
furniture was made for the house. But toward the close of the last
century, sawing-mills became somewhat numerous. The demand for lumber
was foreseen, and those who had a water privilege set about to get up a
mill. Following the saw-mill came the grist-mill, which, though more
needed than the former, because of its greater expense, was not built
until a later period. It was about the first of 1800, that frame
buildings began to appear in the first, second, and third townships
particularly, to take the place of the log hut. Mr. George Finkle, of
Ernesttown, says, his father Henry Finkle, who, during the war, had
learned the use of carpenter’s tools, in the Engineer Department, built,
with his whip saw and cross-cut saw, the first frame house in the
country. He also built the first school-house, and a dwelling house for
the teacher on his own premises. Likewise, the first wharf along the
bay.

We have made somewhat extensive enquiries, and believe we are correct in
stating that the oldest brick building in Upper Canada is situated upon
the brow of the hill at Belleville. We also entertain the belief that it
was the first, certainly one of the very first brick buildings put up in
the Province. It is known as Myers’ House, having been built by Captain
Myers about the year 1794. This quaint edifice, upon which the tooth of
time is eating so peacefully, standing upon the brink of the hill was,
when new, of most imposing appearance; and, no doubt, stood up grandly,
overlooking the winding river, and the thickly set cedars at its base.
The bricks were made in Sidney _at the Myers Place_, five miles east of
Trenton. Captain Myers was a man of great hospitality, which was shared
in by his estimable spouse, whose short stature and genial face is
remembered by some yet living. They served visitors at the brick house
always with an excellent board. Here, many a distinguished traveler
between Kingston and York, Dr. Strachan among the number, found a
welcome. Not less so was it with the farmers round about, who came long
distances to get grists ground; all such were invited to the table and
supplied with a bed until the grist was ground. The furniture for the
house was procured at Albany.

In June, 1796, an Act was passed “for the better Regulation of certain
Coins current in the Province;” and it was enacted that the British
guinea, the Johannes of Portugal, the moidore of Portugal, the American
eagle, the British crown, the British shilling, the Spanish milled
dollar, the Spanish pistareen, the French crown, and several other
French pieces; the American dollar, should pass as legal tender at
certain specified value.

The punishment for tendering “a counterfeit, knowingly,” of any of the
gold or silver coins of Great Britain, Portugal, the United States,
Spain, or France, was to suffer one year’s imprisonment, and be set in
and upon the pillory for the space of one hour, in some conspicuous
place, and upon a second conviction, he should be adjudged guilty of
felony without benefit of clergy.

The first paper money issued in America, was by the Anglo-Americans in
1689, to pay the troops under Sir William Phipps, when he returned from
the unsuccessful seige of Quebec. The value ranged from ten pounds to
two shillings.

During the war of 1812, in 1813, an Act was passed “to facilitate the
circulation within the Province, of Army Bills, issued by the authority
of the Lower Province.” It was to continue one year unless peace was
declared.

The first Legislation in Upper Canada, with respect to banks, was in
1819, when the Bank of Kingston, or, as it was subsequently called
Pretended Bank of Upper Canada, was incorporated; but, this was
“forfeited by non-user,” although the institution was in operation,
under the title of “the President, Directors, and Company of the Bank of
Upper Canada.” Legislation was made in 1823, to settle the affairs of
the “pretended bank.” The commissioners were George Herkimer, Markland,
John Kirby, and John Macaulay. Repeated Acts were necessary before the
affairs of this company were fully settled.

In 1819, was also passed an Act to “form the Company of the Bank of
Upper Canada.” It was reserved for the assent of His Majesty, which was
given and made known by proclamation in 1821. Among the names of those
who petitioned for the Act of Incorporation, are those of Allan,
Baldwin, Legge, Jackson, Ridout, Boulton, Robinson, Macaulay, Cameron,
and Anderson. This bank, the failure of which so recently occurred, was,
in its time, of great benefit to the Province, and it deserved a better
fate.

A necessary attendant of civilization is a sufficient supply of such
merchandize as is requisite to give comfort, and even luxuries. The long
distance of the first settlers of Upper Canada from the marts of
commerce, with a barrier of forest, and the swift rapids of the St.
Lawrence, kept out for many a day, many comforts, and all luxuries. But
in time, persons engaged in the mercantile business, and articles of
various kinds began to find their way into the wilderness-bound colony.
The first merchants of the Province were engaged in the fur trade; but,
as time passed away, they found customers among the settlers, who bought
their produce, and, in return, brought to them goods.

Among the first, and the principal merchants of Upper Canada were
Duncan, of Matilda; Cartwright, of Kingston; Hamilton, of Queenstown;
and Robertson, of Sandwich. These gentlemen, we have seen, occupied
conspicuous positions, and amassed no little wealth; unless we except
Duncan, who removed. The Hon. Robert Hamilton, it is said, died, leaving
an estate worth £200,000.

Colonel Clarke, of Dalhousie, speaks of his brothers Peter and James,
who “turned merchants, having been supplied with an assortment of goods
from Montreal. In 1790, they went into the Indian trade at Kingston,
which had a great communication with the back lakes.”

We also learn that Mr. Macaulay carried on business first at Carleton
Island, and afterward at Kingston, with no little profit. One of the
oldest settlers in Kingston was Joseph Forsyth. He became one of the
first merchants in Kingston, and for many years conducted a lucrative
business with the Indians and settlers. He “ever maintained the
character of an upright and reputable merchant.” He died 20th September,
1813, aged fifty-three.

A bartering trade commenced between the settlers in the township of
Kingston, and the nearer townships, and some persons at Carleton Island;
gradually the field of operation was transferred to Kingston. Many of
the loyalists, who were constantly arriving, procured food and a few
other things at these places.

In 1817, there were in the Township of Kingston sixty-seven stores and
shops, this includes the different denominations of shops kept by
mechanics. In the whole of Midland District there were about
eighty-eight merchants’ shops: twenty-four storehouses. Mr. Gourlay
says, at this time, that Kingston is the third place in the Canadas,
Quebec and Montreal being first.

When want no longer rested upon the inhabitants, they began to look even
for comforts and luxuries. They were supplied now and then with
articles, both those essential to living, and those which may be called
comforts and luxuries, by itinerant merchants. These pedlars were
generally from the States, and often managed to drive bargains in which
the settler received not a fair return for the grain or other article he
parted with. But some of the pedlars were honest, and ultimately became
settlers and good loyal subjects. One of the first, probably the first,
to visit the western extremity of the bay, was one Asa Walbridge, an old
bachelor, somewhat eccentric, and withal shrewd, he not only turned an
honest penny, but contributed very much to the welfare and comfort of
the settlers. His head-quarters, when ashore, were at the mouth of
Myers’ Creek, where he was the first to erect a log house. It was he
brought in many of the first fruit trees, which have rendered many of
the old farms more valuable. He brought in the seeds from the States,
and planted numbers here and there, often from motives of kindness
alone. We have been told that all the old orchards in Prince Edward came
from his planting. Some of the merchants in Kingston entrusted goods to
local storekeepers by whom the settlers were also supplied with articles
of different kinds.

Dr. Armstrong says, I ought not to omit the name of James Cummings,
Esq., merchant, of the Port of Hallowell, now Picton. He was a man of
sterling integrity, upright and just in all his dealings. He was greatly
respected and esteemed, and died in the midst of his manhood, greatly
lamented, about the year 1818. He was a younger brother of the late John
Cummings, of Kingston.




                            CHAPTER LXVIII.

  CONTENTS—Steam vessels—Crossing the Atlantic in 1791—First Steam
    Vessel—Hudson—The second on the St. Lawrence—First across the
    Atlantic—In Upper Canada—_Frontenac_—Built in Ernesttown—The
    Builders—Finkle’s Point—Cost of Vessel—Dimensions—Launched—First
    Trip—Captain McKenzie—_Walk-in-the-Water_—_Queen Charlotte_—How
    Built—Upon Bay Quinté—Capt. Dennis—First year—Death of Dennis—
    Henry Gilderslieve—What he did—Other Steamboats—Canals—First in
    Upper Canada—Welland Canal—Desjardin—Rideau—Its object—Col. By—A
    proposed Canal—Railroads—The first in the world—Proposed Railway
    from Kingston to Toronto, 1846—In Prince Edward District—Increase
    of Population—Extract from Dr. Lillie—Comparison with the United
    States—Favorable to Canada—False Cries—The French—Midland
    District, 1818.


               THE FIRST STEAM VESSELS—CANALS, RAILWAYS.

We have already, under “Traveling in early Times,” spoken of the first
vessels that floated upon the waters of the western world, and we design
now to speak of those which advancing civilization brought, to a certain
extent, to supersede the original boats used by the Indians and first
European colonisers. At the present day Europe is brought into close
relationship with us by the swiftly running steamer, while the two
continents hold daily intercourse by means of the telegraph; yet, not a
century ago, it required many months for the slow-sailing ship to
traverse the breadth of the Atlantic. In 1789, mails with England was
only twice a year. At the time Simcoe came to Canada, in 1791, there
were only those merchant ships that made altogether eleven voyages in
the year. “A Traveler,” writes, that “regular packets across the
Atlantic, first sailed in 1764. The Liverpool Packet Line began running
in 1818.”

The river Hudson, named after the navigator of that name, who ascended
this splendid stream, called, by the native Indians, “The great River of
Mountains,” in 1609, has the honor of being the place whereon floated
the first steamboat that existed in the world. The boat was launched in
the year 1807, being named ‘Clermont.’ It was of 150 tons burden. The
engine was procured from Birmingham. Robert Fulton, of New York, though
not the originator of steam power, was the first in America who directed
it to the propelling of boats. Fulton, the pioneer in boats by steam,
lived not long enough to see accomplished the grand end of propelling
boats thus across the Atlantic. He died in 1815. The second steamboat
built in America, was launched at Montreal, 3rd Nov., 1809, built by
John Molson. It was called _Accommodation_, and plied between Montreal
and Quebec. At the first trip it carried ten passengers from Montreal to
Quebec, taking thirty-six hours. The whole city of Quebec came out to
see her enter the harbor. The fare was eight dollars down, and nine up.

It is found stated that the first steamboat from America to England, was
in 1819; and the first steamboat built in Great Britain was in 1812, by
Henry Bell, of Glasgow. But the following is found in the Portland
_Advertiser_:—“The first steamship which made the voyage, under steam
throughout, across the Atlantic, was the _Royal William_, in 1833. This
vessel was of 180 horse-power, and 1,000 tons burden, and built at a
place called Three Rivers, on the St. Lawrence, in Canada. The voyage
was made from Picton, Nova Scotia to Cowes, Isle of Wight.”

The first steamboat on Lake Ontario, the _Frontenac_, was built upon the
shores of the Bay, at Finkle’s Point, Ernesttown, eighteen miles from
Kingston, and within the corporation of Bath. She was commenced in
October, 1815, and launched the following season. The three years of war
had caused many changes in Upper Canada. On the whole, it may be said
that the war materially benefitted the Province. After peace, things did
not relapse into their former state. A spirit of enterprise was abroad,
especially in the mercantile community. The leading men of Kingston
conceived the idea of forming a company to build a steamboat, to ply on
Lake Ontario, and the navigable waters of the St. Lawrence. A company
was consequently formed, composed of individuals belonging to Kingston,
Niagara, Queenston, York, and Prescott. The shareholders of Kingston
were Joseph Forsyth, Yeomans, Marsh, Lawrence Herkimer, John Kirby,
Capt. Murney, William Mitchell, and, in fact, all of the principal men
except the Cartwright family. Advertisements were issued for tenders to
construct the boat. The advertisement was responded to by two parties; a
Scotchman, by the name of Bruce, from Montreal, and Henry Teabout, from
Sacket’s Harbor. Bruce was several days at Kingston before the other
person arrived, and he supposed he would get the contract. Mr. Finkle
says Teabout came with a letter from Hooker and Crane to Johns and
Finkle, informing them who Teabout was, and asking them to favor him
with their influence in procuring the contract. The letter was shown to
Mr. Kirby, of Kingston, who was one of the committee of the company. Mr.
Kirby assured Finkle and Johns, that notwithstanding the prejudice which
existed on account of the war, the tender of Teabout should receive
every justice. No other tender being made, the committee met and
decided, by a small majority, to accept Teabout’s. All those who voted
for Bruce “were either Scotch or of Scottish descent.” Teabout having
received the contract, at once, with Finkle, set about to find a place
to build. After two day’s examination of the coast, he selected Finkle’s
Point, in consequence of the gravelly nature of the shore, as thereby
would be obviated the delay which frequently followed rains, where soils
would not quickly dry. “The next consideration was to advance £5,000 to
go to New York and procure a ship carpenter and other necessaries to
commence operations. Accordingly, we (Johns and Finkle) became security,
with the understanding that so soon as the boat should be so far
advanced as to be considered worth the security, our bond would be
returned. So satisfactorily did the work progress, that the bond was
shortly handed to us by the Treasurer, who was William Mitchell. Here I
will digress a short time. During the war of 1812, David Eckford, the
Master ship-builder, of New York, was sent to Sacket’s Harbour, to take
charge of the ship building at that place, and brought with him his
carpenters. Among them were three young men, Henry Teabout, James
Chapman and William Smith. The last was born on Staten Island, the other
two in New York. Teabout and Smith served their time with Eckford.
Chapman was a block turner. At the close of the war, these three formed
a co-partnership, and Teabout, in contracting for building the
_Frontenac_, was acting for the company. Before building the steamboat,
they had built for themselves at Sacket’s Harbour, the _Kingston_, the
only craft plying between Sacket’s and Kingston, and a fine schooner for
the Lake, called the _Woolsley_. Chapman was in charge of the
_Kingston_, and was doing a more than ordinary profitable business.
Bruce’s friends wished to do something for him, and had him appointed,
at a guinea a day, to inspect the timber (of the Frontenac). His study
was to delay the building of the boat; there was a constant contest
between him and Teabout.”—(Finkle). The contract price of the wood work
was £7,000. When the boat was almost ready for the machinery, the
contractor’s funds were expended. The engine cost £7,000. Before the
vessel was completed, the cost reached nearly the sum of £20,000.

The Kingston _Gazette_ informs us that “On Saturday, the 7th of
September, 1816, the steamboat _Frontenac_ was launched at the village
of Ernesttown. A numerous concourse of people assembled on the occasion.
But, in consequence of an approaching shower, a part of the spectators
withdrew before the launch actually took place. The boat moved slowly
from her place, and descended with majestic sweep into her proper
element. The length of her keel is 150 feet; her deck, 170 feet; (the
tonnage was about 700). Her proportions strike the eye very agreeably;
and good judges have pronounced this to be the best piece of naval
architecture of the kind yet produced in America. It reflects honor upon
Messrs. Trebout and Chapman, the contractors, and their workmen; and
also upon the proprietors, the greater part of whom are among the most
respectable merchants and other inhabitants of the County of Frontenac,
from which the name is derived. The machinery for this valuable boat was
imported from England, and is said to be of an excellent structure. It
is expected that she will be finished and ready for use in a few weeks.
Steam navigation having succeeded to admiration in various rivers, the
application of it to the waters of the Lakes is an interesting
experiment. Every friend to public improvements must wish it all the
success which is due to a spirit of useful enterprise.” The _Gazette_
adds: “A steamboat was lately launched at Sacket’s Harbor. The opposite
side of the Lake, which not long ago vied with each other in the
building of ships of war, seem now to be equally emulous of commercial
superiority.” Gourlay says the boat at Sacket’s Harbor was on a smaller
scale, and less expensive. “She, the _Frontenac_, was estimated to cost
£14,000; before she commenced her watery walk, her cost exceeded
£20,000.”—(Finkle). “The deck was 170 feet long and thirty-two feet
wide, draws only eight feet when loaded. Two paddle-wheels, with about
forty feet circumference; answers slowly to the helm.”—(Howison).

The Kingston _Gazette_, of May 24, 1817, says, “Yesterday afternoon the
steamboat left Mr. Kirby’s wharf for the dock at Point Frederick. We are
sorry to hear, that through some accident, the machinery of one of the
wheels has been considerably damaged, notwithstanding which, however,
she moved with majestic grandeur against a strong wind. We understand
she has gone to the dock, it being a more convenient place for putting
in a suction pipe.” The same paper, of May 31, 1817, further says, “The
steamboat _Frontenac_, after having completed the necessary work at the
Naval Yard, left this port yesterday morning, for the purpose of taking
in wood at the Bay Quinté. A fresh breeze was blowing into the harbor,
against which she proceeded swiftly and steadily, to the admiration of a
great number of spectators. We congratulate the managers and proprietors
of this elegant boat, upon the prospects she affords of facilitating the
navigation of Lake Ontario, by furnishing an expeditious and _certain
mode_ of conveyance to its various ports.” “June 7th, 1817. The
_Frontenac_ left this port on Thursday (5th,) on her first trip for the
head of the Lake.” She was commanded by Capt. James McKenzie, of the
Royal Navy, the first trip she made, who continued in command until she
was no longer seaworthy. The Purser was A. G. Petrie, of Belleville, now
far advanced in years. The _Frontenac_ made the trip up and down the
Lake and River, to Prescott, once a week. Whether she went further west
than York, at first, is uncertain. Capt. Jas. McKenzie “came to Canada
with the first division of the Royal Navy, sent from England to serve on
the Lakes during the war of 1812. At the conclusion of the war, he
returned to England, and was placed on half pay; but his active habits
led him to consider and study the powers of the steam engine, and he
soon became acquainted with its complicated machinery. In 1816, he
returned to Kingston, and assisted in fitting up the _Frontenac_, which
he commanded till she was worn out. Since, he has commanded the
_Alciope_ on this Lake, and at the time of his death, (27th August,
1832, aged 50), was engaged in the construction of two other steamboats;
one at the head of the Lake, and one at Lake Simcoe; and was, on most
occasions, consulted respecting the management of steamboats, so that he
may justly be called the father of steam navigation in Upper Canada—his
death may be considered a great loss to society and to the country.”

The first steamboat built to ply on Lake Erie was “Walk-in-the-Water,”
built at Buffalo at the same time the “Frontenac” was built, and
commenced her watery walk about the same time.

Respecting the _Kingston_, built at Sacket’s Harbor, we find it stated
she was intended to ply between Lewiston and Ogdensburgh, but after a
trial of a few months the undertaking was found to be either
unprofitable or too much for the powers of the vessel to accomplish, and
she afterwards employed ten days in making the round trip of 600 miles.
She was 100 feet long and 24 feet wide, measuring 246 tons. The wheels
were about 11 feet in diameter, and the capacity of the engine 21 horse
power.

Almost immediately after the _Frontenac_ was launched a second steamboat
was commenced. The material which had been collected while building the
_Frontenac_ had not all been used, and went far in the construction of
the “Queen Charlotte,” which was destined to be the pioneer steamer upon
the Bay Quinté and River St. Lawrence, in its upper waters. She was
built by shares of £50 each. Johns and Finkle had nine shares. She was
built, (Gilderslieve being the principal shipwright,) launched, and
commenced running in the early part of 1818. The engine was furnished by
Brothers Wards of Montreal, being made at their foundry. She was not
long launched before she was ready to run. She made trips twice a week
from Wilkins’ wharf, at the Carrying Place, to Prescott. She was
commanded a few of the first trips by an old veteran captain named
Richardson, who lived then near Picton, and afterward to the close of
the season, by a young man named Mosier. Of the number of passengers on
the first trip we have no knowledge, but suppose them to be few, for
Belleville, then the largest place above Kingston, was a mere hamlet—
Trent, Hallowell, Adolphustown and Bath were the only stopping places
from the head of the Bay to Kingston. They were regulated in their
course, the first summer by frequently heaving the lead, an old
man-of-war’s-man being on board for the purpose. (Collins reported in
1788 that vessels drawing only from eight to ten feet of water can go
into the Bay Quinté). For two seasons she was commanded by Capt. Dennis;
Mr. Gilderslieve was purser the second and third seasons; and the fourth
commenced his captaincy, which lasted as long as the boat was seaworthy,
a period of nearly twenty years; he was, at the building, a master
shipwright, and became a stockholder.

Says Mrs. Carroll, “of the fare from place to place I have no knowledge,
but from the head of the bay to Kingston, the first season it was five
dollars, meals included.”

The good old Charlotte was a very acceptable improvement in the
navigation of the Bay. A few of the owners of sailing crafts, perhaps,
suffered for a time; but the settlers regarded her as an unmixed
blessing. During the first years she was so accommodating as to stop any
where to pick up a passenger from a small boat, or let one off.

The old inhabitants of to-day speak of her with words of kindness. But
the _Queen Charlotte_ has passed away. The last remembered of her was
her hull rotting away in the Cataraqui Bay above the bridge.

The steamer did not prove remunerative to the stockholders until
Gilderslieve became the commander. Of the second Captain, we produce the
subjoined from a Toronto daily of 1867:

  DEATH OF MR. DENNIS.—“We observe with much regret the death of
  Joseph Dennis, Esq., of Weston, and with it the severance of another
  link connecting us with the early history of this country. Mr.
  Dennis was born in New Brunswick in 1789, his father, the late John
  Dennis, having settled there after being driven out of the United
  States as a U. E. Loyalist. The family removed to Canada some three
  years later, Mr. John Dennis receiving a grant of land for his
  services and losses as a Loyalist. This land was selected on the
  Humber river, and on it he then settled and lived, till having been
  appointed Superintendent of the dock-yard, he removed to Kingston.

  “Our recently deceased friend, Mr. Joseph Dennis, was brought up in
  the dock-yard to a thorough knowledge of ship-building, which
  occupation, however, he soon exchanged for a more congenial one—that
  of sailing. Owning a vessel on the lake at the outbreak of the
  American war of 1812, he placed himself and his vessel at the
  disposal of the Government, and was attached to the Provincial
  Marine. In one of the actions on Lake Ontario he lost his vessel,
  was captured, and retained a prisoner in the hands of the enemy for
  some fifteen months. He subsequently commanded, we believe, the
  first steamer on the waters of Lake Ontario, the _Princess
  Charlotte_, which plied, as regularly as could be expected from a
  steamer of fifty years back, between the Bay of Quinté, Kingston,
  and Prescott. For the last six and thirty years Mr. Dennis had
  retired from active pursuits, retaining, till within the last year,
  remarkable vigour, which, however, he taxed but little excepting to
  indulge his taste in fishing, of which he was an enthusiastic
  disciple. A man of genial and happy temperament, of unbending
  integrity, of simple tastes and methodical habits, he was a type of
  man fast passing out of this country.”

The successor of the “Charlotte” was built by John G. Parker, called the
“Kingston” commanded for a time by John Grass. She did not prove so
serviceable as the “Charlotte.” Then followed the “Sir James Kemp,”
which was built also at Finkle’s Point.

A history of the first steamboats of the bay would be incomplete without
particular reference to one individual, whose name is even yet
associated with one of the steamboats which ply up and down the Bay.

Henry Gilderslieve came into Canada about a month before the Frontenac
was launched, in August, 1816. He was the son of a ship-builder, who
owned yards on the Connecticut river, and built vessels for the New York
market. Being a skilful shipwright he assisted to finish off the
Frontenac, and then as master ship-builder, assisted at the Charlotte.
During this time Mr. Gilderslieve himself built a packet named the
Minerva. In building this vessel he brought to his assistance the
knowledge he had acquired in his father’s yard. The result was, that
when she was taken to Kingston to receive her fittings out, Capt. Murney
examined her inside and out, and particularly her mould, which exceeded
anything he had seen, and declared her to be the best craft that ever
floated in the harbour of Kingston, which afterward she proved herself
to be, when plying two years as a packet between Toronto and Niagara.—
(Finkle).

At a later date Mr. Gilderslieve superintended the building of the “Sir
James Kemp,” at Finkle’s Point. This was the last built there, after
which Mr. Gilderslieve commenced building at Kingston. Here were
constructed the Barry, a lake boat, with two engines, which in its third
year of running collided with the schooner Kingston, at night, and
immediately sank, the passengers only being saved; the _Prince of
Wales_, the _New Era_, and the _Bay of Quinté_. Thus it will be seen
that Mr. Gilderslieve’s name is associated with most of the steamers
which have plowed the waters of the Bay, first as a skilful shipwright,
then commander and shareholder, and finally as a successful proprietor
of a ship-yard, and owner of vessels. Says one who knew him long: “Of
Mr. Gilderslieve’s business habits there are numerous evidences, for
years it seemed that everything he touched turned to gold, hence the
wealth he left behind him, and I can say, that during the many years I
knew him, I never heard a want of honest integrity laid to his charge,
he died in the fall of, I think, 1851, of cholera, much lamented and
greatly missed.”

The following we clip from a paper of 1842:

“In 1821 the new steamboat _Prince Edward_, built at Garden Island, and
intended for the Bay of Quinté route, made her trial trip to Bath and
back last week in three hours. She is beautifully finished, but being
rather _crank_ in the water, it will probably be necessary to give her
false sides.

“The new steamboat _Prince of Wales_, built at the marine railway by Mr.
Shea, and intended for the Bay, was also tried last week, and performed
well. She has the engine of the _Sir James Kempt_.”

CANALS.—The mighty water way from the Atlantic to the head water of the
western lakes is interrupted in its course by numerous rapids down
rock-strewed channels, and by the Falls of Niagara. These natural
obstacles to navigation had to be overcome by artificial means, before
the water road could become a highway. This has already been done for
vessels of a certain tonnage, by constructing the St. Lawrence Canals—
the Lachine Canal, Beauharnois, and Cornwall, which were completed in
1847; and the Welland Canal, across the Niagara District, to Lake Erie.
The distance from this Lake to Montreal, is 367 miles. The total fall in
this way, is 564 feet.

After the war of 1812, seeing the importance of inland navigation,
beyond the easy reach of an enemy, the country was explored with the
view of securing navigation between Montreal and Kingston. It was
proposed to open a “new route up the Ottawa to the mouth of the Rideau,
and up that river near to its head waters, thence by a short portage to
Kingston Mill river, and down that stream to Kingston;” but the want of
means for a time delayed the work, although, at the time mentioned,
advertisements were made for estimates.

The Welland Canal Company was incorporated in 1824, by Act of
Parliament. The projector and the most earnest worker securing this
important work, was the late William Hamilton Merritt.

The first canal cut in Canada, was that between Burlington Bay and Lake
Ontario. An Act to provide for this was passed in March, 1813.

In 1826, the Desjardin Canal Company was incorporated by Act of
Parliament, in accordance with the petition of Peter Desjardin, and
others, to make a canal between Burlington Bay and the village of
“Coats’ Paradise.”

“At Kingston is the outlet of that stupendous work, the Rideau Canal, an
immense military highway, connecting the Ottawa and St. Lawrence Rivers.
The locks on this canal are amongst the grandest structures of the same
nature in the world. The undertaking was commenced and carried out by
the Imperial Government at an immense expenditure, chiefly for military
purposes, as affording a safe channel for the conveyance of stores,
arms, &c., when the frontiers might be exposed, and partly with a
commercial view of avoiding the rapids of the St. Lawrence, at that time
considered insurmountable, in the transit from the sea-board. This canal
cost upwards of £1,000,000 sterling. Its construction was expected to
have great influence on the welfare of Kingston, and for some time such
influence was doubtlessly beneficially felt, as it was necessary to
trans-ship at that port as well the products of the west in their
carriage to the seaboard, as the merchandize for Western Canada in its
transportation westward, and to forward them by other crafts through the
canal, or up the lake, thus creating a large source of labor, outlay and
gain, and employment to numerous forwarders, agents, and workmen in the
transhipment. The improved navigation of the St. Lawrence, by the
construction of the St. Lawrence Canals, and the discovery of other and
better channels than were known, to a great extent abolished that source
of life and activity on the wharfs and in the harbours of the city.”

“The canal was intended for the passage of barges, both down and up
between Kingston and Bytown. Steamers, however, were soon made available
in guiding barges down the rapids, which came with return cargoes up the
canal. Now steam-tugs tow, through the course afforded by the St.
Lawrence Canals, both schooners and barges up as well as down the
stream, and where schooners are used, no transhipment necessarily takes
place at Kingston. Of late, it has been found profitable to employ
barges in the navigation of the St. Lawrence, or it has been found
profitable for schooners to confine their trip to the open lake, which,
with the facilities for the transhipment of grain afforded by an
extensive steam elevator, has caused a renewed life in that branch of
business.”

“This important work unites, as we have stated, the waters of the St.
Lawrence, with those of the Ottawa. It commences at Kingston, and
pursues a north-eastern direction through a chain of lakes, with most of
which it becomes identified in its course, until it intersects Rideau
River, continuing its route along the banks, and sometimes in the bed of
the river; it enters the Ottawa at Bytown, (now the City of Ottawa) in
north latitude 45° 23”—Length from Kingston to Bytown, including the
navigable courses, 126 miles, with 46 locks, each 33 feet wide, and 134
long. Ascent from Kingston to the Summit Pond by 15 locks, 162 feet.
Descent from the Summit Pond to the Ottawa by 32 locks, 283 feet; total
lockage, 455 feet, depression of the Ottawa below Lake Ontario, at
Kingston 141 feet; general course, north, north-east. It was commenced
in 1826, when the Duke of Wellington was in office, and it is understood
that that great General had a voice in the designing of this mighty
structure, which is not unworthy of his genius. Sir James Carmichael
Smith, of the Engineer’s Department, is said to have originated the idea
of its construction. It was carried out under the superintendence of
Colonel By, and the town at its junction with the Ottawa, was named
after him. That name has since been changed, when Bytown was made a
city. It was the only testimonial to his energy and skill, which
deserved from the Province some better acknowledgment. This great work,
together with the extensive lands along its line of route, held by the
Imperial Government, have lately been transferred to the Province, and
there is no doubt that its resources and revenue will be made the most
of for the general benefit of the country. Already the local trade along
its course is fast increasing, with the improvements and growth of the
settlements in the neighborhood of the Ottawa. The transport of iron ore
from the same section of the country to Kingston, also adds largely to
it. “Along the courses of the stream are valuable water privileges.”—
(Hooper.)

A vague story obtains, among some persons, that when the treaty of peace
between the United States and England took place in 1815, the former
agreed to pay £1,000,000, which the Duke of Wellington applied to this
purpose.

Below is given a document, the importance of which is unquestioned,
whether we consider the interests of those living along the bay, or the
welfare of the whole Province.


          REPORT OF THE SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON THE MURRAY CANAL.

  “The Select Committee appointed to enquire into the expediency of
  constructing a Canal to connect the head waters of the Bay of Quinté
  with Lake Ontario, usually called the “Murray Canal,” and also to
  enquire and report whether any money or lands are applicable to that
  purpose, and if so, what may be the amount or value thereof, beg
  leave to report:

  “That it appears a grant of land was made for the above purpose as
  early as the year 1796, and that said grant, which was then
  ascertained to contain some six thousand acres, was afterwards
  repeatedly acknowledged and confirmed;

  “That a reservation of sixty-four acres has been made between
  Presqu’isle Harbour and Bay of Quinté, on which said Canal was
  intended to be constructed;

  “That the value of the original reservation of six thousand acres
  was estimated by the Crown Lands Department, in 1839, at three
  pounds per acre, or eighteen thousand pounds currency;

  “That the construction of said Canal, in addition to the important
  commercial advantages which would be bestowed on the inhabitants of
  the counties adjacent to the Bay of Quinté, and the trade and
  navigation of the country generally, would afford most important
  facilities for the safe transport of men and munitions in time of
  war;

  “That your Committee obtained the evidence of Colonel McDougal,
  Adjutant General of Militia, which is appended to this Report;

  “That besides providing an admirable harbour of some seventy or
  eighty miles in length, capable of being made almost impregnable
  against attack, the great natural facilities for ship-building and
  for obtaining supplies of timber, would enable the Bay of Quinté to
  be used to great advantage for the repair or construction of ships
  of war;

  “That on reference to the Journals of the Legislative Assembly of
  1845, Your Committee found the record of a letter dated 7th January,
  1840, signed by R. B. Sullivan, then Commissioner of Crown Lands,
  which was furnished as a report on the whole question of the Murray
  Canal, for the information of the House, in reply to an Address to
  His Excellency, under date 17th January, 1845.

  “Your Committee have deemed it expedient to quote fully from this
  Report for the information of Your Honorable House.

  “_1st. Extract._—The suggestion of constructing the Canal by a grant
  of money instead of the appropriation of Crown Lands to that object,
  was adopted by the Legislative in an Address of the 16th February,
  1838, to His Excellency the Lieutenant Governor, on the subject,
  with the trust that in the estimation of amount to be granted in
  lieu of the reservation, due regard may be had to the increased
  value to which these lands may have attained. His Excellency, by
  answer of 26th February, was pleased to concur with the Address.

  “_Extract No. 2._—I would respectfully recommend to His Excellency
  to fix upon some specific sum which may be charged upon the Crown
  Reserve, and made payable out of its first disposable proceeds
  toward the completion of the Canal, and which, upon the cession of
  the Crown Revenue to the Legislature, will be considered a payment
  for which the faith of the Government is pledged and provided for in
  any Bill which may be passed for the granting a civil list in return
  for the cession of the Revenue.

  “That Your Committee examined a work, composed in the year 1826, by
  Major General Sir James Carmichael-Smyth, Baronet, entitled, _Precis
  of the Wars in Canada from 1755 to the Treaty of Ghent in 1814_, the
  said work having been published for the first time in 1862, by Sir
  James Carmichael, Baronet, son of the author. That this work
  contains the following statements, which may fairly be quoted in
  favor of the construction of this Canal.

  “In the dedication of this work to His Grace the Duke of Wellington,
  the author makes the following remarks:—

  “The events of these wars afford, in my opinion, a demonstration as
  clear as that of any proposition in _Euclid_, of the impossibility
  (under Divine Providence) of these Provinces ever being wrested from
  under Her Majesty’s authority by the Government of the United
  States, provided we avail ourselves of the military precautions in
  our power to adopt, by establishing those communications and
  occupying those points which posterity will one day learn with, if
  possible, increased respect for Your Grace’s great name, were
  principally suggested by Your Grace.”

At page 202 he writes as follows:—

  “Our Harbour and Naval Establishment at Kingston are very good
  indeed, and infinitely beyond what the Americans possess at Sacket’s
  Harbour. There cannot be a finer basin in the world than the Bay of
  Quinté. When Rideau Canal is completed there will be great
  facilities for forwarding stores to Kingston.”

At page 203:—

  “In the event of the Americans having the temporary command of the
  Lake (Ontario), York (now Toronto) would be useful for the
  protection of small craft and coasting vessels sailing from the Bay
  of Quinté with supplies for the Niagara Frontier.”

  In a Report published by the Board of Trade of the City of Montreal,
  for the year 1865, under the heading of “Improvement of Inland
  Navigation,” Your Committee have found the following:

  “AN IMPORTANT CUT-OFF.—It was long ago proposed to connect Lake
  Ontario with the Western extremity of the Bay Quinté, by a short
  Canal. The land required for such a purpose is reserved by the
  Government. The distance to be cut through is less than two miles;
  some additional dredging being, of course, required in the Bay and
  Lake to perfect the communication. As no lockage is requisite, the
  expense of the work would be small, while the advantage would be
  great.

  “When it is remembered that the stretch between Presqu’isle Harbor
  and Kingston is the most hazardous on Lake Ontario, the advantages
  to be derived from such a cut-off will be evident, especially in the
  fall, when stormy weather is most prevalent. Had that little Canal
  existed last year, a number of marine disasters might have been
  avoided. Any one who examines the map may see at once how important
  the Bay of Quinté would thus become in the event of hostilities on
  the Lake.”

  “That under these circumstances Your Committee would recommend that
  a Survey be made of the neck of land lying between Lake Ontario and
  the Bay of Quinté, and also of the Harbours of Presqu’isle and
  Weller’s Bay, for the purpose of ascertaining the cost and
  feasibility of said Canal, and that the Survey should be commenced
  with the least possible delay.

  Respectfully submitted, JAMES L. BIGGAR, _Chairman_.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

  APPENDIX.—COMMITTEE ROOM, Tuesday, 24th July, 1866.

  Colonel MACDOUGALL attended, and was examined as follows:

  By the Hon. Mr. _Holton_:

  Be pleased to state to the Committee your views of the importance,
  in a military point of view, of connecting the waters of Lake
  Ontario and the Bay of Quinté by a Canal, navigable for vessels of
  the largest class in use on Lake Ontario?—I am aware that the
  Defense Commission sent to Canada in 1862, to report on the general
  defenses of the Province, strongly recommend the formation of a
  Naval Station in the Bay of Quinté. The natural features of that bay
  render it, in my opinion, admirably adapted for such purpose. In the
  event of the Naval Station being formed in the Bay of Quinté, it
  would be of great importance to have a short and secure entrance
  direct from Lake Ontario to the head waters of the bay. This is
  especially the case in view of the fact that the stretch between
  Presqu’isle Harbour and Kingston is the most dangerous and difficult
  on the Lake. Judging by the map, and in ignorance of local
  peculiarities, it appears to me that the best means of obtaining
  such a short and secure communication as is above referred to, would
  be by cutting a Canal between the head waters of the Bay Quinté and
  Weller Bay. The mouth of the Canal would be covered and protected by
  the perfectly land-locked harbour of Weller Bay, the entrance to
  which, from Lake Ontario, is susceptible of being very easily
  defended against a hostile flotilla. If the case is considered of
  Canadian vessels running before a superior naval force of the enemy
  from the general direction of Toronto, it is obvious that if the
  first were obliged to weather the peninsula of Prince Edward, in
  certain winds they would run serious risks of being driven ashore or
  captured before they could make the entrance to the Bay of Quinté,
  whereas the same vessels, with the same wind as would expose them to
  destruction in the first supposed case, could enter the harbour of
  Weller Bay under full sail, and reach the head of Bay of Quinté
  without molestation. Even though it may not be in contemplation to
  establish a regular Naval Station in the Bay of Quinté, that bay
  would, in the case of war, afford an admirable harbour of refuge,
  which would be made perfectly secure in a military, or rather naval
  sense. Again, in case of war, the proposed Canal would supply the
  means of far safer communication by water, without the sacrifice of
  time between Kingston and Toronto, than could be afforded by the
  open Lake.

In the Hallowell _Free Press_, of February 1, 1831, is a communication
from “A country lad,” who says, “there are several new roads required,
but the one of most essential benefit to the inhabitants would be that
which would lead from Wellington Village, Hillier, across the peninsula
to Belleville. But, while improvements of this description are in
contemplation, it must not be forgotten that the period is not far
distant when the East Lake in Hallowell must be cleared out, and a canal
suitable for the passage of the Lake Ontario steamboats, cut from thence
to Hallowell Village. Such an improvement as this, would, in our
opinion, not only lessen the distance from Kingston to York, and make
the navigation less dangerous, but would afford a safe and commodious
harbour.”

RAILWAYS.—At the present day Canada, in addition to the unsurpassed
water ways through her vast extent, has the greatest number of miles of
railway according to inhabitants in any part of the world. In 1832, the
Liverpool and Manchester Railroad was completed, which was “the great
precursor of all railroads.” Fourteen years later, 1846, a movement was
initiated at Kingston to build a road from Wolfe Island, through
Kingston to Toronto, and a survey was ordered to be made. A part of the
“Report of the Preliminary Survey of Wolfe Island, Kingston and Toronto
Railroad,” is now before us, signed by James Cull and Thomas Gore, Civil
Engineers. In addition the engineering results of the Preliminary
Survey, they give in an appendix, the grounds upon which they form their
opinion as to the probable cost and revenue. It would be interesting to
give their statements in full did space allow.

“_Another scheme._—The Picton _Sun_ is advocating the building of a
railroad, running through the County of Prince Edward, and terminating
at Long Point, whence freight and passengers could be shipped to the
United States.”


                      THE INCREASE OF POPULATION.

It is a common belief among the Americans, a belief which is shared in
by the few Annexationists living in Canada, that increase of population,
productiveness of the soil, and general advance of civilization, are
very much greater in the several States of the Union than in Canada.
Nothing can be farther from the truth. Upper Canada especially, has
quite outstripped, even the most prosperous of all the original States
of the Union. A comparison of the statistics of the two countries shows
this to be undoubtedly the case. The following paragraph, taken from a
valuable little work by Dr. Lillie, affords some idea of the relative
progress of the two countries.

He says, “The rate at which Canada West is growing, and has been for the
last twenty or thirty years, equals, if it does not more than equal the
growth of the very best of the Western States. It will be seen from the
United States census, that the three States of Ohio, Michigan, and
Illinois, contained in 1830, 1,126,851. In 1850, they contained 355,000,
a little over 320 per cent. in twenty years. Canada West contained in
1830, 210,473, in 1749, it contained 791,000, which is over 375 per
cent. of the same period of twenty years. So that increase in the three
choice States was 55 per cent. less than that of Canada West during the
same time.”

And with respect to the products of the two countries, there is found
the same proportion in favor of Canada. So also with regard to vessels,
“in proportion to population the tonnage of Canada more than equals that
of the United States.” And if we look at the various internal
improvements as to canals, railroads, we find that Canada stands
pre-eminent in these things.

Yet, in the face of these facts we can find persons to say, and so
believe that Canada is behind the States in enterprise.

If we regard Lower Canada, it is found that the growth of population is
vastly greater than the States of Vermont and Maine, lying along her
border. Taking Canada as a whole, it is seen “that as compared with the
States, which in 1850 had a population as great as her own, the decimal
rate of increase was greater than in any of those States, with one
solitary exception.

“That in nine years to their ten, she lessened by two the number of
States which in 1850 had a population exceeding hers.

“That she maintained a decimal rate of increase greater than that of the
whole United States, not including the Western States and Territories,
but including California and the other States and Territories on the
Pacific.

“That Upper Canada maintained a decimal rate of increase greater by
one-half than that of the whole United States and Territories—more than
double that of all the United States, excluding the Western States—and
only falling short of the increase in the Western States and Territories
by 7 per cent.

“That in nine years to their ten, she passed four States of the Union,
which in 1850, had a population exceeding hers, leaving at the date of
the last census only five States which exceeded her in population.

The population of French Canada at the time of the revolution, did not
much exceed 70,000. Since that time the increase of population in Lower
Canada has been steady; not from immigration, so much as from early
marriages. In the year 1783, there were by enumeration 113,000. In 1831,
the French had increased 400,000. As we have said this was due to their
social habits.

The loyalists and soldiers that settled in Western Canada in 1783–4–5,
were estimated at 10,000. It has been stated that when Canada was
divided into two Provinces in 1791, the inhabitants had increased to
50,000; but this is doubted by some. It is said that the number did not
exceed 12,000. McMullen puts it at 20,000. The increase of population up
to the time of the war of 1812, was by no means rapid, at that time they
numbered about 70,000; 1822, 130,000; in 1837, 396,000. The number of
inhabitants in 1852 was somewhere about 500,000.

Coming to the Midland Districts, the townships around the bay, it is
found that here advancement was greater than elsewhere for many years.

Robert Gourlay sought information from the several townships of the
Province in 1817, in response it is stated, among other things, that
“the number of inhabited houses now is about 550; population about
2,850. This enumeration includes the town of Kingston, which contains
450 houses, and 2,250 souls. Thomas Markland says, 26th November, 1818,
“The reports from this district (Midland) being few in proportion and
several of these irregular, I cannot give an exact estimate of the
population, but the following will not be far wrong:—Kingston,
Ernesttown, Adolphustown, and Thurlow, contain 7,083. Fredericksburgh,
Marysburgh, Hallowell, Ameliasburgh, and Sidney, 5,340. Pittsburgh, with
Wolfe Island, Loborough, Portland, Camden, Richmond, and Rawdon, will
not average above 300 each, a total of 1,800. In Huntington, I heard
only of five settlers—say 24. Total white population 14,855; Indians
200. Total number of houses in Midland district was 900 Thomas Markland.
A report before me made in October 1826, by John Portt, says the total
number of white inhabitants of Tyendinagua is 27.




                             DIVISION XII.
        THE UNITED EMPIRE LOYALISTS—THE FATHERS OF UPPER CANADA.




                             CHAPTER LXIX.

  CONTENTS—Definition—A division—Their principles—Our position—
    Ancestry—Dutch—Puritans—Huguenots—New Rochelle—English writers—
    Talbot—Falsehoods—Canadian and English ancestry—Howison—Maligner—
    Gourlay’s reply—Palatines—Old names.


                    ANCESTRY OF THE U. E. LOYALISTS.

Under this designation allusion is made to all who left, or were
compelled to leave, the revolting colonies, and Independent States, and
who sought a home in the wilderness of Canada. There is, however, a
class which will be specially referred to, who, in subsequent years,
were placed upon the “U. E. list,” and who, by virtue thereof, secured
important privileges to themselves and family.

The United Empire Loyalist, was one who advocated, or wished to have
maintained, the _unity of the British empire_, who felt as much a Briton
in the colony of America, as if he were in old England; who desired to
perpetuate British rule in America; not blindly believing that no
imperfections could exist in such rule, but desiring to seek reform in a
conservative spirit. This class, we have seen, became, as the tide of
rebellion gained strength and violence, exceedingly obnoxious to those
in rebellion against their King and country. It will be convenient to
divide them into three classes, viz., (1.) Those who were forced to
leave during the contest, many of whom took part in the war; (2.) Those
who were driven away after the war, because they were known or suspected
to have sympathy with the loyalist party, and (3.) Those who would not
remain in the Republic, who voluntarily forsook the land of their birth
or adoption, and removed to a country which acknowledged the sovereignty
of the King of England. Many of this noble class relinquished
comfortable homes, rather than live under an alien flag; they preferred,
above all measure, to enter a wilderness and hew out a new home. They
would live anywhere, endure any toil, undergo any privation, so long as
they were in the King’s dominion, and the good old flag waved over their
head, and their families. It was oft declared that their bones should
lie on the King’s soil. These sentiments are taken, not from the
imagination, but from the accumulated testimony of those who have
supplied statements of family history. Elsewhere it has been shewn how
cruel were the persecutions made against the “tories,” how relentless
the spirit of vengefulness. All this, it may be said by some, should be
forgotten,—buried in the past, with the whigs and tories, both of whom
committed errors and outrages. Under certain circumstances this would be
the proper course—the course indicated by the great Ruler; but,
regarding the United States in the light derived from the statesmen,
orators, and the press, it cannot for a moment be allowed. Until the
descendants of those who successfully rebelled in 1776, cease to vilify
our fathers; until they can find other subject matter for their fourth
of July orations, than foul abuse of our country; until they can produce
school-books which are not stained by unjust and dishonest
representations; and books of a religious nature which are not marred by
unchristian, not to say untruthful, statements respecting Britain and
her colonies. Until the “Great Republic” can rise above the petty course
of perpetuating old feuds, we cannot—we whose fathers suffered, cannot
be required to shut our mouths, and thereby seemingly acquiesce in their
uncharitable and malignant charges against the U. E. Loyalists.
Washington was a rebel as much as Jefferson Davis, and history will
accord to the latter a character as honorable and distinguished as the
former. Washington succeeded against a power that put not forth the
gigantic efforts which the United States did to subjugate the States
over which Jefferson Davis presided. By the events of the civil war in
the United States, we, the descendants of those who occupied the same
relative position in the American Revolution, feel it right to be
guided.

The most of the loyalists were Americans by birth. Their feelings of
attachment to the realm, preponderated over the attachments which bound
them to the homes of their childhood and maturer years. The great
majority of those who settled Upper Canada were from the Provinces of
New York, Pennsylvania, and the New England States. New York, originally
a Dutch colony, had many loyal sons. Indeed this state was dragged into
the rebellion. It follows that a goodly number of the settlers around
the bay were of Dutch extraction, and possessed all the honesty and
industry peculiar to that people. The U. E. list, and the larger list of
refugees, include a large number of names unmistakably Dutch. But there
came from this state as well, many a true son of England, Ireland, and
Scotland, with a sprinkling of the Huguenots, and the Germans, the last
of whom began to emigrate to America in 1710. Many of the settlers of
Upper Canada may point with pride to their Dutch forefathers. Many
Canadians have an equal right also to boast of their Puritan fathers.
They more especially may point to the justice-loving ones who came to
America with honest William Penn, whose son was also a refugee from the
State his father founded, not by taking forceable possession, but by
_buying_ the land from the Indians.

Among the devoted band of firm adherents to the British Crown were not a
few of the descendants of the Huguenots, whose fathers had been
expatriated by the King of France, because they were Protestants, and
who had found safe homes in England. So early as 1686, a number of
Huguenots found their way to America. And from time to time, accessions
were made to the number by emigration. They mostly settled in
Westchester County, New York, in 1689, where a tract of land was
purchased for them by Jacob Leisler, of the Admiralty, and there founded
a town called New Rochelle, after Rochelle in France, noted for the
stand its inhabitants took against Roman Catholicism. In 1700, New
Rochelle had become quite a place, and here was found, when the
rebellion had commenced, “a vast number of Militia officers loyal to the
backbone.”—(Ruttan).

The ancestry of the U. E. Loyalists has been called in question, not by
the rebels alone, but by British subjects. The few instances constitute,
fortunately, but exceptions to a general rule. Travelers from Great
Britain have repeatedly, perhaps we may say persistently, displayed an
astonishing amount of ignorance of the people of Canada and its society.
Allowance can be made for a certain amount of egotism, but downright
bias is unworthy a high-minded writer. Incapable of examining any
subject, except from a stand point exclusively English, they have found
no difficulty in attributing the most unworthy and even scandalous
causes to a state of society to them unusual, and seemingly abnormal.
Perhaps no writer has so disgraced himself, in writing about Canada, as
Talbot. Certainly no one more ignobly essayed to injure Canadian
reputation in Great Britain than he. “Mr. Talbot has stated in his book
that most of the Canadians are descended from private soldiers or
settlers, or the illegitimate offspring of some gentlemen, or his
servant.” The writer had no scruples in publishing a falsehood. Full
well he knew how noble had been the conduct of the U. E. Loyalists as a
class; who relinquished property, homes,—everything for a cause dear to
their heart. Private soldiers indeed! They thought it no disgrace to
enter the ranks to help to suppress an unrighteous rebellion. And the
descendants of the private soldiers feel it an honor to claim them for
sires. Mr. Talbot, we are informed, came to Canada to speculate in
lands; and his record does not justify him in casting a stigma upon the
fathers of Canada. Could we accept a slanderous statement as true, yet
the question might be raised:—Is not their origin as good as many of the
great houses of Great Britain would be found, were we enabled to trace
back their pedigree. Probably, at the present time, and perhaps at no
time, did more than a few read the pages of Mr. Talbot’s production. But
lest there might come a time when the false statements should be
reiterated, we felt it our duty to thus advert to the subject.

Another writer, to whom it may be well to refer, is one Dr. John
Howison, who wrote _Sketches of Upper Canada_. His knowledge of Canada
was pretty much confined to the Niagara district. Hear what the great
(?) man said of the inhabitants. “They are still the untutored
incorrigible beings that they probably were, when the ruffian remnant of
a disbanded regiment, or the outlawed refuse of some European nation,
they sought refuge in the wilds of Upper Canada, aware that they would
neither find means of subsistence, nor be countenanced in any civilized
country. Their original depravity has been confirmed and increased by
the circumstances in which they are now placed.” This is a pleasant
picture that the accomplished doctor draws of our forefathers. The very
flagrancy of the falsehood has rendered the above statement as harmless
as the doctor’s reputation is unknown. It is but too common a story for
a stupid Englishman, with no other ideas than those derived from supreme
egotism, to pass through our country, and after merely glancing at the
outside of everything, proceed to give an account of the people of
Canada. But this Howison was either guilty of drawing his views from
Yankee sources, or of giving vent to some spiteful feeling. Robert
Gourlay, who was no tory, referring to the above statement, speaks in
this way:—“It is not true, it is not fair, it is not discreet. The first
settlers of Upper Canada, in my opinion, were wrong headed men as to
politics; but they were far from being bad-hearted men, and anything but
“the ruffian remnant of a disbanded regiment.” They were soldiers who
had done their duty: who had regarded with reverence their oath of
allegiance; who had risked their lives a hundred times over in support
of their principles; who had sacrificed all which the world in general
holds dear, to maintain their loyalty and honor. They were anything but
the “outlawed refuse of some European nation.” They adhered to the laws
of Britain; and for the laws of Britain they bled. They did not “seek
refuge in the wilds of Upper Canada, aware they would neither find means
of subsistence, nor be countenanced in any civilized country.” It is a
libel on the British Government to say they sought refuge, and a libel
on common sense to say that men, who resolved to earn their bread by
labour, under the worst circumstances in the world, could not find means
of subsistence anywhere else. The whole passage is untrue, is shameful,
and Dr. Howison should apologize for it in the public prints of this
country. These very farmers whom he scandalizes so cruelly, stood up for
British Government most noble during the late war, (1812), many of them
lost their all at that time (in Niagara District), and to many of them
the British Government is now deeply indebted. The mass of first
settlers in Upper Canada were true men, and to this day there is a
peculiar cast of goodness in their natures, which distinguishes them
from their neighbours in the United States. There were among them
ruffians of the very worst description. His Majesty’s ministers needed
spies, and horse stealers, and liars, and perjured villains; and America
furnished such characters, just as England can furnish an Oliver and an
Edward. Why should a whole people be slandered because of a few? Dr.
Howison wrote in Canada only to trifle, and now we see the consummation,
we see a book very well written; very readable as a romance—the tale of
a weak man; but as it affects men, worse than trifling—scandalous. To
say all the ill he could of Canada, and no good of it is unfair—is
deceitful—after all, in his parting exclamations, he “spoke about the
happy shores of Canada.” The refined Dr. Howison, it would seem,
remembered “many civilities” from the Canadians; but because he could
not appreciate the nobility of nature when crowned by the rough
circumstances of pioneer life, he must needs write a libel. No doubt his
mind was influenced by Yankee tales of Butlers’ Rangers, and perhaps his
exquisite sensibility was wounded, forsooth, because a Canadian would
not touch his hat to him.” Robert Gourlay was a friend to Canada, a
friend to humanity; he was not always right; but he was far more correct
while in Canada than those who persecuted him. He was a patient and
close observer, and made himself thoroughly acquainted with Canada, and
his statement in reply to Howison’s utterances are fully satisfying.
What was true of the settlers at Niagara, must remain true of the whole
class of U. E. Loyalists. Notwithstanding the many adverse
circumstances—the earnest contest for life, the daily struggle for food,
their isolation from the influences of civilized life, the absence of
regular ministers of the gospel, notwithstanding all, the old soldiers
constituted a band of pioneers infinitely better than those who form the
outer belt of settlers, at the present day, in the Western States.

As intimated, not a few of the U. E. Loyalists were descendants of those
who had likewise been driven, by persecution, from their homes. There
were not only the children of the noble old Huguenots, but a good many
German Irishmen, called Palatines. They originally came from the
Palatinate of the Rhine, once the possession of the House of Palatine.
The Palatines were Protestants, and during the seventeenth century, were
exposed to the most cruel barbarities. They fled in thousands to the
friendly camp of the Duke of Marlborough, when commander of the allied
armies. In 1709, Queen Anne sent a fleet to Rotterdam for the distressed
Palatines, and carried about 7,000 to England. Of these, 3,000 were sent
to New York, but finally found homes in Pennsylvania, among the Quakers.
The names of some of these are before us, and it may be seen they are
familiar ones, although some of them are somewhat altered.

Frantz Lucas, Deitrich Klein, Conrad Frederick, Ludwig, Henrich Newkirk,
Keiser, John Mortan, Casper Hartwig, Christoper Warner, Hermanus
Hoffman, Rudolph Neff, Schmidt, Schumacher, Lenhard, John Peter Zenger,
Philip Muller, Schaffer, Peter Wagner, Straule, Henrich Man, Eberhard,
Kremer, Franke Ross, Peter Becker, Christian Meyer, Godfry Fidler,
Weller, George Mathias, Christo, Hagedom, Fink, John William Dill,
Bernard, Conradt, Bellinger.

“Of those who remained, five hundred families removed to Ireland, and
settled, principally, in the County of Limerick.” Among their names we
find, Baker, Barham, Barrabier, Bennoser, Bethel, Bowen, Bowman,
Bovinezer, Brethower, Cole, Coach, Corneil, Cronsberry, Dobe, Dulmage,
Embury, Fizzle, Grunse, Grier, Heck, Hoffman, Hifle, Heavener, Ozier,
(probably Lazier of our day), Lawrence, Lowes, Rhineheart, Rose,
Rodenbucher, Ruckle, Switzer, Sparling, Stack, St. John, St. Ledger,
Strongle, Sleeper, Shoemaker, Shier, Smeltzer, Shoultace, Shavewise,
Tesby, (probably Detlor of our day), Tettler, Urshelbaugh, Williams, and
Young.

A certain number of the Palatines settled at the German Flats, many of
whom, being Loyalists, were obliged to leave; and become pioneers in
Canada. Likewise, were there many from other parts of the State, and
from Pennsylvania.

In the early history of New York State, may be found many names,
generally Dutch-like, closely resembling those of the first settlers of
Western Canada.

In a letter, dated “Albany, 30 July, 1689,” we find the names of Capt.
Bleeker and D. Myers.

At a convention at Albany, Oct. 24, 1669, was present, among others,
Gert Ryerse, Jan Jense Bleeker.

“Proposals made to ye people, Albany, ye 5 day of November, 1689, by 40
inhabitants,” among which is Jacob Vanden Bogaert.

“At a meeting, at Albany, 28th March, 1690,” were present, Gert Ryersen,
John Pietersen, Hendrick Hedgeman, (Hagerman).

At a meeting in Albany, after the massacre of Schenectady, February 9,
1690, to arrange for defending against the French and Indians, and to
bury the dead; there were, among 60 others present, D. Wessels, Rector,
J. Bleecker, Ald. Ryckman, Ens. Bennet.

In the list of those killed at Schenectady, are several of the Vroomans,
Symon, Skemerhoorn. “Taken prisoners at Skinnechtady, and carried to
Canada ye 9th day of February, 1689/90.” “John Wemp, sonne of Myndt & 2
negroes, and 26 others.”

In a list of officers in the Province of New York, 1693, members of
Council—are found Phillips, Brock, Lawrence, Young, Marshall, Shaw,
Evetts, (probably Everit), Handcock, Dirck Wessels, Recorder at Albany;
Beekman, Howell, Barker, Platt, Whitehead, Harrison, Hageman, Strycker,
Willet. Among the militia officers, N. Yorrk, 1700, we find Booth,
Moore, Wheler, Hubbs, Kechum, Frederick, Daniel Wright; Robert Coles;
Lake, Hegemen, Evert, Bogardus, Hosbrooke, Rose.

List of inhabitants in County of Orange, 1702, we find—Geritssen,
(Garrison), Reynerssen, (Ryerson), Ceniff, Mieyer, (Meyer,) Weller,
Coeper, Merritt.

Freeholders of the city and county of Albany, 1720, Williams, Van Alen,
Holland, Collins, Van Dyke, several Bleeker’s; Cornelius Boarghaert,
Vandusen, Meebe, Weemp, (Wemp), Trueax, Van Valkenburgh, Huyck,
Gardimer, Dingmans, VanAlstine, Coonradt, Ham, Luyke, Deeker,
Esselstine, Fritts, Quackenboes, (Quackenbush), Van Rensalaer.

In the war of the Indians, at the battle of Point Pleasant, 1774, there
was killed, among others, Ensign Candiff.

The following we take from the _Schenectady Evening Star_:

  VALLEY OF THE MOHAWK IN OLDEN TIMES.—_Schoharie_—_The Vroomans_.—
  When the Schoharie settlements were invaded by the British, under
  Colonel Butler, in the year 1789, the following persons, among
  others, were murdered by the Indians: Tunis Vrooman, his wife and
  son, and on this occasion Ephraim Vrooman and his two sons,
  Bartholomew, Josias and John Vrooman, Bartholomew Vrooman, Jr., and
  his wife and son Jacob, were taken prisoners. The wife and daughter
  of Ephraim Vrooman was killed by an Indian named Seth Hendrick. Mr.
  E. Vrooman, while on his way to Canada, whither he was carried in
  captivity, was under the immediate charge of Seth Hendrick, who
  treated him with much kindness. There were two or three Indians who
  accompanied Seth. These before they arrived at their destination,
  grew tired of their prisoner, and proposed to despatch him. Mr.
  Vrooman overheard the conversation, which was conducted in a
  whisper, and repeated it to Hendrick. Hendrick assured him in the
  most positive manner, that “not a hair of his head should be
  touched,” and gave his companions a severe reprimand for their
  ungenerous conspiracy. After the termination of the Revolutionary
  contest, Hendrick paid Mr. Vrooman a visit, and apologised for his
  conduct during the war, in the strong, metaphorical language of his
  nation: “The tomahawk,” said he, “is used only in war; in time of
  peace it is buried; it cuts down the sturdy oak as well as the
  tender vine; but I (laying his hand on Mr. Vrooman’s shoulder) saved
  the oak.”

  “EVA’S KILL.—The creek which runs through the village of Cranesville
  has, for the last ninety years, been known as Eva’s Kill, or creek.
  It owes this name to the circumstance of a woman named Eva being
  murdered near its banks. In the year 1755 Mrs. Van Alstine, from
  Canojoharie, traveled through this place on her way to this city to
  visit her parents. She was on horseback, and had her daughter with
  her, a child about four years of age. A party of French and Indians
  had just arrived from Canada, and were prowling about with murderous
  designs on the defenceless inhabitants of the Mohawk Valley. Espying
  Mrs. Van Alstine, they marked her for their prey. They pounced upon,
  wounded and scalped her, left her as they supposed, dead on the
  margin of the creek which bears her name. Her daughter they took to
  Canada. After they had departed, Mrs. Van Alstine partially
  recovered, and mustered strength enough to crawl to the river, on
  the opposite shore of which she saw some men standing, to whom she
  beckoned. She feared to speak lest she should be overheard by her
  enemies who were still in the neighborhood. These men came over
  cautiously, and conveyed her safely to her agonized parents. She
  lingered nine or ten days in a state of extreme suffering, when she
  gave up the ghost. Her daughter’s life was spared, and she, in time,
  was restored to her friends.”

In 1750–60, are found the names of Jordan, Dunham, Grant, Harkamer,
Spenser, Peterson, Wilson, Church, Devenport, Kemp, Gibson.

Census of New York, about 1703. Amongst others, Vanhorn, Larrance,
Loukes, Vandewater, White, Hams, Wessels, Wm. Taylor, Johnston, Vesey,
Bogert, Oastrom, Waldron, Davis, Marshall, Clapp.

_Census of Long Island, 1673._—Jacobs, Carman, Symonds, Beedel, Allen,
Williams, Valentyn, Ellesson, (probably Allison), Osborne, Hobbs,
Soddard, Ellison, Foster, Mott, Applebe, Persell, Truax, Hoyt.

_The Roll of those who have taken the oath of allegiance, September,
1687_: Peter Stryker, native of the Province; Cornelis Pertise,
(Peterson), native; Beakman, native; Gerrit Dorlant, native; Joseph
Hagemen, (Hagerman), 37 years; Adrien Ryerse, 41 years. Living in
Breucklyn (Brooklyn): Covert, native; Bogaert, 35 years; Jan Fredericks,
35 years; Pieter Corson native; Caspere, (Casper); Jacobus Vande Water,
(Vandewater), native; Dirck Janse Waertman, (Wartman), 40 years; Van
Clief, De Witt, Loyse, Waldron, Willensen, Badgely, Culver, Jessop,
Rogers, Diamond, Erle, Butler, Johnes (Jones), Whiting; Arnold,
Washbourn, Way, Harton, Booth, Bradly, Goldsmith, Giles, Baily, Osmond,
Carey, Case, Miller, Garitson.




                              CHAPTER LXX.

  CONTENTS—Character—Hospitality—At home—Fireside—Visitors—Bees—
    Raisings—Easter Eggs—Dancing—Hovington House—Caste—Drinks—
    Horse-racing—Boxing—Amusements—La Crosse—Duels—Patriotism—
    Annexation—Freedom—Egotism—The Loyalists—Instances—Longevity—
    Climate of Canada—A quotation—Long lived—The children—The present
    race—A nationality Comparison—“U. E. Loyalist”—Their Privileges—
    Order of Council—Dissatisfaction.


 CHARACTER, CUSTOMS, AMUSEMENTS, PATRIOTISM, AGE AND DESCENDANTS OF THE
                            U. E. LOYALISTS.

When we compare the motives which actuated all classes of those who
adhered to the Crown with the rebels in their various grades, we feel to
exult and express sincere thankfulness that the fathers of Upper Canada
were honest, devoted, loyal, truthful, law-abiding, and actuated by the
higher motives which spring from religion. The habits of the loyalists
were simple, and comparatively free from immorality. Their love of order
and adherence to law is noteworthy. No people in the world have been
characterised by so firm and devoted adherence to the established laws
than the U. E. Loyalists. Never deprived of that freedom which ennobles
the man, they always abominated that monstrous offshoot of republican
liberty which teaches a man to take the law in his own hands. In later
years in Canada some strife has been witnessed between parties who have
introduced their national feuds from the old country. But those who
fought in the revolutionary war, and who mainly assisted to drive back
the invading foe in 1812, have always been peace-loving citizens. Lynch
Law, (a term derived from a man of that name living in South Carolina,
who constituted himself the arbiter between any contestants, and to
their satisfaction) has always been held in utter detestation.

The settlers were always hospitable. The circumstances of their life, in
which they so often were cast upon the care and attention of others,
made each experience the deep feeling of gladness to have a visitor,
which belongs to a sense of kindness received. In this they differed
widely from the people of the more Northern States. Strangers were never
turned away, and a clergyman, no matter of what denomination, was
received “right gladly.” The Rev. Mr. Smart says that he was often up
the Bay in his early days of ministerial labor, and he was ever treated
by the inhabitants of all classes, with great hospitality. And after a
few years had worn away, carrying with them the burden of many heart
sorrows, there came an occasional opportunity to exchange friendly
hospitality. Visiting indeed became a regular “institution,” to borrow a
Yankee phrase. Near neighbours would of an evening call in, uninvited,
to spend the evening, and talk over the times, present, past and coming.
Sometimes visits were made to friends a long distance off, going by
canoe or batteau, or perchance on horseback, by a bridle-path, with
saddle-bags containing oats for the horse. But the winter visits were
characterised more especially by genial hospitality. On such occasions
the hostess brought forth things new and old. Choice viands, carefully
stored away, were brought to the light. The first fruits of the soil
were lavishly spread upon the unassuming board. The famine of 1787–8,
and the subsequent lack of the necessaries of life, and the total
absence of luxuries for many a year, had the effect of intensifying the
value that might naturally be placed upon plenty and luxury. To be truly
entertaining to guests, was to set before them a feast of good things.
Hence it came in the later years of the country that the table of the
well-to-do farmer always groaned with substantials and delicacies. On
those occasions the old soldier recounted his deeds of warfare, and
hairbreadth escapes, and his struggles in the wilderness. The blazing
hearth became the centre of attractive conversation, and lit up the
hardy faces of the pioneers, and the milder countenances of their wives
and daughters, while in the back ground might be seen the bright eyes of
the children, listening to the tales that were told. The younger ones
had been ordered off to bed, but they lie wakeful in their bunks, which
were in the same room, to catch the ever flowing talk. The conversation
at these times did not always relate to those matters above stated, it
often took a mysterious turn, and ghosts became the subject of their
evening’s talk. The above is not from imagination, but in substance from
the lips of more than one, who remembers to have occupied the little
bunk and listened upon many an evening to the conversations.

Family visiting was a common mode of exchanging civilities. It was
necessary because of the widely separated houses. The evenings were
times of the most pleasing reunions. Every log house possessed a large
Dutch fireplace, into which was placed a back log of immense size, while
upon the hand irons, or, as at first, large square stones was heaped
light dry wood which sent forth a cheerful blaze. By the light thus made
there would be in the fall and winter carried on various household
duties, each family was to a great extent dependent upon themselves for
almost everything required upon a farm, or about a farm-house. The wife
would be busy carding, or making clothes of home-made linen, or of
cloth. The daughters would be employed in mending or darning. The farmer
would be engaged in making or repairing harness, or boots, or “fixing”
an implement of husbandry, while the son would be fashioning an
axe-helve, or an ox-yoke, or whittling a whip handle. The simple meal,
though of a homely fare, was satisfying, for their taste was not
pampered by unnecessary luxuries when alone. But when company came
everything was changed. The work was put aside, and they set themselves
out to make their visitors enjoy themselves. They would encircle the
wide and glowing fire, and indulge in the most amiable talk. There was
no spirit of envy in their midst, but a quiet content and thankfulness
that the wilderness was beginning to blossom. The triumphs of the past
would be duly recounted, and the future looked forward to with highest
hopes. Plans would be canvassed and laid for the children, while apples,
cider and nuts would receive due attention by all. At these meetings
were often the young folks—marriageable daughters and sons who had been
preparing to go on the other farm, or back hundred acres where a log
house was partially erected; before long the company would be divided
into two distinct groups, the old and the young. Sometimes matters would
be managed that the older ones would meet at one house and the young at
another, by which means a more pleasing state of things was created. But
courting, or sparking as it was termed, was generally done upon Sunday
evening. The day of rest was the only one when the love-sick swain could
get away. And even the most exemplary Christians regarded “going to see
the girls” on a Sunday night as quite allowable. Then, this practice
favored the desire, so prevalent, to keep secret the intention of any
two to get married.

Visits were made without invitations. To wait for an invitation was
quite contrary to the primitive views of the settlers. The visit must be
a voluntary action. Even to give a hint to one to make a visit by
parties not related was considered as beneath proper respect. It was a
species of independence. “I don’t want one to come to my house if he
don’t want to,” the phase went in that way. But there were occasions
when invitations were sent out, and that was when some help was
required; and to persons not familiar with the habits, it will seem
strange that it was considered a compliment to get an invitation, and a
slight to be neglected. These invitations were to be present at bees,
and help to do work. At the first these bees were common, to put up the
log houses, and get a little clearing done, by a certain time. But
afterwards, though less frequent, they were of a more pretentious
nature. Raising Bees were in time, indications of prosperity. A frame
barn or house showed that the farmer was progressing, and in accordance
with the general expectation, treated “the hands” with the best he had.
Then there were, beside the raising bees, the clearing bees, logging
bees, and stone bees, and husking bees, and in later times apple bees;
and there was the women’s bee for quilting. All these meetings were of a
more or less hilarious order. The work was done, and done with a will;
it was a sort of duty—a matter of principle that either the work should
be done, or a proper effort made to that end. For many years spirituous
liquors were dealt out, or set freely before the men, but in time, some,
seeing the evil of drinking, and sometimes fearful of accidents,
determined to discontinue the custom. Whether drinking was indulged in
or not, all were treated to a glorious supper, generally of pot-pie and
cakes, and pies of pumpkin and apple. The women folks of course,
required assistance, and the neighbours would come to help, so that at
night there would be collected a goodly number of both sexes. Husking
bees and apple bees took place at night, but they did not last so long
that no time was allowed for amusement. And then commenced the play and
the dance. At first these unions and plays were exceedingly harmless and
indulged in with the utmost artlessness. The young of both sexes were
well known to each other, and it was more like a family gathering than
aught else. But now fortunately these bees and kissing-plays are no
longer in vogue. They were natural enough in the days of primitive
pioneer life; but with increasing inhabitants and the addition of people
of other countries, they became unnatural.

The breaking up of winter brought to a termination for a time, all the
social festivities. In connection with sugar making was here and there a
jovial meeting to “sugar off.”

Aside from the Sabbath there were but few holidays; and, with many,
Christmas was imperfectly observed. Easter was remembered principally
because of the feast of eggs on Sunday. At first, when hens were scarce,
it was not every family that had eggs on that day, or had enough. So it
came to pass that eggs would be preserved beforehand, not by the natural
provider however. The boys regarded it as their prerogative to hide the
eggs for some time before, and even when it was unnecessary, large
numbers would be safely secreted by the young ones. This was generally
done by the youngest, old enough; and he was to so hide them that no one
could find them. The honor was lost if the eggs were found. The Easter
morning consequently was one of anticipation, to see however many eggs
had been preserved.

An old settler of Ameliasburgh discourses of Bees in this wise: “Bees
were great institutions in those days, every settler was licensed to
make two or three each year, provided he furnished a good “pot pie,” and
plenty of grog, and never made any objections to his guests fighting.
Fighting might take place at any stage, but more generally occurred
after work was done, before and after supper.”

Dancing seems to have been particularly attractive to almost all. Almost
every neighbourhood or concession had its fiddler, the only kind of
instrumental music of the times. The fiddler was generally an old
soldier, who had acquired some knowledge of the art of playing during
his time of service.

A kind correspondent, (Morden), has supplied us pleasing information,
obtained from an old resident of Sophiasburgh. This person came from
Adolphustown, when a girl of fifteen, in the first year of the present
century. We quote:—“She tells many funny stories of balls and private
“sprees” that they used to have over in the Indian woods, at Capt.
Isaac’s (Hill), an Indian chief, who had a large house, which is still
occupied, and which appears to have been the scene of numberless “hops,”
&c. They could have a civil dance at Captain Isaac’s, and it would not
cost much. The Sixth Town youngsters seem to have delighted in
patronizing his house.” This young woman married and became, with her
husband, a pioneer of Ameliasburgh, in 1805. It seems that these new
settlers of the Seventh Town considered themselves somewhat superior to
the inhabitants generally, and would not join in their “frolickings,”
but would occasionally visit Sophiasburgh for the purpose of having a
“spree.” This feeling of caste was a marked feature in the several
townships at an early date.

The Hovington House, situated about sixty rods above the bridge at
Picton, was a place of no little fame. It was built by one Hovington who
came with VanAlstine. It was a long narrow edifice forty or fifty feet
deep, and about twenty feet broad, and not very high. It was divided
into two portions by a log partition, the ends of which projected
without. This public house was especially for the benefit of the
settlers at East Lake, in their journeyings back and forth across the
Carrying Place. To use the language of our informant, “it was a great
place to dance and frolic.” At stated times the bay settlers would come
even from forty miles distance, Fredericksburgh on the east, and the
Carrying Place and Sidney on the west. But now the foundation of the old
building which so often resounded to the sounds of mirth, the fiddle,
and the tripping feet, can scarcely be traced.

As a general thing, the hard pinching circumstances of the new country
brought all to a common level, excepting a few Government officials. But
in certain localities there existed a feeling of superciliousness, not
very deep, but yet it was there. The places, and the inhabitants
thereof, in time, became noted as being “big feeling” or stylish. For
instance, the denizens of Kingston regarded the settlers up the bay as
somewhat behind them; while the people of the Fourth Town spoke
disparagingly of the Fifth Towners. By the settlers of the Sixth and
Seventh Towns, the citizens of Sidney and Thurlow were looked upon as
stylish. But the wheel of fortune turned with many a one.

Amusement, and diversions of different kinds, when properly used, are
not only allowable, but even salutary to man’s physical and mental
state; but if uncontrolled by reason; if irrational from want of
education, they may easily run into excess and immorality. To the
educated man, who is cast away from all that can supply food for his
mind, there is a terrible danger of seeking unholy and even vicious
sources to allay the constant longing after mental food. There is
likewise a danger of such seeking artificial excitement. To such the
evil of intemperance too often comes with overwhelming waves steadily
and certainly flowing. The first settlers of Upper Canada, when their
circumstances are taken into consideration, and the usages of the times,
it must be said, were not particularly addicted to the evil of
intemperance. In after years, this evil did certainly increase; but at
the first, although almost everyone had liquor of some kind in the
house, yet the great majority were guiltless of excess. In those early
days, teetotalism and temperance societies were unknown; but it must be
here mentioned that the first temperance society organized in Canada,
was in Adolphustown. The drinking usages of the day among all classes
led to the erection of distilleries and breweries at an early period.
There was also an extensive traffic in rum, and it is known that many a
one made himself rich by selling to buyers along the bay, and across the
Carrying Place up the lake, even as far as York.

Perhaps the most common out-of-door amusement was horse-racing, after
horses became more general among the settlers. It was looked upon as
dancing was by all, as amusement of the most unobjectionable character,
and it is said of a certain reverend individual, that he was accustomed
to run horses on his way home after preaching. Probably this was true,
as the same person became a reprobate. On the occasion of the annual
training of the Militia, which took place for many a year, the 4th June,
(and this comes within the writer’s recollection) there was, at the
different training places, more or less of horse racing. These races
were made, not by horses trained specially for the purpose, but by such
animals as were in daily use by the farmers, some of which, although
ungainly in looks, and in indifferent condition, could get over the
ground in a remarkably short time.

Kingston and Newark being military stations, were, from the presence of
officers, who were always gentlemen by birth, more dignified in the ways
of amusement. Not but gentlemen existed through the country, but not in
sufficient numbers to regulate the modes of pleasure, and give tone to
society. The officers were very fond of horse-racing, and would
frequently spend field days, especially the King’s Birthday in testing
the mettle of their steeds. At these there would generally be a great
entertainment by the ladies who, says Colonel Clarke, would be
gorgeously clad in “brilliant dresses, with threads of silver forming
the motto, _God save the King_.”

A kind of amusement common at the close of the last century, and the
beginning of the present, in America, and to a certain extent in Canada,
was that of boxing—boxing that too often amounted to brutal fighting.
There were a certain number in every township who availed themselves of
training days to show their athletic qualifications. Gourlay says, 1817,
that “pugilism, which once prevailed, is now declining.” And at the
present day, happily, it is confined to those of a brutish disposition.
It is only the lowest who find amusement in engaging in, or witnessing
pugilistic encounters.

As Upper Canada was, in a limited sense, an offshoot of Lower Canada, so
but a few of the peculiarities of Lower Canada were introduced to the
Upper. One was that of _Charivariing_, which means a great noise with
petty music. It was introduced from France. The custom is now almost
obsolete among us, but time was when it was quite common. It generally
was indulged in at second marriages, or when an unequal match and
marriage took place; when a young girl married an old man for instance,
or if either party were unpopular. The night of the wedding, instead of
being passed in joyous in-door pleasures by the wedded ones, was made
hideous by a crowd of masked persons, who with guns, tin-pans, pails,
horns, horse-fiddles, and everything else that could be made to produce
a discordant noise, disturbed the night until silenced by a treat, or
money. Sometimes those meetings resulted in serious consequences to one
or more of the party, by the bridegroom resorting to loaded fire-arms.

Sometimes the native Indians contributed to the general amusement, upon
days when there was a public gathering. Now and then they engaged alone
in certain sports which would be witnessed by the whites. Playing ball—
bandy-ball, lacrosse, foot-races, and the war-dance, were occasionally
engaged in. The present fashionable game of lacrosse is of Indian
origin, and may well be remembered by every Canadian, and even American.
After the conquest of Canada, when the Great Ottawa chief Pontiac had
effected an alliance of all the western and northern tribes, to destroy
the frontier forts of the British. There were several forts, originally
French, along the upper lakes; two notably, one at Detroit, the other at
Michilmacinac. Smaller forts had been attacked and taken, in most cases
by treachery and Indian cunning. These two forts remained untaken.
Pontiac devised the plan of pretending to wish for peace. With the
ostensible intention of holding a council to make peace, the chiefs were
to enter the forts; while the Indians, engaged in ball-playing along the
ramparts, were to amuse those within the ramparts. The squaws were to be
present, seemingly as spectators, but in reality to hold under their
blankets, rifles, the ends of which had been cut off for concealment. At
a given signal, the ball was to be knocked over the outer defence, and
the Indians were to rush in as if to get it; but seizing their rifles
from the women who had placed themselves conveniently, they were to rush
in to slaughter the unsuspecting inmates. At Michilmacinac this proved
successful, and the whole garrison was massacred, and Detroit barely
escaped the same fate.

DUELING.—At the time when fierce encounters took place between organized
forces in America, which resulted in the independence of the United
States, and the settlement of Upper Canada, the practise of duelling
obtained among the higher classes. Happily, this heinous crime, an
outrage against humanity, is no longer tolerated where British laws and
British principles of justice and freedom have force. But such was not
the case seventy years ago. The early history of Canada witnessed a few
personal engagements of honor. The first duel was between Peter Clark,
Chief Clerk of the Legislative Council, and Captain Sutherland of the
25th regiment. The meeting took place at Kingston, and Mr. Clark fell
fatally wounded. This occurred in the winter of 1795.

On the 22nd July, 1817, a duel was fought between S. P. Jarvis, Esq.,
and Mr. John Ridout. The latter received a wound in the chest and died
in about an hour.

  “DUEL.—On Friday the 11th inst., Alexander McMillan, Esquire, and
  Alexander Thom, Esquire, met in a field on the Brockville Road, to
  decide an affair of honor—the former attended by Mr. Radenhurst, and
  the latter by Mr. Cumming. After exchanging shots, the seconds
  interfered, and on mutual explanations being made, the matter
  terminated amicably. Doctor Thom received a contusion on the leg.”

One of the latest instances in which a duel was fought in Upper Canada,
occurred some forty years ago. The event resulted in the death of one of
the combatants, the other, who was tried for his life, has now for some
years adorned the bench of the Province.

PATRIOTISM.—In no country upon the face of the Globe, and at no period
in the history of any country, has appeared a higher or purer order of
patriotism, than is written upon the pages of the history of British
America. British connection is to mostly every son of the land dearer
even than life itself. At least it has been so in respect to those of
whom we write, the U. E. Loyalists. Co-equal with the love they have to
the British Crown, is the hearty aversion they bear to Republicanism.
Neither the overtures of annexation, nor the direct and indirect
attempts to coerce, has produced a momentary wavering on the part of the
descendants of the ancient stock. Americans in our midst have vainly
tried to inoculate the minds of the people with the principles of
Republican Government; but the Canadian mind was too free, the body
politic too healthy, the system too strong to imbibe any lasting feeling
of desire to change the tried for the untried. The few annexationists
who have, from time to time, existed, were but the fungoid offshoot of a
healthy plant. From the time Franklin and his coadjutors vainly essayed
to draw the French Canadian into their rebellious cause, until the
present there has been a frequently manifested desire, on the part of
the United States, to force us into the union. The contemptible
duplicity of Webster, who concealed from Ashburton the existence of a
second map, whereby he tricked Canada, Yankee like, out of a valuable
portion of territory along the Atlantic coast, with a view of cutting us
off from the ocean. The declaration of war in 1812, and the repeated but
unsuccessful invasions of our Province. The proclamations issued to
Canadians, by the would be conquerors, Hull, Wilkinson, and others.
Their sympathy and aid to turbulent spirits in 1836–7. The attempts at
bullying England when she was at war with Russia. The organization of
the Fenian association, with the publicly avowed purpose of seizing some
portion of our Province. The abrogation of the Reciprocity Treaty, the
object of which was proclaimed by Consul Potter—all along the eighty
years’ history of the United States, is to be seen a disreputable
attempt, by all possible means, to bully a weaker neighbor. All this
does not become a great and honorable nation, a nation so extensive,
whose people are so loud-tongued upon the principles of liberty—Liberty!
The name with the United States is only synonymous with their
government. They cannot discover that a people should be free to choose
their own form of government, always excepting those who rebelled in
1776. Oh yes! we have liberty to choose; but then we must choose in
accordance with Yankee ideas of liberty. Egotistic to the heart’s core,
they cannot understand how we entertain views dissimilar to their own.
How applicable the words of the immortal Burns:—

                  “O wad some power the giftie gie us,
                  To see oursels as others see us:
                  It wad frae monie a blunder free us
                            An’ foolish notion.”

Without detracting from the well-known loyalty of the other sections of
the Province, it may be safely said that the inhabitants of the Bay
Quinté and St. Lawrence, and Niagara, have proved themselves devotedly
attached to British institutions. The U. E. Loyalists have been as a
barrier of rock, against which the waves of Republicanism have dashed in
vain. It has been the refugee-settlers and their descendants, who
prevented the Province from being engulfed in its dark waters. In 1812,
in ‘37, and at all times, their loyalty has never wavered. It has been
elsewhere stated, that settlers from the States came in at a later date.
Those were found likewise truly loyal. Says McMullen, speaking of the
war of 1812, “But comparatively few Canadians joined the American
standard in the war, and throughout which none were more gallant in
rolling back the tide of unprincipled avarice than the emigrant from New
England and New York, who aside from the U. E. Loyalist, had settled in
the country.” There were a few renegades who forsook the country, not so
much to join the enemy as because they had no soul to fight. In this
connection it will be desirable to refer to one notable case; that of
“Bill Johnson.”

The following will sufficiently shew how intense were the feelings of
loyalty many years ago. The writer’s father was present at a meeting,
which was conducted by a minister lately from the United States, and who
was unaccustomed to pray for the King. The good man thought only of his
allegiance to the King of Kings, and omitted, in the extemporaneous
prayer, to pray for the King of England. Whereupon Mr. T. arose and
requested the preacher either to pray for his Majesty, or leave his
territories. The minister did not again forget so manifest a duty. In
this connection, we cannot forbear inserting another instance of
Canadian loyalty, which exhibited itself not long ago in the loyal city
of Toronto.

  “CANADIAN LOYALTY.—A very extraordinary manifestation of feeling
  took place on Thursday night last in Toronto, at the closing meeting
  of the Sabbath School Convention. A gentleman from New York
  delivered a parting address, on behalf of the American visitors who
  had attended the Convention; at the conclusion of which he referred
  to our Queen as a “model woman,” and said that from the fulness of
  his heart he could say, ‘Long live Her Majesty Queen Victoria!’ When
  he gave expression to this sentiment there was such an outburst of
  enthusiastic loyalty that every one seemed carried completely away.
  The immense audience immediately commenced such a cheering, and
  clapping of hands, as is seldom seen, and kept it up till there was
  an accidental “change of exercise.” Under the powerful excitement of
  the moment, a gentleman near the platform commenced singing “God
  Save the Queen,” when the entire audience rose to their feet and
  joined in singing it through. That was singing with a will! Several
  persons were quite overpowered, and even wept freely. It was simply
  an unpremeditated expression of the warm devotion of the Canadian
  heart to the best Queen that ever sat on the British throne.”

LONGEVITY.—The climate of Canada, even of Ontario, is by some considered
very severe. The months of unpleasant weather which intervene between
summer and winter, and again between winter and summer; and the snowy
months of winter itself are not, it must be admitted, so agreeable as in
other climates. And, occasionally, even the summer itself is
comparatively cold. For instance, in 1817, snow fell at Kingston in the
month of June. But, notwithstanding the occasional severity, and the
general unpleasantness, (although all do not so consider it) the climate
of Canada seems conducive to longevity. Both in Upper and Lower Canada,
among the French and English may be found a great many instances of
wonderfully extended age. There is a school of naturalists, who
entertain the belief that the races of men are strictly indigenous; that
if removed from the land of their birth, they will degenerate, and
unless intermixed with constantly flowing recruits, will ultimately die
out. They assert that the European races transplanted to America are
doomed to degeneration and death so soon as emigration shall cease to
maintain the vitality brought by the original settlers. To this view we
have ventured to give very positive dissent, and have supported this
position in another place with the following language: “In Canada are to
be seen quite remote descendants of the most prominent people of Europe,
the British and French, and, I am prepared to assert, with no marked
signs of physical degeneration, the French of Lower Canada, even under
many adverse circumstances, have fully maintained their ancient bodily
vigor, and can compare favorably with the present inhabitants of old
France, while their number has increased.” Yet their ancestors, many of
them, emigrated two hundred years ago; and, since the colony became a
part of Britain, no replenishment has been received from the old stock.

“Turning to Upper Canada, we find a fact no less important, and quite as
antagonistic to the theory. In consequence of the American Revolutionary
war, some twenty-five or thirty thousand United Empire Loyalists were
forced, or induced, to seek a home in the Canadian wilderness. Many of
these were descendants of those who had first peopled New Holland. A
large number settled along the St. Lawrence and the Bay of Quinté. In
the main, indeed, almost altogether, until very recently, these old
settlers have intermarried. The great-grandchildren of those American
pioneers now live on the old homestead, and are found scattered over the
whole Province. And although I have no positive data upon which to base
my assertion; yet, from careful observation, I have no hesitation in
declaring that in physical development, in slight mortality among the
children, in length of life, in powers of endurance, not to say in
bravery and patriotism, they cannot be excelled by any class of
emigrants.”—(Principles of Surgery).

Since the above was written, we have become more intimately acquainted
with regard to the longevity, both among the French and Anglo-Canadians;
and the opinion then expressed has been greatly strengthened. Respecting
the latter class, personal observation has aided us. In our frequent
visits to different parts, made during the last few years, we have
enjoyed the opportunity of conversing with many persons who had much
over-ran the period allotted to man; and others who had exceeded their
three score years and ten. Some of them have been spectators of the very
scenes of the settlement of the country, and retain a vivid recollection
of the events attending that trying period. Venerable, with hairs
blossoming for the grave, and chastened by the long endured fire of
affliction, they are happy in their old age. They connect the present
with the past, and remind us how great the heritage they have secured to
us from a vast, untrodden wilderness. Notwithstanding the toils, the
privations in early life, ere the tender child had merged into the
adult, when the food was limited, and often inferior in quality, they
yet have had iron constitutions that in the earnest contingency of life
served them well. Of course, the plain and regular habits of the
settlers, with plenty of out-door exercise, assisted to promote long
life, and give them a hardy nature. We have knowledge of a vast number
who attained to a great age. Of those who lived to an old age, “A
Traveler,” writing in 1835 says of Upper Canada, “I often met the
venerable in years.”

The children and grand-children of the early settlers live, in many
cases, to as great an age as their fathers.

  DESCENDANTS.—While there were some among the first settlers of
  European birth, the majority were of American birth, and possessed
  the characteristics of the colonists of that day. But, separated
  from the people and the scenes intimate to them in their youth, and
  living in the profound shades of the interminable wilderness, they
  gradually lost many of their characteristic features and habits, and
  acquired others instead.

The Canadian immigrant, be he English, Irish, or Scotch, or even German
or French, will, as time gives lines to his face, and gray hair to his
head, insensibly lose many of the peculiarities of his race, and in the
end sensibly approximate to the character and appearance of the people
among whom he has settled. The children of the emigrant, no matter what
pains the parents may take to preserve in their children what belongs to
their own native country, will grow up quite unlike the parents. So much
is this the case that any one on entering a mixed school, high or low,
or by noticing the children at play, as he passes along the street,
whose parents are both natives and foreigners, would find it quite
impossible to point out one from the other, whether the child was of
Canadian parentage, or whether its parents were of another country. The
fact at which it is desired to get is that emigrants to Canada, no
matter how heterogeneous, are gradually moulded into a whole more or
less homogenous. That this is observable somewhat in the emigrant
himself, but decidedly so in the children. The fact being admitted that
a transformation is slowly but certainly effected, it may be inquired by
what influence it is accomplished. It cannot be due solely, to the
climate, nor to dress, nor diet, nor the original habits of the people,
although each has its influence. Must we not search for a more powerful
cause of peculiarity as a people, in some other channel. A natural one
seemingly presents itself. The growth of a nation, as the growth of a
tree will be modified by its own intrinsic vitality, and at the same
time by external circumstances. Upper Canada was planted by British
heroes of the American Revolution. It arose out of that revolution. The
first settlers were U. E. Loyalists. The majority of the original
settlers were natives of America, and brought up in one or other of the
provinces that rebelled. They were Americans in all respects, as much as
those who took sides with the rebels, yet to-day the descendants of the
U. E. Loyalists are as unlike the descendants of the rebels, as each is
unlike a full blooded Englishman. The pure Yankee and the Canadian of
the first water may trace their ancestors to a common parentage, and
have the same name. As Canadians we are not afraid to institute a
comparison between ourselves and the natives of New England or New York,
or Pennsylvania. Let the comparison refer to any question whatever,
either of the body or mind, of society or of government. The external
influences which have operated have been elsewhere indicated. The
circumstances of the U. E. Loyalists as settlers in a wilderness, were
widely different from those of the States after the Independence was
secured. Incessant toil and privations, without opportunities for
acquiring education, on the one hand; on the other there was all the
advantages of civilization. And so it continued for nearly half a
century. It is to be desired that we had statistics to show the
difference as to longevity, and general health. Suffice it to say that
scientific men are debating the cause of gradual decline among the New
Englanders, while Upper Canada overflows with native population. Another
influence of an external nature, which must not be omitted as operating
upon the loyalists, is that derived from the emigrants from Great
Britain and the officers from the army and navy, and other gentlemen who
became part of the first settlers. That they had a wholesome effect
cannot be doubted, and gave a healthy tone to the provincial mind. From
these internal and external influences the Upper Canadian has been
developed into an individual singular in some respects, but yet
constituting a middle link between the Englishman, and the “Englishman
intensified,” as the American has been called.

The difference in the character between the British American and those
who have lived under Republican Government is a striking commentary upon
the effects of social and political institutions. Canadians may not have
excelled in making wooden nutmegs, and basswood hams; but they have
succeeded in converting a wilderness into a splendid Province. And
although eighty years behind in commencing the race with those who
robbed them of their homes, they have even now caught up in many
respects, and to-day a young State with great breadth and resources
presents itself at the threshold of nations. It has for a population a
stable people. Canada has no long list of cruel charges against her for
aggression. Her escutcheon is clean as the northern snow against which
she rests, from the stains of blood—blood of the Indian, the African,
the Mexican, or of a neighbor.

After all, notwithstanding this bright record of loyalty on the part of
settlers and their descendants, yet the Bay of Quinté inhabitants were
not permitted to receive the heir to the Crown of England, to support
which, their sires suffered so much. They spilled their blood, they
suffered starvation; and yet by the advice of one who held in higher
consideration the Roman Catholic Church, than the grand-children of the
U. E. Loyalists. The Prince of Wales passed up and down the bay without
landing. They waited with burning enthusiasm to receive the Prince, but
he passed and repassed without gratifying their desire. Notwithstanding
this there were some who followed him to Toronto, determined to pay
their respect to the Prince, notwithstanding the Duke of Newcastle.

“THE U. E. LIST.”—It will be remembered that a certain number of
Americans who had remained in the States, were induced to remove to
Canada by a proclamation issued by Simcoe; many of these were always
loyalists in heart, some had become tired of republicanism, and others
were attracted by the offer of lands, free grants of which were offered
upon paying fees of office, some $30. By this means a new element was
added to the Province. At the same time the first settlers were to be
placed in a position to which the newcomers, however loyal, could never
attain.

Distinct from the general class is here meant those whose names were
entered upon a list ordered to be prepared by Government. “To put a mark
of honor,” as it was expressed in the orders of Council, “upon the
families who had adhered to the unity of the empire and joined the royal
standard in America, before the treaty of separation in the year 1783,
to the end that their posterity might be discriminated from the then
future settlers. From the initials of two emphatic words, the unity of
the empire, it was styled the “U. E. List,” and they, whose names were
entered on it, were distinguished as the U. E. Loyalists, a distinction
of some consequence, for, in addition to the promise of such loyalty by
themselves, it was declared that their children, as well as those born
hereafter, as those already born, should, upon arriving at the age of
twenty-one years, and females upon their marriage within that age, be
entitled to grants of 200 acres each, free from all expense.” Upon
arriving at age, the descendant petitioned the Governor, stating the
facts upon oath, and accompanied with the affidavit of one person. The
order was issued, and land in one of the newer townships was duly
allotted and the patent issued free of cost.

The following is the order of Council referring to the grants of land to
the U. E. Loyalists:

                                      “QUEBEC, Monday, 9th Nov. 1789.”
                Present, LORD DORCHESTER and thirteen Councillors.

  “His Lordship intimated to the Council, that it remained a question
  upon the regulations for the disposition of the waste lands of the
  Crown, whether the board constituted for that purpose, were
  authorized to make locations to the sons of loyalists, on their
  arriving to full age, and that it was his wish to put a mark of
  honor upon the families who had adhered to the unity of the empire,
  and joined the Royal standard in America, before the treaty of
  separation in the year 1783.”

  “The Council concurring with his Lordship, it is accordingly
  ordered, that the several land boards take course for preserving a
  registry of the names of all persons falling under the description
  aforementioned, to the end that their posterity may be discriminated
  from future settlers, in the parish registers, and rolls of the
  militia of their respective districts, and other public remembrances
  of the Province, as proper objects, by their persevering in the
  fidelity and conduct so honorable to their ancestors, for
  distinguished benefits and privileges.”

  “And it is also ordered that the said land boards may, in every such
  case, provide not only for the sons of the loyalists, as they arrive
  at full age, but for their daughters also, of that age, or on their
  marriage, assigning to each a lot of 200 acres, more or less,
  provided, nevertheless, that they respectfully comply with the
  general regulations, and that it shall satisfactorily appear that
  there has been no default in the due cultivation and improvement of
  the lands already assigned to the head of the family of which they
  are members.”

In the first days of the Upper Canadian Militia, instructions were given
to the Captains in each battalion that in the roll of members, all of
the U. E. Loyalists enrolled should have the capitals U. E. affixed to
their names.

After the war of 1812, it became necessary for the applicant to present
a certificate from a Clerk of the Peace that he retained his loyalty.
The following is the order of the Executive Council:

                                                YORK, 27th June, 1816.

  “Public notice is hereby given by order of His Excellency Governor
  in Council, that no petition from sons and daughters of U. E.
  Loyalists will be hereafter received without a certificate from the
  Magistrate in Quarter Sessions, signed by the chairman and Clerk of
  the Peace, that the parent retained his loyalty during the late war,
  and was under no suspicion of aiding or assisting the enemy. And if
  a son then of age, that he also was loyal during the late war, and
  did his duty in defense of the Province. And if a daughter of an U.
  E. L. married, that her husband was loyal, and did his duty in
  defense of the Province.” (Signed)      JOHN SMALL, Clerk of the
  Executive Council.

The steps taken by Government to prevent persons not actually upon the
U. E. List from enjoying the peculiar privileges operated sometimes
against the U. E. Loyalists unpleasantly, which led to some agitation,
as the following will show:

In the year 1832, a meeting was held at Bath. Referring to this meeting
the Kingston _Herald_, of April 4, says:

The alleged injustice of the Government with regard to the sons and
daughters of U. E. Loyalists has been a fruitful source of complaint by
the grievance-mongers. At the late Bath meeting Mr. PERRY offered the
following amendment to a resolution, which was negatived by a large
majority,

“Resolved, That a free grant of 200 acres of the waste lands of the
Crown, by His Majesty the King, to the U. E. Loyalists and their sons
and daughters, was intended as a mark of His Majesty’s Royal munificence
towards those who had shown a devotedness to His Majesty’s person and
government during the sanguinary struggle at the late American
Revolution, and that the settlement duty required of late to be
performed by the above description of persons and others equally
entitled to gratuitous grants, and also their not being allowed the
privilege of locating in any, or all townships surveyed and open for
location, appears to this meeting to be unjust, and ought therefore to
be abolished.”




                             CHAPTER LXXI.

  CONTENTS—Notice of a Few—Booth—Brock—Burritt—Cotter—Cartwright—
    Conger—Cole—Dempsey—Detlor—Fraser—Finkle—Fisher—Fairfield—Grass—
    Gamble Hagerman—Johnson’s—“Bill” Johnson—Macaulay—The Captive,
    Christian Moore—Parliament—Morden—Roblins—Simon—Van Alstine—
    Wallbridge—Chrysler—White—Wilkins—Stewart—Wilson—Metcalf—Jayne—
    McIntosh—Bird—Gerow—Vankleek—Perry—Sir William Johnson’s children.


                     INDIVIDUAL NOTICES—CONCLUSION.

The noble band of Loyalists have now almost all passed away. Their
bodies have long since been laid in the grave; their children also have
almost all departed, and the grand-children are getting old. Their last
resting places—resting from war, famine, and toil—are to be found upon
beautiful eminences, overlooking the blue waters of the Bay and River
and Lake. All along their shores may be seen the quiet burying-places of
those who cleared the land and met the terrible realities of a pioneer
life.

The present work cannot embrace a history of the many noble ones,
deserving attention, who laid the foundation of the brightest colony of
Great Britain. Yet it would be incomplete without giving the names of a
few representative persons. They are such as we have been able to
procure, and while there are others, not referred to, well worthy of a
place in history, these are no less worthy. We have, under “The
Combatants,” referred to others of the first settlers, and would gladly
have introduced the names of all, could they have been obtained.

BOOTH—“DIED—At Ernesttown, on Saturday, Oct. 31, 1813, very suddenly,
Joshua Booth, Esq., aged 54 years. He was one of the oldest settlers in
that place, and ever retained the character of a respectable citizen.
Left a widow and ten children.”

THE BROCK FAMILY.—William Brock was a native of Scotland; born in 1715.
Was taken by a press-gang when eighteen, and forced upon a man-of-war.
Served in the navy several years, when he was taken prisoner by the
French. Afterward was exchanged at Boston. Being set at liberty from the
service, he settled at Fishkill, New York, where he married, and became
the father of a large family, two sons, Philip and John, by the first
wife; and eight children by a second, named William, Ruth, Naomi,
Isabel, Deborah, Catherine, Samuel, Garret, and Lucretia. In
consequence, of the rebellion, he became a refugee, and, at the close,
settled in Adolphustown; lived for a short time near the Court House,
upon his town lot, two of his neighbors gave him theirs, and he
continued to live upon the three acres for some time. He drew land near
the Lake on the Mountain, and in the west, to which his sons went when
they grew old enough. One of them was Captain of Militia during the war
of 1812. He received at that time a letter from Gen. Brock, who claimed
relationship; the letter was written a few days before Gen. Brock fell.
This letter still exists. The youngest of the children married
Watterberry, and still lives, (1867) aged 82, with her daughter, Mrs.
Morden, Ameliasburgh.

CARTWRIGHT.—One of the most noted of the refugees who settled at
Kingston, was Richard Cartwright. He was a native of Albany, and was
forced to leave his home because of his loyalty. He found an asylum with
others at Carleton Island, or Fort Niagara. Some time after the
conclusion of the war he was in partnership with Robert, afterward
Honorable Hamilton, at Niagara. But sometime about 1790, he settled in
Kingston, where, as a merchant he acquired extensive property. The
Government mills at Napanee came into his possession. Those who remember
his business capacity, say it was very great. He was a man of “liberal
education and highly esteemed. Suffered at last calmly and patiently,
and died at Montreal, 27th July, 1815, aged fifty years.”

The estimation in which this gentleman was held is sufficiently attested
by the following, which we take from the _Kingston Gazette_:

                                                 YORK, March 13, 1816.

  A new township in the rear of Darlington, in the district of
  Newcastle, has been surveyed, and is now open for the location of
  the U. E. Loyalists and military claimants. We understand that His
  Excellency, the Lieutenant-Governor to testify in the most public
  manner the high sense which he entertained of the merit and services
  of the late Honorable Richard Cartwright, has been pleased to honor
  this township with the name of CARTWRIGHT, a name ever to be
  remembered in Canada with gratitude and respect. Dignified with a
  seat in the Legislative Council, and also with a high appointment in
  the militia of the Province, Mr. Cartwright discharged the duties
  incident to those situations, with skill, fidelity, and attention.
  Animated with the purest principle of loyalty, and with an ardent
  zeal for the preservation of that noble constitution which we enjoy,
  he dedicated, when even struggling under great bodily infirmity, the
  remains of a well spent life to the service of his country. Nor was
  he less perspicuous for his exemplary behaviour in private life;
  obliging to his equals—kind to his friends—affectionate to his
  family, he passed through life, eminently distinguished for virtuous
  and dignified propriety of conduct, uniformly maintaining the
  exalted character of a true patriot, and of a great man.

He was a good type of the old school, a tall, robust man, with a stern
countenance, and a high mind. He had sustained the loss of one eye, but
the remaining one was sharp and piercing. As the first Judge of
Mecklenburgh, he discharged his duties with great firmness, amounting,
it is said, often to severity. As an officer of the militia, a position
he held in 1812, he was a strict disciplinarian, and often forgot that
the militiamen were respectable farmers. Mr. Cartwright left two sons,
the late John S. Cartwright, and the Rev. Robert Cartwright. It is
unnecessary to say that the descendants of Judge Cartwright are among
the most respectable, influential and wealthy, living in the Midland
District.

MR. JAMES COTTER, was by profession, a farmer, residing in Sophiasburgh
in good circumstances. He was universally respected; decided, and well
informed in political matters; and as a proof of the public confidence
was elected M.P.P. In Parliament he served his constituents faithfully,
and maintained a reputation for consistency and uprightness. In 1819,
when party spirit animated the two political parties, he became a
candidate for re-election, but after a close contest was defeated by
James Wilson, Esq.

CONGER.—“At West Lake, Hallowell, on the 27th May, 1825, died Dengine
Conger, in the 60th year of his age. He held a commission in the First
Battalion of the Prince Edward Militia, during twenty-three years. He
resided in Hallowell forty years, and lived a very exemplary life, and
died regretted by all who knew him.”

COLE.—In the history of Adolphustown, reference is made to Daniel Cole,
the very first settler in that township. The writer in the summer of
1866, took dinner with John Cole, of Ameliasburgh, son of Daniel. John
was then in his 92nd year. He has since, 1867, passed away. Born in
Albany before the rebellion, he, with his family during the war, found
their way as loyalists to the city of New York, where they remained
until the leaving of VanAlstine’s company. The old man could remember
many of the events of that exciting period, being, when they came to
Canada, about ten years old. The brigade of batteaux from Sorel, was
under the supervision of Collins, he says: “Old Mother Cook kept tavern
in Kingston, in a low flat hut, with two rooms.” There were four or five
houses altogether in the place. Landed in fourth township in June. Saw
no clearings or buildings all the way up from Kingston, nor tents; a
complete wilderness. Remembers an early settler in second township,
named Cornelius Sharp, from the fact that he injured his knee, and that
Dr. Dougall desired to amputate; but his father cured it. His mother’s
name was Sophia de Long, from Albany. She lost property. A hogshead of
spirits was brought up from New York. The settlers were called together
every morning and supplied with a little on account of the new climate.
His father had been a spy and carried despatches in a thin steel box,
which was placed between the soles of the boot. Before resorting to this
mode he had been caught, and sentenced to be hanged immediately. The
rope was around his neck, and the end thrown over the limb of a tree,
when he suddenly gave a spring from their grasp, and ran, while shot
after shot was leveled at his flying figure; but he escaped, “God
Almighty would not let the balls hit him.” Remembers the Indians when
first came, were frequently about, would come in and look at the dinner
table; but refused to eat bread at first; afterward would, and then
brought game to them in abundance at times. Remembers landing at
Adolphustown, he hauled the boat to a block oak tree, which overhung the
water, his father built a wharf here afterwards. It was in the
afternoon. They all went ashore. There were three tents of linen put up.
His father brought a scythe with him, with which they cut marsh hay, or
flags. This was used to cover the houses, and they kept out the rain
well.

His father’s family consisted of twelve persons, two died at Sorel. The
settlers used to meet every Sunday to hear the Bible read, generally by
Ferguson; sometimes had prayer. Remembers, Quarter Sessions met at his
father’s, Cartwright was Judge. The Grand Jury would go to the stable to
converse. Says he once saved Chrys. Hagerman’s life, who was bleeding at
nose, after Drs. Dougall and Dunham had failed. His father lived to be
105, his sister died last year, aged 101. Remembers the man that was
convicted of stealing a watch, and hanged. Has seen the gallows on
Gallows Point, Captain Grass’ farm. The gallows remained there a dozen
years. The man it turned out, was innocent.

DIED.—“On Friday the 5th of August, at his residence in Adolphustown,
Mr. Daniel Cole, at the very advanced age of 105 years, 1 month and 12
days. He was a native of Long Island, N. Y., and the oldest settler in
this township; he was respected and beloved by all who knew him—having
long performed his duty as a loyal subject, a faithful friend, a kind
husband, an indulgent parent, and an obliging neighbor. Born in the
fifth year of the reign of George II, he lived under four Sovereigns,
and saw many changes both in the land of his birth, and this of his
adoption. He has beheld the horrors of war, and has tasted of the
blessings of peace; he has seen that which was once a wilderness,
“blossom and flourish like the rose,” where formerly was nothing to be
seen but the dark shadow of the lofty pine, oak, and maple, here and
there broken by the thin blue vapor curling above the Indian wigwam, he
has seen comfortable dwellings arise; out of the superabundance of
nature man has supplied his necessity. Beneath the untiring efforts of
human industry, the dark woods have disappeared and waiving fields of
grain have taken their place. Where once was seen nought but the light
birch bark canoe of the “son of the forest,” he has beheld the stately
steamboats sweep majestically along—where formerly resounded the savage
howl of the panther, the wolf and bear, he has seen towns and villages
spring up, as it were by magic; in fact the very face of the country
seems changed since he first sat down upwards of 52 years ago, as a
settler on the place where he died.

“But after all he saw, he too is gone, his venerable age could not save
him, for we are told “the old must die.” The friends of his early days
were all gone before him; he was becoming “a stranger among men,”
generations had arisen and passed away, still he remained like a
patriarch of old, unbroken by the weight of years. After witnessing the
fifth generation, he died universally lamented by all his acquaintances,
leaving behind him 8 children; 75 grandchildren, 172 great-grandchildren
and 13 great-grandchildren’s children; in all 268 descendants.”

                                Adolphustown, August 9, 1836.      T. D.

DEMPSEY.—“Mark Dempsey was sent out by the British Government as
Secretary to General Schuyler. Married about 1746 to Miss Carroll.
Thomas, their youngest son, was born in New Jersey, 9th January, 1762.
His father died while he was young, and he was left in a part of the
country which was held by the rebels, when he had attained to an age to
be drafted, Thomas Dempsey did not like to fight in the rebel ranks, and
consequently escaped and joined the loyalists. Was in the service when
New York was evacuated. Married 1782 to Mary Lawson, whose father, Peter
was imprisoned by the rebels, and his property all plundered and
confiscated. Came to Canada by Oswego, 1788, accompanied by his wife and
her parents. Tarried at Napanee till 1789, when they came to
Ameliasburgh, and settled on lot 91, which had been purchased from John
Finkle. Dempsey’s worldly effects then consisted of a cow, which they
brought with them, seven bushels of potatoes, and a French crown, and a
half acre of wheat which Finkle had sowed. They drew land in Cramahe.
During the first years they were in great distress. A tablespoonful of
flour, with milk boiled, or grain shelled by hand, formed their daily
meals. Their clothing consisted of blankets obtained of the Indians for
the women, and buckskin pants and shirts for the men. Dempsey was the
second settler in the township, Weese having settled two years before.
Margaret Dempsey, born October 24, 1790, was the third child born in the
township.”

DETLORS.—The Detlors are of the Palatine stock. Says G. H. Detlor, Esq.,
of the Customs Department, Kingston:

My grandfather, John V. Detlor, emigrated with my grandmother from
Ireland, to New York; directly after his marriage in the City of New
York, they removed to the town of Camden, where they resided with their
family—and at the close of the Rebellion (having joined the Royal
standard)—he with two or three of his sons and sons-in-law came to
Canada, and finally located on lands in the Township of Fredericksburgh,
Lot No. 21, 6th concession, where he and his sons lived and died. My
father removed to the town of York (now City of Toronto), in 1802, and
at the invasion of that place by the Americans, in April, 1813, my
father lost his life in defense of the place. There is now but one of my
grandfather’s children living, an aunt of mine, Mrs. Anne Dulmage,
resides in the village of Sydenham, Township of Loughboro’, County of
Frontenac.

They sacrificed their lands, and suffered great privations. The Detlors
have ever been universally esteemed, not alone in the Midland District,
but in all parts of Canada, and have been found worthy occupants of many
responsible positions.

ISAAC FRASER.—“Among the prominent men who resided in Ernesttown, near
the Bay of Quinté, was Isaac Fraser, Esq., for many years M.P.P. for the
Counties of Lennox and Addington. Mr. Fraser was a man of great decision
of character, and during the active part of his life, probably wielded a
great influence, and his opinions always commanded great respect. In his
political opinions, he was identified with the Conservative or Tory
party; and when he arrived at a conclusion on any particular point, he
adhered to it with all the tenacity which a clear conviction of its
justice could inspire. With him there was no wavering, no vacillation.
He was always reliable, and his friends always knew where to find him.
There is no doubt, he acted from conscientious motives, and from a clear
conviction of duty; and, so far as I know, no man ever charged him with
acting corruptly. In his religious views, Mr. Fraser sympathized with
the Presbyterians, and, if I mistake not, was a member of the church
organized, and watched over by the late Rev. Robert McDowall, of
Fredericksburgh.”

FINKLE.—The late Geo. Finkle, of Ernesttown, says, “My grandfather, Dr.
Geo. Finkle, left Germany when a young man; and bought two estates, one
at Great, and one at Little Nine Partners. In adhering to the British,
he had all his estates, which were valuable at Nine Partners, Duchess
Co., confiscated to the Rebel Government. My father, Henry, made his way
to Quebec shortly after the war began, being sixteen years old. Entered
the Engineer’s Department, where he learned the use of carpenter’s
tools. In settling, this knowledge was of great use to him, and he
became the builder of the first framed building in Upper Canada. His
wife was a sister of Capt. John Bleeker. He settled on the front of
Ernesttown, lot six.” Finkle’s Point is well known.

The First court held in Upper Canada, it is said, was at Finkle’s house,
which being larger than any at Kingston, or elsewhere on the Bay,
afforded the most convenience. Mr. Finkle records the trial of a negro
for stealing a loaf of bread, who, being found guilty, received
thirty-nine lashes. The basswood tree, to which he was tied, is still
standing; Mr. Finkle had slaves and was the first to give them freedom.
One of the brothers, of which there were three, John, George, and Henry,
served seven years in Johnson’s regiment.

Mr. Finkle wrote us, Dec. 11, 1865; he says, “Being in my 74th year, and
in impaired health, I am unable to write more.” The kind man soon
thereafter was called away, at a good old age, like his father and
grandfather.

Geo. Finkle, son of Henry, had three sons, Gordon William, Roland
Robinson, and Henry. The Finkle’s, as we have seen elsewhere, were
actively engaged in the construction of the first steamboats the
‘Frontenac’ and ‘Charlotte,’ having had an interest in the ‘Charlotte,’
and his eldest son, Gordon, is now one of the oldest captains upon the
Bay, being attached to the steamer ‘Bay Quinté.’ The old place granted
to the grandfather, still belongs to the family, Roland R. still
residing there, and the youngest, Henry, is Postmaster at Bath.

FISHER.—Judge Alexander Fisher, a name well known in the Midland
District, was a native of Perthshire, Scotland, from whence his parents,
with a numerous family, emigrated to New York, then a British province.
At the time of the rebellion they had accumulated a considerable amount
of both real and personal property; but at the defeat of Burgoyne, near
the place of whose defeat they lived, the Fisher family, who would not
abandon their loyalty, left their all, and endured great hardships in
finding their way to Montreal. Alexander was subsequently employed in
the Commissariat, under McLean, at Carleton Island; while his
twin-brother obtained the charge of the High School at Montreal, which
situation he held until his death, in the year 1819. At the close of the
war the family obtained their grants of land as U. E. Loyalists.

Alex. Fisher was appointed the first District Judge and Chairman of
Quarter Sessions for the Midland District, to the last of which he was
elected by his brother magistrates. He was also for many years a Captain
of Militia, which post he held during the war of 1812. The family took
up their abode in Adolphustown, upon the shores of Hay Bay. A sister of
Judge Fisher was married to Mr. Hagerman, and another to Mr. Stocker,
who, for a time, lived on the front of Sidney. He was related, by
marriage, to McDonnell, of Marysburgh. His parents lived with him at the
farm in Adolphustown. They were buried here in the family vault, with a
brother, and the Judge’s only son.

Judge Fisher was short in stature, and somewhat stout, with a prominent
nose. He was, as a judge, and as a private individual, universally
esteemed. “He was a man of great discernment, and moral honesty governed
his decisions.”—(Allison.) He died in the year 1830, and was buried in
the family vault. As an evidence of the high esteem in which he was
held, there was scarcely a lawyer or magistrate in the whole District,
from the Carrying Place to Gananoque, who did not attend his funeral,
together with a great concourse of the settlers throughout the counties.

FAIRFIELD.—The Kingston _Gazette_ tells the following:

“DIED.—At his house, in Ernesttown, on the 7th Feb. 1816, in the 47th
year of his age, W. Fairfield. His funeral was attended by a numerous
circle of relatives, friends and neighbors. He left a widow and seven
children. The first link that was broken in a family chain of twelve
brothers and three sisters, all married at years of maturity. His death
was a loss to the district, as well as to his family. He was one of the
commissioners for expending the public money on the roads. Formerly a
member of the Provincial Parliament; many years in the commission of the
Peace. As a magistrate and a man, he was characterized by intelligence,
impartiality, independence of mind and liberality of sentiments.”

GRASS.—Captain Michael Grass, the first settler of Kingston township,
was a native of Germany. The period of his emigration to America is
unknown. He was a saddler and harness-maker by trade, and for years
plied his trade in Philadelphia. It would seem that he removed from
Philadelphia to New York, for his son Peter was born in this city in
1770. According to the statement of his grandson who often heard the
facts from his father, Peter Grass, soon after the commencement of the
rebellion, Michael Grass was taken prisoner by the Indians, who were
staying at Cataraqui. In this he is probably mistaken. We learn from
another source that it was during the previous French war, which is more
likely to be correct. It would seem that Grass and two other prisoners
were not confined in the fort, but held in durance by a tribe of
Indians, who permitted them to hunt, fish, &c. They made an effort to
escape, but were caught and brought back. Again they attempted, carrying
with them provisions, which they had managed to collect, sufficient to
last them a week. But it was nine weeks before they reached an English
settlement, one having died by the way from hunger and exposure. It was
the knowledge which Grass had acquired of the territory at Cataraqui,
while a prisoner, which led to his appointment to the leadership of a
band of refugees at the close of the war.—(See settlement of Kingston.)

It does not appear that Captain Grass occupied any office in the army
during the war. His captaincy commenced upon his leaving New York with
the seven vessels for Canada. By virtue of his captaincy, he was
entitled to draw 3000 acres. Beside lot twenty-five in Kingston, he drew
in fourth concession of Sidney nearly 2000 acres in one block.

Captain Grass had three sons, Peter, John, and Daniel, and three
daughters. Daniel, some years after, went sailing and was never heard
from. Peter and John settled in the Second Town and became the fathers
respectively of families. The land drawn by the captain, and the 600
acres by each of his children, has proved a lasting source of wealth and
comfort to his descendants.

Captain Grass naturally took a leading part at least during the first
years of the settlement at Kingston. He was possessed of some education,
and was a man of excellent character, with a strict sense of honor.
Although opportunities presented themselves to accumulate property at
the expense of others, he refused to avail himself of all such. He was
appointed a magistrate at an early period, and as such performed many of
the first marriages in Kingston. In religion, he was an adherent to the
Church of England. Probably he had been brought up a Lutheran. His old
“Dutch” Bible still is read by an old German in Ernesttown; but it seems
a pity that although none of the Grass family can read its time worn
pages, it should be allowed to remain in other hands than the
descendants of the old captain.

In connection, it may be mentioned that some time before the war, a poor
German, a baker by trade, came to New York. Michael Grass assisted him
into business, and even gave him a suit of clothes. When the refugees
came to Canada, this baker accompanied them. He settled in Quebec, where
he amassed eventually great wealth, and the P—— family are not unknown
to the public.

GAMBLE.—The subjoined somewhat lengthy notice is taken from the _Toronto
Colonist_:—“Dr. Gamble and family were for many years residing at
Kingston, and he was intimately associated with the first days of Upper
Canada, as a Province, while his offspring as will be seen, form no
indifferent element of the society of the Province,” we therefore insert
the notice _in extenso_. “Isabella Elizabeth Gamble, the third daughter
of Dr. Joseph Clark and Elizabeth Alleyne, was born at Stratford, in
Connecticut—then a colony of Great Britain—on the 24th October, 1767. In
the year 1776, her father, faithful to his allegiance, repaired to the
British army in New York, to which place his family followed him. At the
peace of 1783, Dr. Clark removed with his family to New Brunswick (then
known as the Province of Acadia) and took up his residence at
Mangerville. There his daughter, the subject of this memoir, then in her
seventeenth year, was married on the 18th of May, 1884, to Dr. John
Gamble, the eldest son of William Gamble and Leah Tyrer, of Duross, near
Enniskillen, Ireland. Mr. Gamble was born in 1755, studied physic and
surgery at Edinburgh; emigrated to the British colony in 1779, and
landed in New York in September of that year. Immediately on his
arrival, he entered the King’s service as Assistant-Surgeon to the
General Hospital; subsequently he was attached to the “Old Queen’s
Rangers,” and for some time did duty with that regiment as surgeon. At
the peace of 1783, he, with other American Loyalists, went to New
Brunswick. After his marriage Dr. Gamble practised his profession at St.
John’s, and resided in New Brunswick until 1793, when having been
appointed Assistant-Surgeon to the late regiment of Queen’s Rangers, by
General Simcoe, then Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada, he joined his
regiment at Niagara, where it was then quartered, having left his wife
and five daughters at Mangerville. Mrs. Gamble continued to reside with
her father until 1798, when her husband, having in the meantime, been
promoted to the surgeoncy of his regiment; she, with her five daughters,
the eldest then but thirteen years of age, accompanied by her father and
a sister (afterwards married to the Hon. Samuel Smith), ascended the
river St. John in a bark canoe, crossed the portage by Temi conata to
the Rivierie du Loup, came up the St. Lawrence, and joined Dr. Gamble
then with his regiment in garrison at York.

“In 1802, the Queen’s Rangers were disbanded, and Mrs. Gamble
accompanied her husband and family to Kingston, where he practised his
profession until his death, in the fifty-sixth year of his age, on the
1st December, 1811. She remained in Kingston till the year 1820, when
with the portion of her family then at home, she removed to Toronto, and
there remained surrounded by her offspring until her death on the 9th
March, 1859.

“Mrs. Gamble had thirteen children, nine daughters and four sons;
Isabella, the eldest, married to Robert Charles Home, Esq.,
Assistant-Surgeon, Glengary Light Infantry; Mary Ann, married to Colonel
Sinclair, Royal Artillery; Sarah Hannah Boyes, to James Geddes, Esq.,
Assistant-Surgeon, Medical Staff; Leah Tyrer, to the Hon. William Allen;
Catharine, who died unmarried; Jane, married to Benjamin Whitney, Esq.;
Rachel Crookshank, to Sir James Buchannan Macaulay; Magdaline, to Thomas
William Birchall, Esq.; and Mary Ann unmarried; John William, of
Vaughan, William, of Milton, Etobicoke; Clarks, of Toronto, and Joseph
who died in infancy; of these thirteen, six only survive, but Mrs.
Gamble’s descendants have already reached the large number of 204, and
some of her children’s children are now upwards of thirty years of age.

“The remarkable longevity of a large number of the American Loyalist
emigrants who came to the British Provinces after the American
Revolution, has been noticed by the Lord Bishop of New Brunswick, as a
striking instance of the fulfilment of the promise contained in the
fifth commandment, embracing, as that commandment unquestionably does,
the duty of obedience to civil rulers. Mrs. Gamble may well be counted
among that number, having, in October last, entered upon her
ninety-second year.”—_Colonist._

Among the company of refugees which followed VanAlstine’s lead to
Canada, was Nicholas Hagerman.

He settled in the village of Adolphustown, almost in front of the U. E.
burying ground. The point of land here between the Bay and the Creek is
still known as Hagerman’s Point. The whole of the land except the
burying ground was cleared by Hagerman. His house was situated a short
distance west of the road leading from the wharf up to the village. It
was built near the water’s edge. The short period which has elapsed
since that building was erected has not only consigned the builder to a
grave almost unknown, and the building to the destructive tooth of time,
but the very land on which the house stood, where he and his family
daily passed in and out, is now washed away by the ceaseless waves of
the bay.

Mr. Hagerman was a man of some education, and it is said had studied law
before leaving New York. At all events he became one of the first
appointed lawyers in Upper Canada, probably at the time McLean, of
Kingston, was appointed. He continued to live and practice law in
Adolphustown until his death. “He was the first lawyer to plead at these
Courts. He was a self-made man.”—Allison.

The writer’s parents lived at, and near the village of Adolphustown when
young; they knew the Hagerman’s well, and for many a day and year
attended school with Nicholas Hagerman’s children. There were at least
two brothers, David and Christopher, and two daughters, Betsy and Maria.
Daniel was a sedate person, but “Chris.” was a saucy boy. They were both
elected to Parliament at the same time, but Daniel died before the
meeting of Parliament. Christopher studied law with his father at first,
was a pupil of Dr. Strachan’s, and completed his legal studies in
McLean’s office in Kingston. The father and son were sometimes employed
by opposing clients; at one time in Kingston, the son won the suit, much
to the annoyance of the father. The father exclaimed, “have I raised a
son to put out my eyes.” “No”, replied the son, “to open them father.”
At the commencement of the war in 1812, Christopher went as Lieutenant
with a Company from Adolphustown to Kingston. Shortly after he was
chosen Aide-de-Camp to the Governor General. Thenceforth his way to
preferment was steady. At the close of the war he was appointed
Collector of Customs at Kingston. The _Gazette_ of 5th September, 1815,
says that Christopher Alexander Hagerman, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, was
appointed to His Majesty’s Council in and for the Province of Upper
Canada.

On the 26th March, 1817, he was married to Elizabeth, eldest daughter of
James Macaulay, Esq., Kingston.

JOHNSONS.—Henry Johnson was born at New Jersey, 1757, where he lived
till the rebellion, when he removed to Poughkeepsie. In June, 1788,
being a loyalist, he came with his brother Andrew to Canada, enduring
many privations and hardships. He settled in Hallowell, where he lived
until his death, which took place 28th May, 1829, being in his 73rd
year. “He was noted for his hospitality—charitable to the poor without
ostentation, a pious Christian. For the last five years he suffered
much.”

ANDREW JOHNSON.—Among the combatants, we have given the name of James
Johnson; here we design to give a place to some account of his two sons,
Andrew and William, or “Bill,” as he was commonly called, a name yet
remembered by many.

Perhaps there is not now living a more interesting historic character
than Andrew Johnson, residing in the vicinity of Belleville. A native of
New York State, Gainesborough, he came in with his father at the first
settlement of Upper Canada. He was an eye witness of the first days of
Ernesttown, and Kingston. At the beginning of the present century he was
known as an unusually rapid walker. Andrew was engaged in carrying the
mail from Kingston to York. Mr. Stuart was his employer. His route was
by the Bay shore to Adolphustown, across the Bay, at the Stone Mills, by
Picton and Wellington, to the Carrying Place; and thence along the Lake
shore, fording streams as best he could, often upon a fallen tree, or by
swimming. He would spend five hours in York and then start back. These
trips were generally made once a fortnight. He subsequently lived at
Bath for forty years, where he kept a tavern, and strangely enough, as
he avers, he never drank liquor in his life.

His father’s log house was used by Rev. Mr. Stuart to preach in for
three years, before the frame building was erected on the hill, which
would hold thirty or forty persons. It was a story and a-half high.
Andrew Johnson is now upwards of a hundred. Although his memory is
somewhat defective, he retains a great deal of bodily vigor; and eats
and sleeps well. He rarely converses unless spoken to. He is a man of
somewhat low stature, small frame, with spare limbs. Mr. Lockwood, who
has known him a long time, says, “He was remarkably quick in his
movements.” During the war, the two started to walk from Prescott to
Kingston, but Lockwood says that Johnson could walk three miles to his
one. His brother, “Bill,” had a fast horse, which could outrun anything.
Andrew offered to bet a hundred dollars that he could travel to York
quicker than the horse. Of course there was but an imperfect path, with
no bridges. His offer was not accepted. Andrew was a loyal soldier in
1812, and belonged to the same companies as his brother. The old man is
yet very quick in his movements, retaining that peculiar swinging gait
by which he formerly so rapidly traveled long distances. His days are
passing away in a quiet dream, tenderly cared for by his son, with his
wife.

BILL JOHNSON.—William Johnson, brother of the foregoing, was one of six
sons of James Johnson, born in Ernesttown. His youthful days were spent
in the vicinity of what is now the village of Bath. About the time of
the commencement of the war of 1812, he was engaged in Kingston, in
trading, and had a store of general merchandize. When the first draft
for men was made, Johnson was one of the conscripts. For a very short
time, he did service, and then procured his brother (not Andrew) as a
substitute. There was not at this time any doubt of his loyalty. It was
natural he should desire to attend to his business in Kingston, which at
this time was lucrative. And there does not appear that he employed his
brother in other than good faith. But some time after his brother
entered the service, he deserted to the United States’ shore. Even now
it does not appear that the authorities of Kingston suspected his
loyalty, for they desired that he should take his place in the ranks
which his brother had forsaken. This, however, “Bill” would not do. The
result was that a file of soldiers commanded by Sergeant Lockwood, (our
principal informant) was sent to arrest Johnson, by order of the
captain, Matthew Clark of Ernesttown.

Upon the approach of the soldiers, Johnson shouted to Sergeant Lockwood,
who had been his life long playmate, “I know what you are after; but you
won’t get me yet,” and immediately shut the door and turned the key.
Lockwood, without hesitation, raised his musket, and with the butt
knocked the door open, in time to see Bill escaping by the back door. A
close chase ensued into a back enclosure, and Lockwood succeeded in
catching him by the leg as he was passing through a window. Johnson then
submitted, and was conveyed a prisoner to the guard house within the
jail. After being confined for sometime he escaped by breaking the jail;
probably aided by sympathizers, for a good many thought he was badly
treated.

Whatever may have been Johnson’s feelings towards the British Government
before, he now became a most determined enemy of his native country. He
vowed he should “be a thorn in Great Britain’s side;” and his goods and
some property at Bath, a few town lots, being confiscated, he declared
he would get back all he lost. The foregoing occurence took place
sometime during the fall of 1812. It would appear that Bill Johnson set
to work in a systematic manner to carry out his threats.

Being well acquainted with the country and people, and, withal, a bold,
determined and fearless man, he did not hesitate to visit the Canadian
shore, and was even seen at Bath in day light. He built several small
boats, light and trim, and he would at times unhesitatingly voyage upon
the broad lake in bold undertakings. His operations consisted in
privateering, in inducing American sympathizers to accompany him to the
States, and in acting as a spy. During the war there were frequently
boat loads of goods, consisting of liquors and other valuable articles
passing up the bay, and across the Carrying Place, thence to York. On
one occasion Thomas Parker, who was engaged in the business, left
Kingston with a batteau laden with valuables for York. Johnson, who
watched such events, saw Parker depart. While the latter made his way up
the bay, Johnson proceeded in his craft around by the lake, and awaited
Parker off Presqu’isle. In due time the batteau was seized by Johnson
and his comrades, and taken to the other side. Parker being landed on
Point Traverse, off Marysburgh.

Another exploit was the seizure of Government despatches near Brighton.
A company of Dragoons, Captain Stinson, were on duty to carry despatches
between the River Trent and Smith’s Creek, Port Hope. On a certain
occasion when a dragoon, by the name of Gardner, was pursuing his way
with despatches, he was suddenly seized by Johnson, who deliberately
took him with his horse to the lake shore, where he shot the horse,
placed the despatch bag in his boat, and then permitted the man to find
his way on foot through the woods to report himself to his captain.

“Bill Johnson still lives at French Creek upon the American shore of the
St. Lawrence. He was an active participant in the events of 1837, and it
is supposed had much to do in recruiting for the army of sympathizers.”
There is so much of fiction to be found respecting him in connection
with that time, that it is difficult to say what part he did take. It
has been generally supposed that he was one of the few who escaped from
the Windmill, but while, no doubt, he was engaged at the time, there is
nothing to rest a decided statement upon. We suspect that “Bill,” in his
later days, was given to boasting a little, and took pleasure in
catering to the taste of his Yankee friends, in relating what he and his
daughter Kate did, (in imagination.)

MACAULAY, “the father of the Honorable John, and the Rev. William
Macaulay, settled during the Revolutionary war on Carleton Island, then
a British station and fortification, where he supplied the commissariat
and garrison, and carried on business. In 1794, Mr. Macaulay removed to
Kingston, where he amassed considerable property. When he removed to
Kingston, he had rafted over from Carleton Island his log dwelling
house, and placed it where it now stands at the corner of Princess and
Ontario Streets. It has since been clap-boarded over and added to, and
having been kept painted and in good repair is still a very habitable
building.”—(Cooper.)

Mr. Macaulay had come to New York shortly before the commencement of the
Colonial troubles, and as a loyalist had his house pillaged and burnt,
by the rebels, and became a refugee at the military post at Carleton
Island. About 1785, he settled at Kingston, where he married, and
remained until his death, in September, 1800, being fifty-six years old.
He was at no time connected with the service, but engaged his time in
commercial business, and was on most intimate terms with those in
authority, being a particular friend of the Duke of Albano. His sons
continued his business and in time were called to occupy honorable and
responsible situations under Government, as Legislative Councilor,
Surveyor General, Provincial Secretary, Inspector General, Chaplain to
Legislative Assembly, and Commissioners on various important matters.


                      THE CAPTIVE CHRISTIAN MOORE.

Upon the 19th March, 1867, the writer was privileged, through the
kindness of the Rev. Mr. Anderson, to visit an individual who, of all
others, possesses historic interest. About half a mile north of the
Indian Church upon the old York road, Tyendinaga, lives Christian Moore.
Beside the stove, in a low Indian chair, sat a woman whose shrunken and
bent appearance made her appear no larger than a girl of sixteen. But
the face, with its parchment-like skin—the deeply wrinkled features,
bespoke the burden of many winters. Yet, the eye still flashed looks of
intelligence, as the face was upturned from her hands on which she
almost incessantly rested her head, as if the shoulders had wearied in
their long life duty. Christian is about a hundred years old, during
eighty of which she has remained a captive with the Mohawks. Although a
white woman, she knows not a word of English. Long, long years ago, in
becoming the wife of an Indian, and the mother of Indians, she became to
all purposes one of themselves. She is a living relic of the American
Revolution, as well as of the customs of the Mohawk Indians a hundred
years ago.

In the first days of the rebellion, in an encounter between the Indians
and a party of rebels in the Mohawk valley, one of the Indians, by the
name of Green, was killed. The custom among the several tribes, or
families, when one of their number had been lost in war, was to take the
first captive they could, and adopt him or her, into the tribe, to keep
up the number. A party of Indians, under John Green, a chief and brother
of the one killed, called in after days Captain Green, in the course of
their foray, caught a little girl about ten years of age. That little
girl is the old person of whom we are speaking. The old woman yet
recollects the fact that her father’s family, on the approach of the
Indians, made haste to escape; she by accident was left alone or behind.
She remembers to have been running along the road, when she was taken.
She says there were a good many Indians. After this there is a blank in
her memory, until the period of the Indians leaving their homes to
escape. This was the time when they buried their Communion Plate.
Christian says she was carried upon an Indian’s back, as they fled to
Lachine. She recollects that they were staying three years at Lachine,
when the tribe set out to take possession of the land which Government
was to give them. It was about a year from the time they started from
Lachine, until they, under Brant, reached their destination, the Grand
River. Captain Green was with this party, and stayed with them at Grand
River for six years, when, becoming dissatisfied, he, with his family,
came to the Bay Quinté. Christian remembers all this. She was living
with Captain Green’s sister. They came in a batteau, down the north
shore of the lake, and crossed at the Carrying Place at the head of the
bay.

Christian in time became the wife of an Indian, by the name of Anthony
Smart, who, she says, has been dead now thirty-eight years. They had but
one child, a daughter, who was married to Abram Maricle. They had three
children, one being a son, Christian’s daughter has been dead many
years, but the old lady now is surrounded by grand-children to the third
generation.

Some time after the close of the Revolution, a person by the name of
Moore, came with his family to Canada, and settled at Napanee. By some
means he learned that there was a white woman among the Mohawks, and he
visited them to see if it might be his long lost daughter. Such proved
to be the case. He was Christian’s father. She remembers the occasion,
(it was about forty-five years ago,) her father was then a very old man.
Of course, there was no resemblance between the woman in Indian garb
before him, and his little girl of ten years. But there was a mark upon
her arm, the result of a burn by which he was enabled to recognize his
own flesh and blood. The scar, upon the left forearm, can yet be
distinctly seen. Painful, indeed, must have been the feelings of the
parent, to know she was his daughter, and yet knew not a syllable of her
mother tongue. The natural channel by which parental and filial
affection might have flowed was sealed. She says, she has a sister now
living back of Napanee. She asked her father if she had been christened,
and he informed her she had been. Upon our asking her the question, if
she ever went to school, she says, “No;” that she was “always working
hard.” Asking her the question, if she did not think she had lived a
long while, she replied, “I don’t think I’ll live very long.” The Rev.
Mr. Anderson informs us that she has ever maintained the character of a
true Christian, and is always happy to partake of the Holy Communion,
Christian’s great-grandson, himself a father, acted as interpreter.

It is possible that this woman, who belonged to another century, may
live yet several years. There is much of vigor in her movements and
conversation. Although shrivelled and bent almost double with age, her
body seems to be well nourished, and her arms possess considerable
thickness. She always enjoyed good health, and now eats and sleeps in
the most comfortable manner.

We are informed by a recent letter from Rev. Mr. Anderson, 1869, that
the old woman continues quite well, and works in the garden in summer.

PARLIAMENT.—Mrs. Morden, of Sophiasburgh, was born upon the banks of the
Hudson, forty miles from its mouth. Her birthday stretches back
ninety-eight years. She came into Canada with her father, George
Parliament, who was of German parentage, born upon the sea; and like the
ocean, he was through out his brief life tossed up and down with
scarcely a day of calm and sunshine. The family reached the Fourth Town,
and only six weeks after her father’s eyes were closed in death. Mrs.
Morden has a distinct recollection of the rebellion. Her father was
staunchly loyal, and she has heard him repeatedly declare that he would
lay his bones in the King’s domains. During the war he was imprisoned
twice, at Goshen and Poughkeepsie. She was thirteen years old when they
came to Canada, and remembers the many weary days of travel by Oneida
Lake. Her father walked and drove the cattle all day, her mother would
sit up till late at night over the camp-kettle preparing food for the
party to use the following day, so that there would be no delay on the
way. Having crossed from the States, the Skenectady boats landed at
Little Catariqui. The father was down below on the St. Lawrence swimming
the cattle across the stream. They found their flour was nearly done.
She, with a little sister, went along the shore to the village of
Kingston to buy flour, she had only enough money to buy a quarter of a
hundred of second flour, which she carried from McAulay’s store to the
hungry company at the Little Catariqui, where they were wind-bound. She
remembers the appearance of the shores as they journeyed along; the rude
log cabins in the small clearings. The family of eleven children settled
upon the north shore of Hay Bay. The eldest boy was nineteen years old.
They now thought that they, in common with other settlers, would be
permitted to work out a peaceful and happy future, but the arrow of
death was already in the bended bow. The mournful occasion can hardly be
appreciated, the father of eleven children in the wilderness suddenly
cut down. Each of the neighbours had quite enough to do to care for his
own family. All these terrible facts are fresh in the mind of the
venerable lady. The events of later years are faded from her memory, but
those are too deeply engraven upon her mind, by the pen of sorrow, to be
erased while life lasts and mind sits enthroned. The subsequent events
connected with the family for a time are no less distressing. They had
one cow, the milk of which supplied them with their principal food. Fish
was occasionally caught. But they often had to seek herbs and greens.
For weeks they were in the greatest distress for the very necessaries of
life. All of the family who were old enough went out to work. The
following spring, and the subsequent ones, her mother made sugar, not to
use in the family, “oh! no, that was too great a luxury.” It was all
carried and sold for flour. Mrs. Morden remembers it, for she carried
much of the sap. She subsequently worked out, until after several years
she found a kind supporter. Mrs. Morden, whom the writer saw nearly four
years ago, (1865), was then, although so old, yet vigorous and
sprightly, with a kindly face, and even a sharp eye. Of all the persons
it has been our privilege to converse with, there are only a few who
gave such clear and appropriate testimony, and afforded so much
satisfaction. She confined her remarks strictly to the questions, and we
learned much in a short hour. She spoke feelingly; and with Christian
nobleness said she, “I have lived a long time and had many blessings,
thanks be to God.” Thus spoke the lips of one whose youth had been spent
in another century.

ROBLINS.—The Roblin family is extensively and favorably known in Upper
Canada, especially in the bay region. They, although numerous, have
sprung from a common ancestry. Originally of English or Welsh nativity;
at the commencement of the rebellion they were found dwelling in New
York, and New Jersey. As a result of the Revolution, four branches of
the Roblin family came into Canada, two of whom, John and Stephen, were
brothers.

John Roblin lived in New Jersey, he took no part in the contest, but his
sympathies were doubtless with the loyalists. One day, he was sitting in
the door-way, when a scouting party fired upon the house as they
approached. Some fourteen shots were fired. This was done without any
warning, the house being inhabited by a private family. John Roblin was
wounded in the knee. The party entered the house and completely
ransacked it, searching for valuables; not satisfied with what they
found, they demanded where the money was; John’s brother, Stephen, was
suspended by his thumbs to a tree with the view of forcing him to tell
where the moneys was concealed. John, although wounded, was stripped
almost naked. The ruffians, who did all this under the name of
“Liberty,” destroyed what they could not carry; and flour, furniture,
everything in fact, was strewn about and broken. One of the party put
his bayoneted musket to the breast of Mrs. Roblin, and dared her to call
George her king. She fearlessly replied, he once was, why not now. The
demon was pulling the trigger, when a more human comrade knocked the
weapon aside. The rebels were near by under Washington, and this was a
regular detailed foraging party. John Roblin was afterward placed in the
rebel hospital, but the doctor was unnecessarily cruel, and so
maltreated him, that he became a life-long cripple. The family came into
the rebel camp, and Mrs. Roblin complained to General Washington of the
conduct of his men. He had her look among the men, and promised to
punish any she said had been among the party. But of course they kept
out of the way.

The Roblins settled originally in Adolphustown, John Roblin died, and
his widow, with the family, removed to Sophiasburgh, where she bought
100 acres of land for $25, and paid for it by weaving. She likewise cut
down trees and made her hut.

Roblin, who settled in the third concession of Fourth Town, became a
member of Parliament.

SIMON.—John Simon was born in Massachusetts, joined the Royal Standard
when the rebellion commenced. At the close of the war, he settled at
first near Montreal. He soon removed to Cataraqui, and finally to the
Township of Flamborough West, County Westmeath, where he lived till his
death. He had three sons, Titus, John, Walter. A daughter married
Detlor, another James McNabb, one Dr. Meacham, one Thompson, the last
three lived at Belleville. One of the sons, Titus, we believe,
distinguished himself in 1812, at the battle of Lundy’s Lane. He had
been Commissary at Kingston, and moved to Toronto.

MAJOR VANALSTINE.—The life of this man we have been unable to trace in
full; but sufficient remains known to supply the requisites for a short
sketch. He must have come from the vicinity of Albany, for he was
decidedly Dutch, and spoke the English language very imperfectly. He was
a stout, robust man, with a dark complexion, not one of military
bearing; and most likely, until the rebellion, had nothing to do with
military matters. Among the first to settle in Adolphustown, he well
knew the hardships of pioneer life. During the course of the rebellion
he had suffered many privations. Naturally a kind-hearted man, he for
many years afforded to the new comers much comfort and material aid. His
house was ever open to the passing stranger—to the old soldier, to poor
refugees. He was known to everybody in the whole settlement of the Bay.
No matter who came, he would order up from his cellar kitchen—the old
Dutch style—his negro servants—slaves he had brought in with him, and
set before the traveler the necessary refreshments. The son of one who
knew him well, says he was hospitable to a fault. His religion was
Lutheran, and the Government granted him a pension for distinguished
service.

THE WALLBRIDGE FAMILY.—Are of English descent, and were among the first
settlers of America. There were several families of the name existing in
America at the breaking out of the rebellion, one of which had been
residents of Bennington, and were known as the Bennington Wallbridge’s.
The rebellion led, as in many other instances, to a division among the
sons; some sided with the rebels, others remained loyal. Elijah
Wallbridge took part with the loyalists. His children never heard him
speaking of the part he took; but it is learned through another source
that he was one of a party who on one occasion made a gallant attack
upon a military prison, and relieved the prisoners. His old musket may
yet be seen. It is in possession of the Hon. Lewis Wallbridge. At the
close of the war, he desired, like many other loyalists, to remain in
the States, and indeed did for a time, but the spirit of intolerance was
manifested toward him, so that he determined to settle in Canada. He
consequently, at the beginning of the present century, came to the Bay
and purchased the tract of land held in Ameliasburgh by the family.

Elijah Wallbridge married the daughter of a U. E. Loyalist, Capt. Robert
Everett, of Kingston. Mr. Wallbridge, in making his visits to the front
of Ernesttown, found it convenient to cross the Bay from Mississauga
Point to Ox Point, and as a canoe was not available he often disrobed
himself, tied his clothes in a bundle and managed to swim across,
holding the bundle of clothes above the water.

WHITE.—The Cobourg _Star_ recorded the death of Mrs. White of White’s
Mills, aged 82 years, as follows:

“Another old and respectable inhabitant has paid the debt of nature,
whose memory will long be cherished by survivors.” In 1792 Mrs. White
was living with her family, the Chryslers, at the homestead, Sidney,
near Belleville, but removed after her marriage with Mr. White, to
Cobourg, in the neighborhood of which she has remained ever since,
beloved by her family and greatly respected by all the settlers around.
Although she often remarked, they had to undergo many privations, yet
they were the happiest days of her existence. She feared the present
generation was launching out too much into the fashion of the world, to
conduce to solid happiness.

The Chryslers were U. E. Loyalists, and among the first who made Upper
Canada their home after the Revolution. Sorel at that period was a
government station, and here in 1802, Mrs. White, then Catherine
Chrysler, was born. In 1784, their house was unfortunately burned down,
when the General made them a liberal grant of lands in Sidney, near
Belleville. This was the first settlement in that locality, which was
soon followed by many others, so that a neighborhood was soon formed as
helpmates to one another. A few years afterward, Mr. White, being a
lumber merchant, located in the neighborhood; an intimacy soon sprang up
between the parties, which ended in a family union. Clergymen were
scarce in those days, but Rev. Robert McDowell, of the reformed Dutch
Church, who kept a horse and traveled through the wilderness, tendered
his services. By that worthy pioneer, Mr. and Mrs. White were happily
united in country simplicity. These primeval days were often referred to
as affording more solid happiness than modern finery and ostentation.
May the present generation never lose sight of those good old times. She
fulfilled the declaration of that discerner of the human heart, Solomon,
who says: “She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not
the bread of idleness. Her children rise up and call her blessed; her
husband also, and he praiseth her.”

WILKINS.—Col. Charles Wilkins, although not one of the old U. E.
Loyalists, yet having come to Canada at an early date, and taken an
active part in matters pertaining to the welfare of the country,
respecting military matters, and especially in the history of the Bay,
this work would not be complete without a special notice of this very
worthy gentleman. The writer had the privilege of visiting him at his
home, the Carrying Place, in the summer of 1866, and procured many
valuable facts, which were imparted with a kindly courtesy. The winters
of 83 years had left their impress upon the tall and once erect figure.
But notwithstanding the wear and tear of life, with many cares, and the
intractable disease which steadily advanced, his face beamed with a
pleasant smile, while he recounted many events with which he had had to
do. While relating matters of a general nature, he was most unwilling to
speak of his own services, and the diffidence and humbleness of manner,
with which he referred to himself was remarkable. We have made reference
to Col. Wilkins elsewhere, and will here allude to some events in his
life.

He came to Canada with his father in 1792, aged 10 years. At an early
period he took up his abode at the Carrying Place and engaged in
business; was married in 1804 to Miss Mary, daughter of Charles Smith,
of Port Hope, who died in 1847. Elsewhere has been mentioned the part he
took in the war of 1812, for which he received an official recognition.
Mr. Wilkins had for several days, the late General Scott of the American
army, when a prisoner in Canada. Mr. Wilkins’ kindness to him was
remembered in later years. In the trouble of 1836–8, the Government
called upon Mr. W. to take command of the militia. He was appointed to
many posts of honor and duty, and in 1840 was called to the Legislative
Council. Mr. Wilkins was always exceedingly popular, not because he
sought popularity, but because of his naturally kind and gentlemanly
deportment to all classes, and his many sterling qualities. The very
high estimation in which he was held was fully evidenced on the occasion
of his death in 1867, when old friends came long distances in unpleasant
weather, to see his remains deposited in their last earthly resting
place.

STEWART.—A traveler writing in 1835, says of Canada, “I often met the
venerable in years,” and “on March 8, 1833, died Mrs. J. Stewart, near
St. David’s, Niagara District, aged 109 years; her husband died a few
years since at the age of 96, leaving children, now living, aged 80, and
grand-children at 60.” “Last year a woman by the name of _Metcalf_,
residing near the capital of Upper Canada, bore a child when past her
sixtieth year.”

Among obituary notices we find the following: “At Hope Village, East
Guilliamsbury, in 1829, much and generally regretted, _John Wilson,
Esq._, a native of the Province of New Jersey, aged 90 years, 14 days.”

DEATH OF A PIONEER OF LONDON TOWNSHIP.—We have to record the decease of
Mr. Joseph Jayne, which took place at his residence in London Township,
7th concession, lot 32, on Wednesday last, the 10th inst., at the
advanced age of nearly 101 years. He was born on Long Island, N. Y., on
June 13, 1764, some years before the State of New York had ceased to be
a British Province. Deceased was revered and held in esteem by a large
circle of friends, for whose entertainment he was ever fond of
recounting his adventures in the revolutionary period, and who deeply
regret his loss.—_London Free Press._

  MCINTOSH.—“On the 25th February last at his residence in Marysburgh,
  in the 93rd year of his age, respected by all his acquaintances, Mr.
  Donald McIntosh, who came to America in the 42nd Royal Highlanders,
  and arrived the day before the battle of Bunker’s Hill, and was in
  that engagement. He was subsequently in the 84th, and was at Quebec,
  when Montgomery made his unsuccessful attempt on that stronghold,
  and during last war, was a Lieutenant in the 1st Regt. of Prince
  Edward Militia.”

  BIRD.—“At his residence in Marysburgh, Mr. Henry Bird, in the 90th
  year of his age. He appeared to be in good health till a few moments
  before the vital spark took its flight; he was well respected; he
  came to Canada in the 54th Regt.”

  GEROW.—“At Ameliasburgh, in the County of Prince Edward, on
  Wednesday, the 19th inst., Mary Gerow, aged 80 years. Deceased was
  one of the first settlers on the borders of the Bay of Quinté, where
  the greater part of her long life has been spent.”

  VANKLEECK.—“In Madoc, on Monday, the 9th of October, Simeon
  Vankleeck, Esq., in his 98th year, after a short illness, almost
  entirely free from pain. Old age seemed to claim its rights, and the
  system quietly gave way. Mr. Vankleeck was one of the earliest
  pioneers of this part of the country, having resided in Madoc
  forty-one years. He was well and favourably known throughout the
  county, and his immediate acquaintance bear testimony to his energy
  and firmness, which mingled at the same time with a kindness and
  suavity that won their hearts. His old age was remarkable for genial
  good temper and activity of mind and body. In his 94th year, he
  presided at a political meeting held by the Hon. Sidney Smith, at
  Hazzard’s Corners, to which place he walked from his son’s
  residence, a distance of seven miles. In politics he was noted for
  his strong conservative feeling—the side he chose when a young man—
  and adhered to it through his whole life, believing it to be, as he
  stated in his later years, the “Loyal Side.””

  The deceased was a descendant of a branch of the Vankleeck family,
  whose loyalty to the British Crown caused them to leave their
  ancient home in Duchess County, New York, during the American
  Revolution, and to settle in the wilds of Canada. He was several
  years connected with the British army during the Revolution. He
  leaves several sons, two of whom reside in this township.—_Mercury._

  PERRY.—Died at Ernesttown, the 12th of January instant, Jemima
  Perry, wife of Robert Perry, Senr., and sister of the late Ebenezer
  Washburn, Esq., of Hallowell, in the 76th year of her age. Her
  remains were interred on the 14th, with every mark of real but
  unostentatious grief and respect.

  “In the beginning of last November, she was seized with a
  distressing asthmatic affectation, which finally terminated her
  life, and which she endured with Christian patience and resignation
  to the will of heaven.

  “Mrs. Perry was born in the Province of Massachusetts, and came with
  her husband and family into this Province among its first settlers.

  “She has left an aged partner, with whom she lived in conjugal union
  and affection fifty-eight years: seven children; a numerous train of
  grandchildren and great-grandchildren; and a large circle of friends
  and acquaintances. Her loss is extensively felt. In the various
  relations of life, as a wife, a mother, a sister, a neighbour, and a
  member of civil and Christian society, her exemplary conduct
  entitled her to the esteem of all who knew her.”

“OLD MAN.—Old John Baker, residing at Cornwall, Ontario, was born in
1766, at Quebec. His mother was a slave, and he was brought by his
master, Colonel Grey, at one time Solicitor-General for Upper Canada.
Baker enlisted in the 104th regiment, and served at Waterloo, Lundy’s
Lane, Fort Erie, and Sackett’s Harbor. He is a little rheumatic, and is
lame from a wound in the leg, received in action; but his intellect is
as fresh and clear as when a boy. He draws a pension of one shilling
sterling a day, and seems good for some years yet,” 1869.

In conclusion we may mention the descendants of Sir William Johnson, by
Miss Molly, a sister of Joseph Brant. She came to Kingston at an early
date, having probably been in Lower Canada during the war, where she
lived until her death in 1804 or 5. One of her daughters married Captain
Farley, of the 16th Regiment, another Lieutenant Lemoine, of the 24th
Regiment; a third John Ferguson, of the Indian Department; a fourth
Captain Earle, of the Provincial Navy, and another to Doctor Kerr, an
eminent surgeon, who settled in Niagara.




                               APPENDIX.


 ROLL OF THE 2ND BATTALION KING’S ROYAL REGIMENT, NEW YORK, 28TH FEB.,
                                 1784.

                         Jacob Weegar
                         Alexander Clark
                         Alexander Platto
                         Jacob Cobman
                         Jonas Simmons
                         James Rankins
                         Jonas Larranary
                         Richard Albery
                         Gabriel Brefsea
                         Christopher Brefsea
                         Bankes, John, Jr
                         Bankes, John, Sen
                         Brant, Franc
                         Baxter, Lawrence
                         Benedict, Benjamin
                         Coons, Jacob
                         Coons, David
                         Campbell, Matthews
                         Connrad, William
                         Coolcraft, Christian
                         Cook, Seth
                         Catchcatch, Christian
                         Drihell, Cornelius
                         Dewitt, Garton
                         Dyckman, Martines
                         Foster, Moses
                         Hopkinson, John
                         Haines, Barrast
                         Haines, Frederick
                         Haines, John
                         Haines, David
                         Hoyle, John
                         Hoyle, Peter
                         House, John
                         Huffman, Jacob
                         Henerham, Andrew
                         Hill, Timothy
                         Mordon, John
                         Morrison, James
                         Wher, John
                         Phillips, Michael
                         Phillips, Peter
                         Pember, Phillip
                         Priest, Jacob
                         Redding, Francis
                         Friar, Samuel
                         File, John
                         Franklin, John
                         Fend, Andrew
                         Gates, Thomas
                         Hart, Zachariah
                         Howell, Warren
                         Johnson, Henry
                         Rahall, John
                         Loukes, Jacob
                         Millross, Andrew
                         McCarty, William
                         Matthews, Pompey
                         Middelton, Ruben
                         Northrup, Eson
                         Reynold, William
                         Scot, Daniel
                         Shaw, William
                         Sholtes, John
                         Snartfager, Frederick
                         Sipperly, Phillip
                         Smith, Stephen
                         Smith, Jacob
                         Cornell, Patner
                         Shilliner, Christian
                         Wallan, Samuel
                         Wirst, John
                         Young, Daniel
                         Defororest, Abraham
                         Willoughby, William
                         William, Albert
                         Young, Peter
                         Young, Stephen
                         Deal, Peter
                         Bernus, Gother
                         Fletcher, John
                         Lount, John
                         Michael Roughnett
                         Alexander Grant
                         George Christie
                         John Bondish
                         David Lishsamblin
                         Peter Zenith
                         Nicholas Schyler
                         Atherson, Charles
                         Magle, Gottip
                         Badernach, John
                         Ross, Alexander
                         John Casscallion
                         Cornelius Pitcher
                         Peter Deal
                         John Litcher
                         Alexander McDougall
                         Luke Carscallion
                         John Berrn
                         George Sullivan
                         James V. Alstine
                         Berron, John
                         Huben, Peter
                         Barnhart, David
                         Cole, John
                         Calden, John
                         Coons, Simon
                         Coons, Peter
                         Cronkhite, John
                         Conelius, John
                         Curtis, John
                         Dych, Nicholas
                         Dych, Henry
                         Deal, Adam
                         Detlor, Valentine
                         Detlor, Jacob
                         Emerish, Henry
                         French, Andrew
                         Finkle, George
                         Cameron, Alexander
                         Cameron, Angus
                         Cameron, Donald
                         Davis, Peter
                         Earner, Peter
                         Eearhart, Simon
                         Eaverson, John
                         Foy, John
                         Fory, Daniel
                         Farlinger, John
                         Fike, Peter
                         Fairchild, Benjamin
                         Faish, Christian
                         Goose, Frederick
                         Hugh, John
                         Randal, Joseph
                         Snider, Jacob
                         Snider, Lidwich
                         Sills, John
                         Sills, Lawrence
                         Sills, George
                         Smith, Michael
                         Smith, Phillip
                         Swathager, John
                         Vszie, Joseph
                         Baltingal, Jacob
                         Baltingal, Samuel
                         Rauley, Jacob
                         Plant, Peter
                         Rollin, Thomas
                         Clark, Hugh
                         Chrisholm, Donald
                         Sutter, Isaac
                         Thomson, Thomas
                         Thom, William
                         Christie, George
                         Beedehee, John
                         Samuel Ashley
                         James McPherson
                         George Barnhart
                         George Dagetger
                         George Prest
                         George Fitzpatrick
                         James Titchert
                         Peter Young
                         Cain Young
                         Clute, John
                         Cooper, Thomas
                         Cook, Silas
                         Coomb, John
                         Coomb, Barnard
                         Donser, John
                         Dire, John
                         Davis, Henery
                         Dogstader, Adam
                         Dengandre, Garrett
                         Dogstader, Pompey
                         Edgar, John
                         Foy, Francis
                         Gilbert Luke
                         Thomas Graham
                         Grant, Peter
                         Gold, Edward
                         Gallingher, George
                         Heming, Henry
                         Hawley, Jacob
                         Helmer, Adam
                         Helse, Frederick
                         Hugh, Henry
                         Hendrick, Peter
                         Harbinger, John
                         Tarhoson, David
                         Kough, Peter
                         Kreem, John
                         Bailer, William
                         Bell, Johnson
                         Beitte Barnard
                         Barnhart, Nicholas
                         Barnhart, Jacob
                         Barnhart, John
                         Brown, Nicholas
                         Burch, Jacob
                         Brown, James
                         Christian, John
                         Christian, Simion
                         Cameron, William
                         Medagh, John
                         Myers, John
                         Cugh, George
                         Culman, Frederick
                         Parsons, John
                         Rood, Mitchell
                         Ramsay, Adam
                         Sulivan, Cornelius
                         Shirley, John
                         Shellop, Henry
                         Winter, Jacob
                         Winter, Henry
                         Wilson, James
                         Kough, James
                         Connor, Christian
                         Wilinger, Michael
                         Smith, Jacob
                         Eamer, Phillip
                         Hawdord, Edward
                         Mure, John
                         John Miller
                         Fossern, Daniel
                         Latoch, Halburt
                         Elijah Sarrabe
                         George Murraoff
                         Luke Bourteal
                         Toil Hurd
                         Samuel Suckey
                         John Saver
                         John Teague
                         Barnhart, Charles
                         Beramy, William
                         Boner, Gasper
                         Boner, Adam
                         Bender, Samuel
                         Cox, Alexander
                         Crander, Anthony
                         John Crander
                         Crander, William
                         Cadman, William
                         Cadman, George
                         Coundouse, George
                         Dow, Thomas
                         Delong, John
                         Evans, Tony
                         Landras, Samuel
                         Logest, Andrew
                         Hamilton, Thomas
                         Henning, Andrew
                         House, Coonroot
                         Hedlar, Adam
                         Johnson, John
                         Hellen, John
                         Himmerly, Andrew
                         Ylline,
                         Law, Samuel
                         Heller, Henry
                         Noon, William
                         Battingal, Jacob
                         French, Albert
                         Flamsbury, William
                         Howard, William
                         Harding, Richard
                         Jones, Thomas
                         Johnson, William
                         Jones, John
                         Roughnet, John
                         Rentner, George
                         Knight, Benjamin
                         Koughnet, John
                         Lonhey, George
                         Lonhey, Henry
                         Lonhes, Abraham
                         Savanay, Alexander
                         Sambert, David
                         Sawyer, William
                         Loft, David
                         McGowen, Stephen
                         Murdoff, James
                         Murdoff, George
                         Moss, Simon
                         Critchert, Bartholomew
                         Rogers, John
                         Rambaugh, Jacob
                         Rambaugh, John
                         Rambaugh, Andrew
                         Rambaugh, William
                         Shellop, Christian
                         Smith, Daniel
                         Shuk, Christian
                         Tute, John
                         Kemdy, Robert
                         Church, Oliver
                         Hillinger, Abraham
                         Laryo, Matthew
                         Erwiny, Robert
                         Schnars, Frederick
                         John Howell
                         Francis Hoyb
                         Richard Cotter
                         Matthew Farrent
                         Jothan Hart
                         Joseph Clement
                         Henry Davis
                         John Windaker
                         Brant, John
                         Borven, William, Senr
                         Baker, Henry
                         Borven, William, Junr.
                         Bush, Henry
                         Cameron, Archibald
                         Dodger, Thomas
                         McDonnell, John, Senr.
                         McDonnell, John, Junr.
                         McDonnell, Roderick
                         McDonald, Ronald
                         McPherson, Laughlin
                         Matthew, Jacob
                         Naramore, Esau
                         Penn, Matthew
                         Prentice, Daniel
                         Prichell, John
                         Phillips, Jacob
                         Porker, Isaac
                         Ross, Thomas, Senr.
                         Ross, Thomas, Junr.
                         Ross, John
                         Roaf, John
                         Ryan, Dennis
                         Rowland, Jervis
                         Tingorac, John
                         Starring, Jacob
                         Severn, Peter
                         Servus, Phillip
                         Smith, John
                         Hart, Nathaniel
                         Sherman, William
                         Tuniver, William
                         Valentine, Alexander
                         Warmly, Jacob
                         Cook, Robert
                         Rierman, Henry
                         Schilles, Henry
                         Henry Deal
                         John Servin
                         Andrew Embury
                         Thomas Clark
                         William Nicholson
                         John Dogstider
                         Allen Chrisholm
                         John Dervitt
                         Arginsinger, John
                         Bartley, Muherd
                         Bartley, Isaac
                         Chrisholm, Duncan
                         Cain, John
                         Coon, Jacob
                         Campbell, John
                         Cain, Barney
                         Cook, Joseph
                         Farling, John
                         Hough, George
                         Hight, Mathew
                         Johnson, Prince
                         Peacock, John
                         Kenton, John
                         Delorm, John
                         Donevan, Herener
                         Evans, Bolton
                         Eglon, Leonard
                         Estwood, John
                         Flanagan, James
                         Gardiner, John
                         Horon, Peter
                         Horon, Jacob
                         Hubbert, Jubilee
                         Hegle, John
                         Koughnet, William
                         Koliph, Henry
                         Toyer, David
                         Toyer, Richard
                         Martin, Robert
                         Murphy, Patrick
                         McGran, Owen
                         McGran, Dennis
                         McDonnell, Daniel
                         Nellinger, Abraham
                         Phillips, Elijah
                         Rapole, George
                         Shaver, Adam
                         Sample, Hugh
                         Street, Daniel
                         Staly, Tobias
                         Stering, George
                         Truax, Isaac
                         Turnburny, John
                         Woodcock, Abraham
                         Woodcock, Peter
                         Welsh, Morris
                         Argussiger, Phillip
                         Wilson, James
                         Thomas Cavan
                         John McIntyre
                         John Ham
                         Abiah Christie
                         Donald McPherson
                         John Tower
                         Peter Winter
                         John Lambert
                         Albert Edward
                         Ball, Samuel
                         Crawford, William
                         Crumwell, Nicholas
                         Santnere, Jacob
                         Witts, Henry
                         Witts, John
                         McCardy, Jacob
                         Mirile, Jacob
                         Minse, John
                         Crawford, Bryan
                         Clark, Jacob
                         Clark, Adam
                         Clark, John
                         Chrisholm, Hugh
                         Faber, David
                         Fitzgerald, William
                         Furny, Rodolph
                         Furny, Adam
                         Gilbert, Nathaniel
                         Graham, William
                         Grant, Peter
                         Helmer, John
                         Horon, Joseph
                         Howard, Christian
                         Towar, Canrobert
                         Tarranay, Isaac
                         Tarranay, Abraham
                         Matthew, Nicholas
                         McKay, Stephen
                         McTaggart, James
                         McDonald, Duncan
                         Mitchell, John
                         McIntyre, Duncan
                         McLennon, John
                         Oxbury, John
                         Phillip, John
                         Rote, George
                         Reyers, William
                         Robertson, Daniel
                         Shaver, James
                         Smith, William
                         Smith, Peter
                         Sweeney, Daniel
                         Stewart, John
                         Teagin, Jacob
                         Vandregoo, Phillip
                         Abstric, Lambert
                         Wright, John
                         Walroda, Jacob
                         Wood, James
                         Wood, William
                         Weegar, Thomas
                         West, John
                         Toursset, Benjamin
                         Tealy, Adam
                         Deprender, George


                     THE GOVERNORS OF UPPER CANADA.

Subjoined is a list of the Governors, Presidents, and Administrators of
Upper Canada, until the Union of the Provinces in 1841:—

             NAMES.                    TITLES.        TIME OF ACCESSION.


 Col. John Graves Simcoe         Lieutenant-Governor  July 8, 1792.

 Hon. Peter Russell              President            July 21, 1796.

 Lieut.-Gen. Peter Hunter        Lieutenant-Governor  August 17, 1799.

 Hon. Alexander Grant            President            Septr. 11, 1805.

 His Excellency Francis Gore     Lieutenant-Governor  August 25, 1806.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir Isaac Brock       President            Septr. 30, 1811.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir R. Halesheaff,    President            October, 20, 1812.
   Bart

 Maj.-Gen. F. Baron de           President            June 19, 1813.
   Rottenburgh

 Lieut.-Gen. Sir Gordon          Provincial           Decr. 13, 1813.
   Drummond, G.C.B.                Lieut.-Governor

 Lieut.-Gen. Sir George Murray,  Provincial           April 25, 1815.
   Bt.                             Lieut.-Governor

 Maj.-Gen. Sir Frederick Phipps  Provincial           July 1, 1815.
   Robinson, K.C.B.                Lieut.-Governor

 His Excellency Francis Gore     Lieutenant-Governor  Septr. 25, 1815.

 Hon. Samuel Smith               Administrator        June 11, 1817.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir Peregrine         Lieutenant-Governor  August 13, 1818.
   Maitland, K.C.B.

 Hon. Samuel Smith               Administrator        March 8, 1820.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir P. Maitland,      Lieutenant-Governor  June 30, 1820.
   K.C.B.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir John Colborne,    Lieutenant-Governor  Novr. 5, 1828.
   K.C.B.

 Maj. Sir Francis Bond Head,     Lieutenant-Governor  Jany. 25, 1836.
   K.C.B.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir John Colborne,    Administrator        Feby. 27, 1838.
   K.C.B.

 Maj.-Gen. Sir George Arthur,    Lieutenant-Governor  March 23, 1838.
   K.C.B. H.G.O.

 Baron Sydenham and Toronto,     Governor General     October, 1839.
   Lower Canada

 Baron Sydenham and Toronto,     Governor General     Feby. 10, 1841.
   United Canada


                    THE ABORIGINES OF NORTH AMERICA.
                            THE MISSISSAUGA.

The following Report, sent by Col. Bell, of Thurlow, to John Ferguson,
Superintendent for Indian Affairs, Kingston, dated 3rd May, 1815,
supplies a tolerably correct idea of the articles furnished by
Government to the Indians:—

  “Account of Indian goods, on the 7th March, 1815, remaining in store
  in the barn of Lieut.-Col. William Bell, at Thurlow, and forwarded
  on the 10th, 11th and 20th of the said month of March to the store
  of Captain W. McIntosh, at the mouth of the river Moira, viz:—

                   12 Bales Cloths,
                    9 Bales Cloths,
                    7 Bales Cloths,
                    1 Bales Calicoes,
                    1 Bales Scotch Sheetings,
                    1 Bales Spotted Black Swanskin,
                    2 Bales Serges,
                    2 Bales Common Grey Coats,
                   11 Bales Caddises,
                    5 Packs Deer Skins,
                   11 Bales Moltons,
                    6 Cases Saddles and Bridles,
                    1 Cases Pistols,
                   25 Cases Chiefs’ and Common Guns,
                    5 Casks Tobacco,
                   20 Cases Shot and Ball,
                    7 Cases Tomahawks,
                    4 Cases Spears, &c.,
                    3 Bags Beef Saws,
                   22 Bales 3-feet Blankets,
                   27 Bales 2½-feet do.,
                    7 Bales 2-feet do.”

  “N.B.—The above Packages have been delivered into the Store of
  Captain John McIntosh, at the mouth of the river Moira, and his
  receipt taken for them and delivered to you at Kingston, and also
  the book in which all the marks and numbers were entered.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Changed all ‘Quinte’ to ‘Quinté’ as the latter was the dominant
      spelling.
 2. Added ‘CHAPTER XXXIa.’ table heading on p. xx.
 3. Added ‘CHAPTER XLVa.’ table heading on p. xxiv.
 4. Made corrections as indicated in ERRATA on p. xxxii.
 5. Switched ‘CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION.’ to ‘INTRODUCTION. CHAPTER I.’ on
      p. 1 to agree with Chapter II arrangement.
 6. Changed ‘comfort’ to ‘comfort, and’ on p. 241.
 7. Changed ‘clergyman, and’ to ‘clergyman, and I’ on p. 264.
 8. Changed ‘CHAPTER XXXI’ to ‘CHAPTER XXXIa’ on p. 295.
 9. Changed ‘CHAPTER XLI.’ to ‘CHAPTER XLII.’ on p. 366.
10. Changed ‘adzes and hatches’ to ‘adzes and hatchets’ on p. 367.
11. Changed 'above ail' to 'above all' on p. 388.
12. Changed ‘One’ to ‘One of’ on p. 398.
13. Changed ‘CHAPTER XLV’ to ‘CHAPTER XLVa’ on p. 402.
14. Changed ‘English languish’ to ‘English language’ on p. 461.
15. Silently corrected typographical errors.
16. Retained anachronistic and non-standard spellings as printed.
17. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.




