










THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL,

FOUNDED ON THE MANUSCRIPT HISTORIES

OF

MR. HALS AND MR. TONKIN;

WITH ADDITIONS AND VARIOUS APPENDICES,

BY

DAVIES GILBERT,

SOMETIME PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY, F.A.S. F.R.S.E. M.R.I.A. &c.
&c. AND D.C.L. BY DIPLOMA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.


_IN FOUR VOLUMES._

VOL. I.


LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON; AND SOLD BY

J. LIDDELL, BODMIN; J. LAKE, FALMOUTH; O. MATTHEWS, HELSTON; MESSRS.
BRAY AND ROWE, LAUNCESTON; T. VIGURS, PENZANCE; MRS. HEARD, TRURO; W.
H. ROBERTS, EXETER; J. B. ROWE, PLYMOUTH; AND ALL OTHER BOOKSELLERS IN
CORNWALL AND DEVON.

1838.




PREFACE.


Having read in the earliest portion of my life the small part of Mr.
Hals’ Parochial History published about the year 1750, I entertained
from that time a strong desire for seeing the remainder also in print;
this desire grew up with my years, increased perhaps by an
understanding that the manuscript had disappeared, no one seemed to
know in what way, and that it might possibly have been destroyed.

At last, the manuscript was recovered by the most justly celebrated
Mr. Whitaker, from a bookseller at Exeter, who had retained the papers
as a pledge for some debt; from Mr. Whitaker they have come to his
son-in-law Richard Taunton, Esq. M.D. who has with great liberality
placed them in my hands; mutilated, however, as to the histories of
several parishes, from want of care and of attention on the part of
the individual holding them as a deposit, although he must have deemed
them to be of pecuniary value.

Mr. Tonkin’s papers were preserved by his niece Miss Fosse, who died
more than fifty years ago, at a place that may now be termed, without
offence, the village of Michell. This lady must have been the last of
Mr. Tonkin’s near relations; for, although the property left at her
decease could not have amounted to anything of importance, the funeral
was attended by many scores of persons, claiming shares of whatever
could be found. Under such circumstances every moveable was soon
converted into money, and the manuscript of the Parochial History,
complete as Mr. Tonkin left it, got into the possession of Lord
Dunstanville, by whom it was instantly offered to me, on my preparing
to edit the Parochial History of Mr. Hals. And as Mr. Tonkin copied
largely from Mr. Hals, many of the lost parishes are at least
partially supplied.

The late Mr. Lysons got possession of a beautifully transcribed copy
of the whole that remains of Mr. Hals’ Parochial History; this was
purchased at the sale of his books by the Earl of Aylesford, who
without any personal acquaintance whatever, has had the liberality to
allow me the use of this splendid folio volume, during the whole time
of my work passing through the press.

Mr. Gregor has supplied me with an original copy of the last Heraldic
Visitation of Cornwall; and to Doctor Boase I am indebted for a
geological description of every parish.

Previously to my taking this task on myself, I endeavoured to preserve
the works of Mr. Hals and Mr. Tonkin for the public, by the more easy
expedient of advancing money in aid of the publication; but not having
obtained success, I at last adventured on what is now done, little
aware, however, of the pains, and time, required for editing the
histories of more than two hundred parishes; although I have to a
considerable extent relieved myself from the most irksome duty of
correcting the press, by obtaining the assistance of Messrs. Nichols
and Son, on the condition of their taking, what is very unlikely to
accrue, any profit arising from the publication, and my sustaining,
the more probable alternative, all the loss.

Mr. Hals’ work is given without alteration, except considerable
omissions of long histories, from the Bollandists and other writers of
legends, relative to obscure Saints, little known, or deserving of
being known; and in many cases owing their supposed connection with
Cornwall, entirely to the writer’s imagination; and in the opposite
extreme, of the lives of personages most worthy of being preserved and
studied in general history, of Apostles, of Emperors of Rome, and
Kings, but quite as irrelevant as the former, to a History of
Cornwall.

I have been also unable to retain the greater part of the derivations
assigned to the names of manors, families, or places; they are
generally referred to some word of a similar sound in modern English,
after a manner scarcely less ludicrous than the mock etymologies of
Dr. Swift.

Lastly, I have omitted various anecdotes, containing simple scandal,
without any thing illustrative of the age or country.

Other anecdotes of a public nature are retained; on a conviction that
events long passed by, and incapable from their very nature of being
suppressed, neither will, nor ought to excite any unpleasing feeling
in the minds of those who may be directly or collaterally descended
from the persons to whom they relate.

I have not throughout the whole work intentionally used a single
expression disrespectful to any one, nor have I retained from either
of the manuscripts, nor added of my own one new anecdote or tale
capable by possibility of giving the least pain.

If an expression should be found, which in the opinion of any
individual is at variance with these assertions, I beg permission to
apologize before I am accused, and to declare that the fault has been
involuntary, and that I am not aware, at this instant, of any such
fault existing.

Mr. Tonkin has mainly copied from Mr. Hals, and these portions of
course have not been printed over again; but all his additions are
preserved, with the greater part of his derivations, apparently much
more accurate than those they are intended to confute.

Here it would have been wise, certainly it would have been prudent,
for me to have concluded the work; but having acquired, through the
course of a long life, the knowledge of many incidents, which,
although of little general importance, may amuse persons taking
an interest even in trifles connected with their immediate
neighbourhoods, I have been induced to add under each parish, such
matters as happened to occur to my recollection; using also in many
cases the information drawn by Mr. Lysons from sources accessible only
to himself, in consequence of his situation in the Tower.

I have further had recourse to the works treating on monasteries and
religious establishments; but without considering myself bound or
pledged to make out a complete history in any case, either by
researches into documents not in my possession, or, still less, (at my
time of life and distant residence) by investigations on the spot.

This part of the work will be found very unequally executed; but it
was never intended to be otherwise.

At the end of each parish I have added the common statistics:――the
number of acres from the measurement of Mr. Hitchins; the value of the
real property; the account of poor rate, and of the population at the
four periods of numeration, from the Parliamentary Returns. And
through the great kindness and liberality of Doctor Boase, I have been
enabled to subjoin to these the geology of each parish, deduced from
an actual survey in person of the whole county, by that very
intelligent and experienced geologist, chemist, and physiologist.

And here it may be right to observe, that, as the formations are not
merely similar, but identical, over many contiguous parishes, and
again in parishes disjoined from each other, the plan of referring
from one to another became indispensable, to avoid repetition after
repetition, and adding, without any utility, to the size of the work.

In the form of Appendices will be found several matters relative to
Cornwall, either not previously in print, or that cannot be obtained
separately from large works, of which they form a part.

Mr. Scawen’s Works, so far as they are contained in the Bodleian
Library.

Leland’s Itinerary.

Drayton’s Polyolbion.

The Transcript of a Manuscript from the British Museum; proving, I
believe, that even Mr. Whitaker, one without doubt among our most able
and learned antiquaries, may be mistaken on a subject connected with
the objects of his peculiar research.

There will be also some miscellaneous matters, and among them an Index
to Mr. Carew’s History; an addition greatly demanded also by another
work, which would then become the most useful Corpus Historicum
relating to our county.

There are several other manuscripts of Mr. Tonkin, chiefly copies from
Mr. Hals of pedigrees, &c. but these I have not touched. And I have
purposely abstained from every general topic relating to the county at
large, as these have been amply discussed by our various historians.

The first in order of time, the most interesting and most
entertaining, is Mr. Carew.

This work was first published in 1602, a second edition came out in
1723, and a third, chiefly through the exertions of the late Mr. John
Price of Penzance, in 1769. But the edition far exceeding all the
others, with highly valuable additions, and with copious notes, was
given to the public in 1811 by the late Lord Dunstanville, in one vol.
4to, 457 pages, with an excellent engraving of the author, from a
picture at Anthony.

Mr. RICHARD CAREW was of a very ancient and respectable family; he
inherited Anthony from a long line of ancestors, and has transmitted
it to his descendants.

Wood says, in the Athenæ Oxonienses, that he was born in the year
1555, became a gentleman commoner of Christ Church at a very early
age, but had his chambers in Bradgate Hall (since Pembroke College),
and that at fourteen he disputed, extempore, with Sir Philip Sidney,
in the presence of several distinguished visitants to the university.

After three years’ residence at Oxford, Mr. Carew removed to the
Middle Temple, where he passed three years more, and then went with
his uncle on an embassy to Poland.

In the year 1577 Mr. Carew married Juliana Arundell, of Trerice, and
served the office of Sheriff in 1586. It is recorded that he was
intimate with most of the noted scholars of those times, and
especially with Sir Henry Spelman.

He died in November 1620, and is buried in his parish church of
Anthony, (see the epitaph, p. xxiv).

Mr. Carew’s life is given in considerable detail as an introduction to
his History of Cornwall. He wrote and translated several other works;
but they seem not to have survived.

Soon after Mr. Carew’s History, Mr. JOHN NORDEN’S was composed, with
the title of “Speculi Britanniæ Pars. A Topographical and Historical
Description of Cornwall, by the Perambulation, View, and Delineation
of John Norden.”

This work has been well characterized by Mr. Tonkin, as “a mean
performance, full of egregious mistakes, with most defective and
erroneous maps of every hundred, yet containing several things in it
not to be met with elsewhere.”

Our next historian, but after a considerable interval of time, was Mr.
WILLIAM SCAWEN, a fragment only of whose work is known to be extant,
and which will appear in these volumes.

He was of an ancient family, well educated, and possessed of an ample
fortune. He represented St. German’s in Parliament, and received the
appointment of Vice-Warden of the Stannaries, immediately after the
Restoration of King Charles the Second.

Of Mr. Hals and Mr. Tonkin I have not any better information than what
is given by Mr. Lysons. He says:

     “About the year 1685, Mr. WILLIAM HALS, a gentleman of an
     ancient Devonshire family, which had been some time settled
     at Fentongollan, in St. Michael-Penkevill, began to make
     collections for a parochial history of Cornwall, which he
     continued for at least half a century; it was brought down
     by him to about the year 1736. Mr. Hals died in 1739; his
     parochial history being at that time nearly completed. About
     the year 1750, the publication of this work was undertaken
     by Mr. Andrew Brice, then a printer at Truro, who afterwards
     removed to Exeter, where he published an useful geographical
     dictionary and other books. The account of seventy-two
     parishes arranged alphabetically, from Advent to Helston
     inclusive, was printed in folio in ten numbers, which are
     extremely scarce. The publication is said to have been
     suspended for want of purchasers; occasioned by the
     scurrilous anecdotes it contained, and reflections thrown on
     some of the principal families. It is probable, however,
     that the inaccuracies with which it abounds, and the tedious
     legends of saints to whom the churches are dedicated, which
     occupy at least half the work, would have operated more to
     the prejudice of its sale than the scandalous anecdotes
     which occasionally occur, many of which had been omitted by
     the editor. The most valuable part of the work is the
     account of families and the descent of property; but in
     these he is frequently inaccurate; and, as Dr. Borlase
     observes, ‘what he says should not have too great stress
     laid upon it, when it stands upon his single authority.’

     “Contemporary with Hals, as a collector of materials for a
     parochial history of Cornwall, was THOMAS TONKIN, Esq. of
     Trevaunance, some time member for Helston, a gentleman of an
     ancient family, who had made great progress in preparing
     such a history for the press, and had completed several
     parishes. Mr. Tonkin began to write his parochial history in
     1702, at which time he had the use of Hals’s collections.
     Dr. Borlase seems to have supposed that Hals’s collections
     were brought down from 1702 to 1736 by Tonkin; the truth is,
     that they both brought down their collections to that
     period, without any communication with each other, which
     seems to have ceased soon after the first period
     above-mentioned. Mr. Tonkin himself says, speaking of Hals
     in the year 1739, ‘it is between twenty-five and thirty
     years since I have seen any of his collections, and, I
     believe, at least twenty since I have seen him. I am told
     that he has greatly improved and polished them since that
     time; but as his method is quite different from mine, and
     that I have some other reasons not necessary to be mentioned
     for not corresponding with him, I can safely say, that in
     this present work of mine, I have not made use of one single
     line out of his compositions.’ Mr. Tonkin, in one of his
     MSS. dated March 27th, 1733, desires that, ‘if by death, or
     any other accident, his MSS. should fall into other hands,
     they would by no means publish them in the dress in which
     they then appeared, but be pleased to new-model them after
     the method followed in those few which had received his last
     corrections, such as at St. Agnes, St. Piran in the Sands,
     St. Michael-Penkevil,’ &c. In 1737 he had made sufficient
     progress in his collections to enable him to put forth
     proposals, in which he announced the plan of his
     publication.

     “In the year 1739, Mr. Tonkin had completed his MS. of the
     first part of his work, which was to treat of the county of
     Cornwall in general; his epistle dedicatory of that date is
     printed at the beginning of Lord de Dunstanville’s edition
     of Carew, addressed to Sir William Carew, Bart. and Sir John
     St. Aubyn, Bart. then representatives in Parliament for the
     county of Cornwall. In this letter he recapitulates what had
     been done towards the topography of his native county.
     Besides the works of Leland, Camden, Norden, and Carew, he
     mentions the general collections of Hals and Anstis, and
     those of Pearce and Gwavas on the Stannaries, the Cornish
     language, &c. Towards the conclusion of his epistle, he
     says, ‘I wish I could say that many more of my countrymen
     had assisted me with their kind endeavours. I do not yet
     despair of having several; for which reasons I have, in my
     proposals, enlarged the designed time of the publication of
     this part. I hope they will be so good as to send in
     contributions. If they persist in their refusal, they must
     be contented with such coarse fare as I am able to give
     them, which I will endeavour to make as palatable for them
     as I can; perhaps, when they come to taste of this, they may
     be prevailed on to supply me with something better towards
     the two remaining parts. All that I can promise them is,
     that I will give them the best account I can, without the
     least partiality; neither shall any one person have a just
     occasion given him to charge me with any wilful omission or
     sophisticated truth.”

Very little was done by Mr. Tonkin to the parochial department of his
intended history after the date of this letter; he died in 1742, and
in the latter part of his life, being unhappily involved in pecuniary
difficulties, he grew less attentive to study, and died without
printing any part of his intended history.

Doctor WILLIAM BORLASE more than meditated a parochial history, having
made some collections towards it. If this design had been carried into
execution, all further attempts might have been deemed superfluous.

His Antiquities and Natural History of Cornwall gave ample proof of
the ability, the ingenuity, and of the diligence possessed by this
excellent man, who had the deserved good fortune of being equally
esteemed and admired, not by the neighbourhood alone, but by the most
learned and scientific persons throughout Europe.

The Antiquities were first published in 1754.

The second edition in 1769.

The Natural History in 1758. All in quarto.

Respecting the Natural History, it may be expedient to remind the
reader, that in the last edition of Chambers’s Encyclopædia, four
volumes of the largest size, with one volume of plates, printed in
1783, the very word Geology does not occur; and that some years later,
chemical lectures were publicly given on the phlogistic theory of
Becher and Stahl.

Mr. POLWHELE has published in seven parts, beginning with the date
1803, and ending with that of 1816, making in all two quarto volumes,
of about 1200 pages, in small type, and abounding with notes and
extracts in a type still smaller, an immense collection of matter
relative to the antiquities, the biography, the literature, the
history military and civil, &c. of Cornwall; arranged under distinct
heads, and enriched with prints of distinguished persons, with figures
of ancient castles, churches, monuments, &c. and with views of towns,
and of romantic scenery. One is astonished at the great labour
bestowed on this work, and still more so when it is recollected, that
the author has distinguished himself in every branch of elegant
literature, and most of all in that department, where the fire of
genius is believed somewhat to diminish the aptitude for patient toil.

The next work on Cornwall deserves particular attention on various
grounds,――its extensive plan, arrangement, and parochial history, and
the situation in life of its author, Mr. C. S. GILBERT, who at the
time of his executing “An Historical Survey of the County of Cornwall;
to which is added a complete Heraldry of the same, with numerous
engravings,” resided as a druggist in Plymouth or Devonport; and he is
said to have acquired a knowledge of this trade by accompanying one of
those itinerant doctors in medicine, who are in the habit of
attracting customers by exhibitions little suited to the gravity of a
profound science.

Mr. Gilbert is understood to have collected information which induced
him to believe, that he might claim a descent from the Gilberts of
Compton Castle; and under that persuasion he applied himself to the
study of antiquities, with genealogy, heraldry, and every collateral
science, which led him by degrees to undertake the History of
Cornwall, and to complete it in two quarto volumes, usually bound in
three; all which he executed with such eagerness, zeal, and disregard
of expense, as to involve him during the latter part of his life in
considerable difficulties. For Compton Castle, and the family from
which this gentleman thought himself derived, and which is now
represented by the Reverend J. Pomeroy Gilbert, of Bodmin, see
Prince’s Worthies of Devon, p. 420, edition of 1810.

About the same time that Mr. C. S. Gilbert’s work appeared, another
very similar to it came out sanctioned by the names of Mr. SAMUEL DREW
of St. Austell, well known by his profound metaphysical writings, and
of Mr. MALACHY HITCHINS, son of the celebrated astronomer, who,
residing at St. Hilary, three hundred miles from London, conducted the
Nautical Almanack from the second year of its appearance 1768, to the
conclusion of his life in 1809, during a period of more than forty
years.

A well written and perspicuous life of Mr. Drew, has been given to the
public by his son Mr. Jacob Halls Drew, in which many interesting
particulars are given of this distinguished writer; together with a
fair and impartial account of his various works, of which the most
known, and perhaps the best, is his Essay on the Human Soul. This
treatise, published in 1802, contains every argument that can be found
in the Phædon of Plato, with additions; and the whole is not inferior
to its prototype. But the observation of an ancient peripatetic
philosopher, Alexander of Appodisia, a city of Caria in Lesser Asia,
is equally applicable to both:

     Αλλ’ εστι πολλα των ὁντων, ἁ την μεν ὑπαρξιν εχει
     γνωριμωτατην, αγνωστοτατην δε την ουσιαν· ὡσπερ ἡτε Κινησις,
     και ὁ Τοπος, ετι δε μαλλον ὁ Χρονος. Εκαστου γαρ τουτων το
     μεν ειναι γνωριμον και αναμφιλεκτον· τις δε ποτε εστιν αυτων
     ἡ ουσια των χαλεπωτατων οραθηναι.

     Εστι δε δη τι των τοιουτων και Ἡ Ψυχη· το μεν γαρ ειναι τι
     την Ψυχην γνωριμωτατον και φανερωτατον· τι δε ποτε εστιν, ου
     ῥαδιον καταμαθειν.

Our reason convinces us of its own separate existence apart from
matter and organization; beyond that, we must submit to learn from
higher authority.

Alexander, therefore, does not go beyond the sphere of human
knowledge, when he adds of the soul as capable of a separate
existence, Μηδε την αρχην Οργανῳ τινι Σωματικῳ προσχρησθαι προς την
ληψιν των νοουμενων, αλλ’ αρκεισθαι αυτον αυτῳ προς το γνωναι το
νοουμενον.

Mr. Hitchins gave several proofs of genius; but his life was cut short
at an early period.

Various descriptions and accounts of local districts, and of
particular places in Cornwall may be found; of these I shall mention
three as by far the best, and highly deserving of attention.

Topographical and Historical Sketches of the Boroughs of East and West
Looe, with an account of the Natural and Artificial Curiosities and
Picturesque Scenery in the Neighbourhood. By Thomas Bond, Esq.

Dr. Maton’s Tour; and

A Guide to the Mount’s Bay and the Land’s End. By Dr. Paris.

As this must in all probability be the last time of my addressing the
inhabitants of my native county through the medium of any permanent
work, I shall so far presume as to offer a few lines respecting
myself, nearly in the words used by two among the most distinguished
of modern writers.

Since it has pleased Almighty God so to constitute the world, that the
human race should every where increase up to the very limit of
subsistence, all countries must witness by far the greater portion of
their inhabitants exposed to the dangers of privation, of poverty, and
of distress, incapable of being mitigated in any way, except by the
prudence, the care, and the general good conduct of the parties
themselves; but easily and fatally susceptible of being augmented,
almost to an unlimited degree, by the establishment of permanent
charities, by distributions in the shape of largesses, and above all,
by the greatest and most melancholy achievement of human weakness and
short-sighted folly, the English system of poor laws, extending
premiums to idleness and improvidence, on a basis of indefinite relief
to claimants multiplying without end.

     “My lot might have been thrown among these; it might have
     been that of a savage, or a slave: nor can I reflect without
     gratitude on the bounty of Nature, which has cast my birth
     in a free and civilized country, in a family decently
     endowed with the gifts of Fortune, in an age of science and
     of philosophy, where years outrun in discoveries and in
     improvements the advances of former centuries.”

It is not for me to determine how far these advantages have been
improved by myself; but at the age of threescore years and ten, I may
justly say with the other writer alluded to――

     “The retrospect of life recalls to my view many
     opportunities of good neglected, much time squandered upon
     trifles, and more lost in idleness and vacancy. I leave many
     great designs unattempted, and many great attempts
     unfinished; but, my mind being free from the burden of any
     heavy crime, I compose myself to tranquillity: I endeavour
     to abstract my thoughts from hopes and cares, which, though
     reason knows them to be vain, still try to keep their old
     possession of my heart: I humbly expect the hour which
     Nature cannot long delay; and with the most profound
     adoration of the Divinity, I hope to possess in a better
     state of existence, that happiness which here I could not
     find, and that virtue which here I have been unable to
     attain.”

                                           DAVIES GILBERT, 1837.


POSTSCRIPT.

I have to acknowledge my obligations to various gentlemen for
assistance in the progress of this work, but especially to the
following:

  To RICHARD TAUNTON, Esq. M.D. for his loan of Mr Hals’s Manuscript.

  To the late Right Honorable FRANCIS BASSET, BARON DE DUNSTANVILLE,
    for his supplying me with Mr. Tonkin’s Manuscript.

  To HENRY S. BOASE, Esq. M.D. for his most liberal communication of
    an abstract for each Parish, taken from an accurate and minute
    Geological Survey of the whole County, made by himself.

  To the Right Honorable HENEAGE FINCH, EARL OF AYLESFORD, for his
    allowing me the use of a Transcript of Mr. Hals’ Parochial History
    as it now exists, formerly belonging to the late Mr. Lysons.

  To GORDON WILLIAM FRANCIS GREGOR, Esq. for his supplying me with an
    emblazoned copy of the last Visitation of Cornwall by the Heralds
    in 1620.

  To Sir HENRY ELLIS, K.H. F.R.S. Sec. S.A. for the communication of
    his MS. additions to Tanner’s Notitia Monastica for Cornwall.

  To the Rev. JOSIAH FORSHALL, M.A. F.R.S. late Fellow of Exeter
    College, Oxford, and now Keeper of the Manuscripts in the British
    Museum, for his extracts from a very ancient Manuscript relative to
    the See of Bodmin.

  I have to acknowledge, with my best thanks, the assistance of THOMAS
    HINGSTON, Esq. M.D. afforded by his arrangement of Extracts
    relating to Cornwall, from the Itinerary of William of Worcester;
    and by an original communication on the Etymology of Names of
    Places within the county.[1]

The only existing Manuscript of Mr. Tonkin’s Work having remained for
some years in the possession of Mr. Whitaker, he added to it various
notes and ilustrations, frequently interlined, or blended with the
original writing, so as to render the task difficult, in many cases,
to distinguish the one from the other. In almost every passage of any
length, Mr. Whitaker’s additions are marked with a [W.]

Geology having pressed forward during the present century, at a pace
unexampled in other sciences, may reasonably be expected to reach new
discoveries in comparatively short intervals of time; these have been
reduced, however, almost to instants in respect to Cornwall. After the
very able, minute, and laborious investigation made by Doctor Boase,
of every district, of every parish in the whole county, the work of
discovery would seem to have been completed, at the least for several
years; but Mr. de la Beche came soon afterwards into Cornwall, under
the sanction of Government, assisted by officers of the Engineers
employed on the great Trigonometrical Survey; and this eminent
Geologist has, in consequence, been enabled to lay down the various
main lodes, the cross courses, the elvans, &c. together with the
junctions of granite, greenstone, and killas, with an accuracy and
discrimination never before attained, nor ever approximated to, except
by Mr. Richard Thomas, in his survey of the mining district, made
about twenty years ago.

Mr. De la Beche has also been enabled to deduce several general laws
observed in the direction of cleavages, in the dip of strata, in the
heaves and slides of lodes, all of which will be detailed in an
eagerly expected volume, together with a discovery most unexpected.
The saxa metallifera of Cornwall had always been supposed referable to
a very remote period of geological epochs, far anterior to the age of
organic remains; till this opinion became shaken by the discovery of
shells, or of their impressions, in the hard schist rocks near
Tintagell: others were subsequently found more to the south and west;
till at last Mr. De la Beche has detected the remains of organized
life adjacent to a productive Copper Lode.

Two other eminent geologists, whom it would be equally idle and
presumptuous for me to praise, have established the fact of a
formation in the northern parts of Cornwall and Devon, not less
unexpected than the discovery just noticed.

Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison having investigated the
deep-seated rocks in Wales, and in the adjacent districts, have
finally traced the carboniferous series under the Severn, and so far
west as the level ridge of land, extending from near Launceston to the
sea coast between St. Gennys and Botreaux Castle, along which plane
the escarpment manifests itself in a very conspicuous manner.

While these discoveries may be considered as in progress, a Cornish
gentleman, but one whose genius does honour to the nation, Mr. Robert
Weare Fox, has deduced from galvanic action on metals, on their
oxides, on their sulphurets, and on their saline solutions in water,
the only theory that has yet accounted for the various phenomena
observed in metallic lodes; and extending still further his
investigations to the recently discovered connection between electric
energies and terrestrial magnetism, Mr. Fox has been enabled to give
more than probable reasons for the extraordinary fact of some metals
usually selecting, in all parts of the world, lodes or fissures
running nearly east and west, and why other metals prefer rents at
right angles to the former; and in respect to the fissures themselves,
Mr. Fox has remarked appearances inducing him to believe that lodes of
considerable breadth have not been formed by any one great and sudden
rending of the earth; but that, in a manner similar to the rising or
to the sinking of land, by the gradual action of causes now well known
to exist, those clefts have been enlarged from time to time, and have
as frequently received additional deposits, easily discriminated from
each other.

Mr. Fox appears also to have settled beyond the possibility of doubt,
the long-agitated question respecting the temperature of mines, by
establishing a general relation between increases of heat and depth;
although the ratio cannot be reduced to any definite formula, being
liable to vary with the presence of more or less water, and with the
different conducting power of rocks, since mines in granite and in
killas differ by several degrees of heat at the same level: yet the
increase corresponds so generally with greater descents into the
earth, that elevation of temperature, and not the expense, nor the
difficulty of exhausting water, appears likely to oppose the final
limit to the progress of mines in depth.

In continuation of the same trains of reasoning and of thought, Mr.
Fox has been led to investigate the important elements of variation
and dip of the magnetic needle; and in pursuing these inquiries, he
has invented an instrument possessed of far greater accuracy than any
one previously employed, and which at this moment is in actual use,
through the enlightened liberality of our own and other governments,
in various and distant portions of the globe.

Mr. Henwood is about to lay before the Public a Work containing the
results of more extensive and scientific researches into the nature of
Lodes and Fissures, than have perhaps been ever executed by any
individual. Mr. Henwood is well known to geologists: I shall therefore
only add what I think myself bound in duty to notice, that an original
appointment in the Stanneries, and a subsequent promotion, have been
bestowed on Mr. Henwood, through the medium of Her Majesty’s Duchy
Officers, and principally of Sir George Harrison, in consideration of
his scientific attainments, and of his desire to render these
attainments available to the development of further inductions.

       *     *     *     *     *

I have endeavoured to render the work cheap by adopting the octavo
form, and by abstaining from all decoration, except a slight sketch of
the Pitt Diamond, which by raising that family into an influential
situation, has modified the fate of Europe in a degree impossible to
have been contemplated by the Regent Duke of Orleans, when he
purchased that bauble at the expense of an hundred and thirty-five
thousand pounds; and excepting also the Tomb of Archbishop Tregury, a
view of Cotehele house, and the Seal of a Corporation, all of which
had been previously cut on wood. I have abstained from further expense
with the view of placing my work in the hands of as many persons in
Cornwall as I possibly could, thereby diffusing the entertainment
likely to arise from Local Anecdotes, from Provincial Occurrences, and
from Historical Events, not of sufficient general importance for
securing to themselves a place in national records. I have caused an
ample Index to be prepared for the whole work; and among the
Appendixes will be found an Index to the Survey of our most respected
historian Mr. Carew; and I will add as a proof of my own
disinterestedness, that I have engaged to leave with the Publishers
all the profits, if any should arise, reserving to myself the much
more probable alternative of sustaining the loss.

The concluding paragraph proves the least agreeable of my work. I am
sorry to say, that the Typographical errors far exceed my expectation.
I must entreat of all my readers to excuse them, and to correct the
Text from the too extensive Tables of Errata. The want of early habit,
dimness of sight, and absence from the Press, must be alleged on my
behalf; perhaps the compositor may plead unusual names or terms, and
subjects not rendered familiar by his ordinary practice.

                                           DAVIES GILBERT, 1837.


     [1] While this sheet is passing through the press, we have
     to lament the premature decease of Dr. Hingston, at
     Falmouth, on the 15th July 1837.




AN INTRODUCTION

TO

THE GEOLOGY OF CORNWALL.

BY DR. BOASE.


The geological notices inserted in this Work, are necessarily so brief
and so unconnected, on account of the alphabetical arrangement of the
parishes, that it is desirable that a few introductory remarks should
be made that this defect may be in some measure obviated.

Cornwall does not possess a great variety of rock formations, being
composed of primary and transition or intermediate groups, covered
here and there with deposits of gravel, sand, and clay, which belong
to the modern epoch. But this limited range of formations is more than
compensated for by the great facilities which the geologist here
enjoys in his investigations; the very extended line of cliffs which
deeply indent the Cornish shores proffer numerous and instructive
sections; and the vast mining operations have brought to light most
important phenomena. Indeed, no country of equal extent can, in these
combined advantages, be compared with Cornwall.

On a general view of this country, the surface exhibits two systems of
valleys; one running parallel with the central ridge, which is highest
near Launceston, and gradually, but irregularly, declines till it
terminates at the Land’s End, in cliffs about a hundred feet in
height; the other intersecting the longitudinal valleys at right
angles; and as all the intermediate hills are more or less rounded,
the country has an undulating appearance in both directions, not
unaptly compared to the waves of the sea. Through these two systems of
valleys, the rivers flow, seeking outlets into the sea by the nearest
continuous descent; sometimes they effect this along the longitudinal,
at others through the transverse valleys, receiving tributary streams
on either hand from the lateral valleys, or curved hollows which they
intersect. But sometimes the river is diverted in its course more than
once, in consequence of the concavity of a cross curve rising above
its level――or by that of the other system descending below this
point――by which irregularity the stream is compelled to flow along the
more favourable drainage; thus the Camel rises about four miles from
the sea, in the moors near Davidstow, and flows more than twenty-five
before it empties itself into the sea at Padstow. In the hollows of
these valleys the drainage is often sufficiently obstructed to produce
marshy ground; but seldom of such extent as to deserve the name of a
lake.

As regards the soil, on the high grounds it is frequently very shallow
and barren; but in the valleys it is very productive, and here and
there is well wooded, more particularly on the southern coast. On the
northern coast, in the vicinity of the sea, it is very sandy, owing to
the light testaceous sand of the shore being carried inland by high
winds; in this manner no inconsiderable tracts of fertile land have
been devastated.

Let us now turn our attention to the internal or geological structure
of Cornwall. The highest parts of the central ridge, already alluded
to, are composed of granite, which occurs in the form of four large
insulated patches, so disposed at nearly equal distances from each
other as to resemble a chain of islands extending from Launceston to
the Land’s End, that is in the direction of N.E. and S.W. On the same
ridge, but rather parallel than continuous thereto, is the great
granitic group of Dartmoor in Devon, the whole of which is sometimes
called the Ocrynian Range.

The granitic patch of Dartmoor is by far the most extensive, being
nearly twenty miles in diameter; that of Launceston is ten miles in
length by six or seven in breadth at its widest part; and its most
elevated hills, Rough-tor and Brown-Willy, do not much exceed 1,300
feet in height. The granitic rocks of this patch, like that of
Dartmoor, are not much exposed by artificial excavations, so that
their varieties cannot be easily examined; the _weathered_ blocks,
which on the summit and sides of the hills form tors and detached
masses, consist of the hard or siliceous varieties of the common and
fine-grained granites, such as have withstood the action of the
elements. One of the most curious of these tors is the _Cheese Wring_,
near Liskeard, a pile of single blocks, each being larger than the one
immediately beneath. Proceeding along the ridge towards the Land’s
End, the next, or St. Austel patch of granite will be found, much less
than the last, but more interesting both in a scientific and a
commercial point of view. In addition to the kinds of granite already
noticed, it contains beds of talcose granite, or protogine, which by
its decomposition furnishes that valuable substance _china clay_ or
_kaolin_, many thousand tons of which are annually exported for the
potteries. The third, or Redruth patch of granite, affords many
varieties of this rock, and has been well explored by numerous mines
which have been productive in both tin and copper ores, affording also
to the mineralogist a great variety of rare specimens. But the fourth,
or Land’s End granite, is by far the most important to the geologist,
for the land becoming here very narrow, the sea has produced
cliff-sections, both in the granite, and also at its point of junction
with the slate, exhibiting many interesting phenomena. Among these,
the veins of granite in the slate are beautifully displayed, and have
long been a great attraction to geologists; but the modes in which
these rocks meet and unite, are not less deserving of notice. But for
a detailed description of these curious facts, the reader may be
referred to my “Treatise on Primary Geology.”

Besides these four principal patches of granite, there are four
others: 1st. that of Kitt Hill, near Callington; 2nd. that of
Tregonning and Godolphin, near Helston; 3d. that of Cligga Point, near
St. Agnes; and lastly, that of the celebrated St. Michael’s Mount. The
two first are of some size, and at the surface are both subdivided
near the middle, by the overlapping of the slate: the other two are
small, but very interesting to the geologist.

It is worthy of remark that the fertility of these granitic groups
gradually increases as they diminish in elevation; and it is a curious
but not surprising coincidence, that the number of parish churches
thereon follows the same order:――thus on the eastern and most
extensive tract of granite, near Launceston, there is only one church;
on the next there are three; on the Redruth patch six; and on the
Land’s End granite no less than nine, within a space considerably less
than that of the eastern tract.

Each of these insulated groups of granite is surrounded by schistose
rocks, the layers of which, on all sides, incline from the granite at
various angles, from 20° to 40°. Although these groups are thus
separated from each other by the slate at the surface, yet it is the
general opinion that they gradually approach beneath, until they are
all united into one and the same mass――the intermediate hollow spaces
(the valleys, as it were, between the granitic mountains) being
occupied by the slate. It might, however, be maintained that the
granite is imbedded in the slate, in large rounded masses, which would
also account for the former rock underlying the other, within the
limits of mining operations: and such an opinion would derive some
support from the fact, that small insulated masses of granite in the
slate are not of unfrequent occurrence.

The slate formation consists of two very distinct groups, when the
most characteristic rocks are alone regarded; but it is not easy to
trace the boundary between them, as the contiguous rocks appear to
pass gradually into each other. These groups have one character in
common: viz. that they consist of several distinct kinds of rocks,
each genus of which respectively may be subdivided into schistose and
compact rocks; the latter are imbedded in the former――are more
crystalline――and often contain clusters of their constituent minerals:
so that the complicated composition of these rocks is made known by
Nature’s own analysis.

The group next the granite is _primary_, the more remote one is
_transition_, or as they are termed in the following pages the
_porphyritic_ and _calcareous_ series of the slate formation. The
series next the granite is characterised by its beds of porphyry, and
by its abounding in veins of tin and copper ores; the other series by
the frequent occurrence of calcareous spar and strata of limestone,
with occasional organic remains, and by its being sparingly
metalliferous, containing no tin-ore, but being productive of lead and
antimony. It is within the last series that the magnesian or
serpentine rocks occur, and which in the Lizard district are developed
to a large extent, forming one of the most interesting geological
features of Cornwall. Those who are desirous of more information
concerning this slate formation, will find a copious account in the
fourth volume of the Transactions of the Geological Society of
Cornwall. It is there proposed to give these rocks, whenever they
possess well-marked characters, distinct names, and not to refer a
great variety of rocks to the vague and indefinite genera of
clay-slate and greywacké. An accurate and more extended nomenclature
would have rendered the following notices much more intelligible.

In describing the general features of Cornwall, we must not omit to
mention the metalliferous veins――the great source of its commercial
prosperity――and the channel through which much curious information has
been obtained, concerning the structure of the earth. These veins
traverse indifferently both the granite and the slate, but are most
abundant in the latter rock, in the vicinity of the granite. The
general direction of the tin and copper veins (or _lodes_, as they are
provincially called) is nearly E.N.E. and W.S.W., and they are crossed
by another system of veins, nearly at right angles, which are not
commonly metalliferous, and when they do contain ores these are often
of lead, antimony, silver, and other metals. This is not however a
general rule, for in the parish of St. Just, Penwith, the tin and
copper ores occur in the cross veins. The course of the veins is not
straight, but they are always more or less undulating, both in their
direction and in their dip or underlie. Various interesting phenomena
result from their meeting with and intersecting each other, known to
the miner under the names of _heaves_, _throws_, and _slides_. This
subject is replete with curious facts, but would require considerable
space for their enumeration; the reader must therefore be again
referred to the work already alluded to on “_Primary Geology_.”

Before concluding this brief sketch, a few words must be said on the
beds of clay, sand, and gravel which cover the low grounds, both on
the granite and on the slate. These may be resolved into two kinds:
1st. those resulting from the decomposition of the rocks, and which
are in their original position; and 2d. those which are not _in situ_,
affording by their appearance, composition, and position, evidence of
their having been transported. These deposits belong to three distinct
periods, and alternate with terrestrial and marine remains, according
to their situation in respect to the sea-level at their respective
epochs. Each of these transports was accompanied, or followed by, a
change in the sea-level: the last corresponds with that now existing;
the previous one, by the elevated ancient beaches, indicates that the
sea was about fifty feet above its present level; and the earliest
transport, being covered with sub-marine forests, shows that the sea
was at that epoch at least fifty feet lower than it now is. (See 4th
vol. Geol. Trans. of Cornwall, p. 466, et seq.) In the lowest or
oldest deposit the tin-ore (_stream-tin_) is found in the form of sand
and gravel mixed with earthy substances: it affords the purest kind of
tin, known in the market by the name of _grain-tin_; and appears to be
the source from which the ancients derived all their tin. The notices
under each parish will furnish more particulars concerning these
interesting deposits.




ERRATA.


VOLUME I.

  P. 16, note, _for_ Glaveney, _read_ Glaseney.
  P. 29, line 22, _for_ points, _read_ parishes.
  P. 45, lines 9 and 12, _for_ Perr, _read_ Parr.
  P. 47, lines 7 and 8, _for_ Pentwan, _read_ Pentewan.
  P. 48, line 15, _for_ Puntner, _read_ Pentewan.
  P. 52, line 4, _for_ Parc, _read_ Parr.
  P. 76, line 20, _for_ Beni, _read_ Berri.
  P. 87, line 18, _for_ Kint, _read_ Kent;
         line 31, _for_ has, _read_ had.
  P. 113, line 2, _for_ 1623, _read_ 1643.
  P. 141, line 5 of note, _for_ Penrith, _read_ Penwith.
  P. 151, In Callington, line 8, _for_ Mellior, _read_ Mellion.
  P. 153, line 27, _for_ sine, _read_ sive.
  P. 158, line 15, _for_ Bodrigar, _read_ Bodrigan.
  P. 210, line 18, _for_ Ludgnan, _read_ Ludgvan.
  P. 222, line 7 from foot, _for_ Solverne, _read_ Talverne.
  P. 226, _for_ Mane Mine, _read_ Manor Mine.
  P. 244, line 3 from foot, _read_ Glanville, of Catchfrench.
  P. 260, line 15, _for_ Disporth, _read_ Duporth.
  P. 298, line 11 from foot, _for_ Carreth, _read_ Carveth.
  P. 328, line 12 from foot, _for_ St. Veye or St. Vewe,
                             _read_ St. Udey or St. Kewe.
  P. 342, line 14, _for_ Donechenir, _read_ Donechenin.
  P. 360, line 20, _read_ a small neat house.
  P. 397, line 19, _for_ Seawen, _read_ Scawen;
          line 25, _for_ Treladra, _read_ Treludra.


VOLUME II.

  P. 7, line 20, _for_ Poble, _read_ Poole.
  P. 90, line 5 from foot, _for_ pale, _read_ pall.
  P. 123, line 13 from foot, _for_ Pennerks, _read_ Pennecks.
  P. 151, line 5 from foot, _for_ Tress, _read_ Trese.
  P. 203, line 2 from foot, _for_ exepecierint, _read_ expedierint.
  P. 213, line 5 from foot, _for_ Appeninnes, _read_ Apennines.
  P. 215, line 12 from foot, _after_ western, _read_ limit of.
  P. 224, last word, _add_ baptismal name;
          and in first line of p. 225, _after_ Cornwall, _add_ and.
  P. 240, lines 2 from foot; and in p. 241, _for_ Angowe, _read_ Angove.
  P. 250, lines 9 and 11 from foot, _for_ Perth, _read_ Porth.
  P. 282, line 2, _for_ Morsa, _read_ Morva.
  P. 283, line 13, _for_ Leucan and St. Lennan,
                   _read_ Levan and St. Sennan.
  P. 290, line 6 and 7 from foot, _for_ Juest and Jeast,
                                  _read_ Tuest _and_ Teast.
  P. 313, line 2, _for_ Bavi, _read_ Bari.
  P. 319, line 9, _for_ seers, _read_ peers.
  P. 339, line 19, _for_ Glanville, _read_ Grenville.


VOLUME III.

  P. 30, line 20, _for_ towers, _read_ tors.
  P. 55, line 12, _for_ scale, _read_ scales.
  P. 85, line 7 from the foot, _for_ thus, _read_ then.
  P. 86, line 10, _for_ Whilstone, _read_ Whitstone.
  P. 87, lines 14 and 18, _for_ Perkin, _read_ Parkin.
  P. 88, line 16, _for_ Heckens, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 91, line 7, _for_ Heckins, _read_ Hechins.
  P. 136, last line, _for_ Modford, _read_ Madford.
  P. 138, lines 28, 29, _dele_ the present rector.
  P. 178, line 15, _for_ St. Ives, _read_ St. Ive.
  P. 230, line 21, _for_ eria, _read_ erica.
  P. 307, line 22, _for_ Episcopus, _read_ Episcopi.
  P. 350, line 27, _for_ Troad, _read_ Trood.
  P. 461, line 7, _for_ Coat, _read_ Cock.


VOLUME IV.

  P. 36, line 10, _for_ Polbenro, _read_ Polperro.
  P. 41, line 10, _read_ Horningcote.
  P. 44, line 2 from bottom, _for_ Mr. _read_ Mrs.
  P. 45, line 2, _for_ Dinnavale, _read_ Dellabole;
         line 6, _for_ Treveares, _read_ Treveans;
         line 14, _for_ brother, _read_ brothers.
  P. 46, line 19, _for_ an entire, _read_ a complete.
  P. 54, line 7 from foot, _after_ ecclesiastical, _read_ and Duchy.
  P. 67, line 19, _read_ from whom it has descended.
  P. 74, line 11, _for_ Ballivor, _read_ Ballivo.
  P. 93, line 20, _for_ he, _read_ she.
  P. 114, line 6 from foot, _for_ Trevilyan, _read_ Tresilyan.
  P. 138, line 17, _for_ bold, _read_ bald.
  P. 139, line 14, _dele_ (S. T.)
  P. 161, _add to the note_, and the name should be Trewren.




HISTORY

OF THE

PARISHES OF CORNWALL.




ADVENT, ALIAS ST. ANNE.


HALS.

Advent is situate in the hundred of Les-newith, i. e. new breadth,
extent, or division.[2] It hath upon the north Lantegles; east, Altar
Nun and St. Cloather; south, Brewer; west, Michaelstow. In the
Domesday (Roll or) Tax, 2d of Will. I. 1068, this district was rated
either under the names of Tegleston or Helleston, manors contiguous
therewith.

For the modern appellations of this parish, they were taken from the
church after its erection and consecration (which goes in presentation
and consolidation with Lanteglos), and is called Advent, from Advent
Sunday, (on which probably it was consecrated and dedicated to God, in
the name of St. Anne, by the Bishop of Exon,) viz. the nearest to the
feast of St. Andrew, and refers to the coming of Christ,――Advent pro
adveniant, coming.

This church is consolidated in Lanteglos, and goes in presentation
with it; the patronage in the Duke of Cornwall, who endowed it.[3]

This parish of Advent alias St. Anne was rated at the 4_s._ per pound
land tax,[4] ann. Dom. 1696; at which time the author of this work,
with other commissioners at Bodmin, settled the respective charges or
sums upon all the parishes or towns in Cornwall for all future ages.


TONKIN.

The right name of this parish is St. Alhawyn, by abbreviation Advent.

The place of chief note in this parish is Trethym. In the time of the
Usurpation, Sir Henry Rolle, of Honiton, retired here, as being a
pleasant seat (especially in summer) for hunting; and soon after it
was the seat, by lease from him, of Matthew Vivian, Gent. a younger
brother of John Vivian, Esq. of Truan, and as noted a cavalier as his
brother was a partisan on the other side. Mr. Matthew Vivian had
several daughters, one of whom being the first wife of ―――― Beale, of
St. Teath, brought him this barton, which he gave to her eldest son,
Matthew Beale, Gent. whose widow now enjoys it (1715): of whom see
more in St. Teath. [From them it passed to the Gwatkins, by which
family it was held until the year 1814, when it was sold by Robert
Lovell Gwatkin, Esq. to Mr. Allen Searell. _Hitchins._]


WHITAKER.

Ridiculing the etymology of Advent suggested by Hals, Mr. Whitaker
says, “The appellation is merely personal, and that of the church’s
saint,” Adwen. This was one of a numerous family of saints, whose
history, as they have left their names to several parishes and
churches in Cornwall, it may be desirable to detail in this place, as
it is quoted by Leland from the Life of St. Nectan, who was the eldest
brother. “Brechan, a petty king of Wales, from whom the district of
Brocchanoc (Brecknock) derived its name, had by his wife Gladwise
twenty-four sons and daughters, whose names were: Nectan, John (or
Ivan), Endelient, Menfre, Dilic; Tedda, Maben, Wencu, Wensent;
Merewenna, Wenna, Juliana, Yse; Morwenna, Wymp, Wenheder, Cleder,
Keri; Jona, Kananc (or Lalant), Kerhender, _Adwen_, Helie, Tamalanc.
All these sons and daughters were afterwards saints, martyrs, or
confessors, leading the life of hermits in Devon and Cornwall.” The
same story is related by Giraldus Cambrensis and William of Worcester.
Whitaker’s Cathedral, vol. II. pp. 91, 98.


LYSONS.

Advent contains the small villages of Treclogoe or Trelogoe, Pencarow,
and Tresinny. Most of the estates in this parish are parcel of the
duchy of Cornwall, being held as free and customary lands of the manor
of Helston in Trigg. The manor of Trelagoe, Treclegoe, or Trenelgoe,
after having been for some descents in the family of Phillipps, was
bequeathed by the late Rev. William Phillipps, Rector of Lanteglos and
Advent, to his nephew John Phillipps Carpenter, of Tavistock, Esq.
whose son is the present proprietor.


THE EDITOR.

  Advent contains 2,844 statute acres.
  Annual value of the real property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
     to Parliament in 1815                  1,396    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1815                          115    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {     170  |    219   |   229    |    244.
    or 43½ per cent. increase in thirty years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The eastern part of this parish consists of granite, forming a portion
of an extensive group of this rock, in which are situated Roughtor and
Brown Willy, the highest hills in Cornwall. This granite is of the
ordinary kind, large grained, and often porphyritic. It contains beds
of fine-grained rocks, in some of which crystalline felspar, quartz,
and mica, constitute the entire mass; but in others these minerals are
embedded in a basis of compact, or rather of granular felspar, which
is itself apparently a compound of felspar and quartz. The junction of
the granite with slate is concealed by a large track of marsh and bog;
adjoining to which is a dreary waste of common, resting on an
irregular bed of quartzose gravel, derived from the granite hills, and
evidently of diluvial origin. This eastern part is sterile, merely
affording a scanty subsistence to cattle during the summer. The
remainder of the parish is composed of felspar and hornblend rocks,
traversed here and there by courses of granitic elvan, a rock in every
respect similar to that occurring in the granite. One of these courses
may be seen by the road side near the rivulet of Pencarrow. Here the
country is wooded and cultivated, exhibiting some picturesque scenes
of hill and dale; so characteristic of the hornblend rock near granite.


     [2] See Mr. Whitaker’s remark on this etymology, hereafter
     under the parish of Lesnewth.

     [3] Jewell contra Harding, p. 582.

     [4] In the Exchequer 61_l._ 17_s._




ST. AGNES.


HALS.

St. Agnes is situate in the hundred of Pyder.

At the time of the Conqueror’s tax there was no such parish or
district as Saint Agnes; but the same passed in rates under the
jurisdiction of the Earl of Cornwall’s manor, now Duchy, of
Twarnhayle; together with Peransand: which now parish of St. Agnes was
taxed to the four shillings in the pound land-tax, 9th William and
Mary, 1696, 137_l._ 5_s._

The present church of St. Agnes was of old only a small free chapel
dedicated to her, without endowment, till the same was augmented and
rebuilt, of three roofs, as it now stands, by charitable collections,
and the proper charge and cost of the inhabitants thereof, in 1484;
consecrated and dedicated to the honour of Almighty God, in the name
of St. Agnes, as a daughter church to Peransand, by Dr. Peter
Courtenay, then Bishop of Exon.[5]

St. Agnes was a Roman by birth, anno Dom. 285, descended of noble
ancestors, and being beautiful of body and mind, at 13 years of age
was courted in marriage by the son of Sempronius, then governor of
Rome; but because he was no Christian she utterly refused his address,
who complained thereof to his father; that immediately he sent for
Agnes, and renewed the proposals of marriage made to her by his son,
making larger offers for her advantage, which altogether proving
ineffectual, Sempronius asked her whether she would adore and
sacrifice to the Roman gods, and abandon the superstition of the
Christians, but she, proving constant to her religion, utterly refused
to do that also; whereupon she was committed to prison, from thence,
after much hard durance, sent among persons of ill fame, where her
innocence and purity were miraculously preserved, till at length, by
the Governor’s order, she was committed to the flames, which
immediately parted asunder, and did her no harm; whereupon the
Governor, and Auspitius his agent, commanded her to be taken out of
the fire, and forthwith to be beheaded by the common hangman, 20
January, anno Dom. 304, in the latter end of the reign of Dioclesian,
or in the beginning of Constantius and Galerius. St. Ambrose wrote
her life. St. Isidore, St. Augustine, Demetrius, and Prudentius,
with Aloysy Lessomanus, Bishop of Seville, have all written
very commendable things of her. In the glass windows of this
church I remember to have seen written the remains of a broken
inscription,――“in carcere serat Agnes,”――referring, I suppose, to her
sowing or preaching the Word in the prison, jail, or hold, to which
she was confined as aforesaid. The parish feast is holden on the
Sunday following St. Agnes’ Day.

In this parish stands Carne Bury-anacht, or Bury-anack, synonymous
words, only varied by the dialect; id est, the still, quiet,
spar-stone grave, or burying-place, where, suitable to the name, on
the natural, remote, lofty circumstances thereof, stand three
sparstone tumuli, consisting of a vast number of those stones, great
and small, piled up together, in memory of some one notable human
creature before the 6th centuary interred there.

This is that well-known place called St. Agnes’ Ball, that is to say,
St. Agnes’ pestis, or plague, so named from the hard, deep, and
dangerous labour of the tinners there, out of which mountain hath been
digged up, for at least 150 years’ space, about ten thousand pounds
worth of tin per annum; which keeps daily employed about the same
1,000 persons, who for the most part spend their time in hard and
dangerous labours as aforesaid, in order to get a poor livelihood for
themselves and families, in the pursuit of which, here and in other
places, many of those poor men yearly by sad accidents lose their
lives.

The natural circumstances of this Ball is a subject as worthy the
consideration of the most sage virtuosos, or natural philosophers;
for, though it be a stupendous and amazing high mountain, abutting
upon the Irish sea, or St. George’s Channel, rising pyramidally from
the same at least 90 fathom above the sea and contiguous lands, yet on
the top thereof, under those spar-stone graves, or burying-places, is
discovered by the tinners, five foot deep, good arable land or earth;
under that, for six foot deep, is found a fine sort of white and
yellow clay, of which tobacco-pipes have been made; beneath this clay
is a laying of sea-sand and nice totty-stones. Two or three hundred
fathoms from the sea, and about eighty fathoms above it, under this
sand, is to be seen for about five foot deep, nothing but such
totty-stones as are usually washed on the sea-shore, and in many of
them grains of tin. Under those stones the soil or matter of the
earth, for five or six feet deep, is nothing to be seen but
_carne-tyer_, id est, spar-stone land or earth, under which spar-stone
earth appears the firm rock, through which tin-loads are wrought or
pursued by the tinners fifty, sixty, and seventy fathoms deep. This
Ball, or lands containing this diversified matter or soil, contains
about eighty acres in circumference; which amuseth most men how the
earth, clay, sand, totty-stones, or spar-stone land, should yet be so
high above the solid rocks to the top of this mountain, unless Noah’s
flood was universal, and reached to this island, as the labouring
tinners believe and tell us. More sure I am, from ocular
demonstration, that a quantity of the white sort of sand in this Ball,
or hill, washed in a stream or river of clear water, will instantly
turn the same water into a milk-white colour, and not to be discerned
from milk, as long as you continue to pour the said sand into the
river; but this is to be understood only of such clean white sand as
is made use of and prepared for writing sand-boxes.

       *     *     *     *     *

The manor of Mithi-an, i. e. of whey, a notable grange for cows and
milk (otherwise, if the name be compounded of my-thyan, Saxon, my
servant or villain by inheritance) was formerly the lands of Winslade
of Tregarick, in Flint, an hereditary esquire of the white spur, who
forfeited the same, with much other lands, by attainder of treason,
tempore Edward VI.; so that that King or Queen Mary gave those lands
to Sir Reginald Mohun, of Hall, knight, or his father, who settled
them upon his younger son, by which conveyance it lineally descended
to my very kind friend William Mohun, of Tenervike, Esq. now in
possession thereof. In this manor is an ancient free chapel, now
converted to a dwelling-house, wherein God was duly worshipped in
former ages by the tenants thereof. [William Mohun, Esq. the last heir
male of this family, bequeathed this estate to his wife Sibella, (who
was afterwards married to John Derbyshire Birkhead, Esq.) and his
sister, Mrs. Elizabeth Prowse. Sir Christopher Hawkins, Bart., who is
the present proprietor of the whole, bought it in 1777; one moiety of
Mr. Birkhead, and the other of Matthew Grylls, brother and heir of
Robert Grylls, who had purchased it in 1758 of the devisees of Mrs.
Prowse. _Lysons._]

Treu-ellis, i. e. the son-in-law by the wife’s town; otherwise, if the
word be compounded of Tre-vell-es, it signifies the well or spring of
water town; is the dwelling of Michael Crocker, Gent. that married
Gwynn, and giveth for his arms, Argent, a chevron engrailed Gules
between three crows Proper, originally descended from the Crockers of
Ireland. Croker, after the English Saxon, is a crock-maker or seller.
[It belonged afterwards to Mr. Joseph Donnithorne,[6] and is now the
property of Mr. Chilcot. The mansion is occupied as a farm-house.
_Lysons._]

Tre-vaw-nanes, i. e. the town of the boys’ valley, alias
Tre-vawn-nanes, i. e. the town of the fanning or vawning valley; where
continually great numbers of boys, or human youths, are employed about
washing, cleansing, or vanning tin in the rivulets thereof, is the
dwelling of Thomas Tonkin, Esq. that married Kempe, his father
Vincent, his grandfather Bawden, his great-grandfather Guye; and
giveth for his arms, by virtue of a late record taken forth of the
College of Arms tempore William III. in a field Sable, an eagle
displayed Or. The name Tonkin, alias Tankin, synonymous words,
signifies a person or thing in the tank or tonk, viz. an artificial
cistern, pool, pond, or fountain of water.


TONKIN.

This being the first parish in the hundred of Pider, I take the
opportunity of stating my opinion, that the name clearly imports the
fourth,――Perwith, Kesrier, Powder, and Pider, all of which meet in one
point, where the four parishes of Redruth, Gwennap, Kenwyn, and St.
Agnes, actually touch; and the spot is called Kyvere Ankou, the place
of death, on account of the frequent burial there of felones de se, or
persons who have destroyed themselves.

Trevannence I believe to mean the town in a valley of springs. This
barton has belonged to my family upwards of five hundred years, so
that we have used the name de Trevannence, by customary inheritance of
the manor of Tywarnhails. But in 1559 Henry Earl of Rutland, then Lord
of the Manor, sold the fee of his right in Trevannence to Richard
Carne the younger, of Camborne, Gent. who reconveyed it the same year
to John Jeffry; and he conveyed it, in 1593, to Thomas Tonkin.

[This estate was the property and the seat of Thomas Tonkin, of
Trevaunance, Esq. who made large collections for a parochial History
of Cornwall. Mr. Tonkin enjoyed his estate but a few years; he died in
1742. His two sons, who did not long survive him, successively
inherited his estates, which, after their death, were for a while in
the possession of Thomas Heyes, Esq. who married the daughter and heir
of his son James, but left no issue; the only child of his daughter,
who married Foss, having died unmarried, they descended to the
representatives of the three daughters of Thomas Tonkin, who died in
1672; which daughters had married into the families of Jago, Cornish,
and Ley. Mr. John Jago, and Mr. Hugh Ley, the immediate descendants of
two of the daughters, are now possessed of two thirds of the manor of
Trevaunance, and of such portion of the manor of Lambourn as extends
into this parish, and was part of the Tonkin estate (except some lands
sold to J. Thomas, Esq. of Chiverton). The other third part has been
subdivided. Mr. Thomas has one half of it by purchase, the other is
divided between Mr. Geach, a descendant of the family of Cornish, and
Mr. Paul Clerk.[7] Trevaunance House was taken down a few years after
the death of Mr. Tonkin; there is now a cottage on its site.
_Lysons._]

The above-named Richard Carne gave for his arms (as appears by his
seal) a pelican in her nest, with wings displayed, feeding her young
ones, which coat is still to be seen in Trevannence seats, and in the
roof of St. Agnes’ church. He was descended from the Carnes of
Glamorganshire, in Wales, who derive their pedigree from Ithal, King
of Gwent, whose direct ancestor was Belimaur, the father of
Cassibelan; which Carne settled in Cornwall, as we have it by
tradition, upon his ancestor’s marriage with the heiress of Tresilian,
of Tresilian in the parish of Newlyn.

Westward of Breanis riseth with a gentle ascent the great hill
commonly called St. Agnes’ Beacon; formerly Carne Breanic. On the top
are three stone barrows; to the westward of the one now used for a
beacon, are visible remains of a small square fortification.

This parish is of a large extent, but for the most part barren, with
abundance of wortzel and downs; but withal very populous, and not
without some parcels of very good land, particularly from Trevannence
to Perwennack, Tewan, Trevisick, Mewla, Meuthion; and neither are the
barren grounds the least considerable, as producing large quantities
of excellent tin, according to the Cornish saying,

    Stean San Agnes an guella stean in Kernow.
   (St. Agnes’ tin is the best tin in Cornwall.)

As likewise in some places very good copper, with some quarries which
produce excellent stone for building; and some of slate for roofing,
but not of the best quality. The land lies very heathy and dry, but
too much exposed to the raging north-west wind for trees to thrive on
it.

From the top of the first hill a part of Devonshire may be seen; also
the North and South Seas; with thirty-four parishes. The Bowden or
Boen Marks, called in sea charts the Cow and Calf, lie about two miles
from the shore.


LYSONS.

An attempt was made by the Tonkin family to form a harbour at
Trevaunance-Porth as early as the year 1632; it was attempted again in
1684, and, after a considerable expence had been incurred, again given
up. In 1699, a third attempt was made with the assistance of Mr.
Winstanly, the celebrated engineer; the works then constructed were
destroyed by a violent storm in 1705. Mr. Tonkin, from whose notes
this account was taken, again commenced his works in 1710, at the
expense of £6,000; he formed the foundation with large masses of rock
laid in hot lime made of lyas stone from Aberddaw, in South Wales.
These works having become decayed, a jetty pier of moorstone was built
about the year 1794, at the expense of £10,000, by a company of
gentlemen, and a considerable trade in coals, lime, slate, &c. is now
carried on with Ireland and Wales. The proprietors are enlarging the
harbour, and rendering it more commodious and safe for shipping. A
small stream of water which rises in the manor of Tywarnhaile, turns
several stamping mills in Trevaunance Comb.

The market, for which there does not appear to be any charter on
record, has been held from time immemorial for all sorts of wares and
provisions, except corn. In 1706, Mr. Tonkin procured the Queen’s
patent for a weekly market and two fairs; but after the writ of _ad
quod damnum_ had been duly executed, and the Queen’s sign manual
obtained, the grant was revoked in consequence of a petition from the
inhabitants of Truro. A small market is nevertheless kept up; the
market day is Thursday.

In a dingle called Chapel-comb, was an ancient chapel known by the
name of Porth Chapel, the ruins of which were taken down about the
year 1780. Near this spot is St. Agnes’ well, of which many miraculous
stories are told; the water is of an excellent quality, and much
esteemed. Hals speaks of an ancient free chapel in the manor of
Mythian, which had been made a dwelling house. There are remains of an
ancient chapel at Mola. Nicholas Kent, of Mingoose, by his will
bearing date 1688, gave for the term of 499 years a dwelling house,
divided into four tenements and a garden, for poor widows of this
parish, and charged his lands of Mingoose and Tereardrene with the
repairs of the house; but it does not appear that it was endowed. One
of the schools, founded by the trustees of the fund left for
charitable uses by the Rev. St. John Elliot, who died in 1760, is at
St. Agnes; the endowment is £5 per annum. There is a Sunday school at
St. Agnes, supported by subscription, and numerously attended.


THE EDITOR.

For various particulars respecting the Tonkin family see the edition
of Carew by Lord Dunstanville, vol. I. 1811, 4to. pp. 353-357, with
monumental inscriptions in St. Agnes church. The arms of Tonkin are
noticed in a copy of the last Heraldic Survey, communicated to the
Editor by Mr. Gregor of Trewanthenick, although a pedigree is alone
recorded in the original. Sable, an eagle displayed Or, armed and
langued Gules, a crescent for difference. Crest, an eagle’s head
erased Or. See the exemplification of them by Robert Cooke, Clarenceux
Roy d’Armes, temp. Reg. Eliza.

The reason of the arms being then omitted was this: Mr. Tonkin of
Trevannence, the chief representative of their family, was more than
eighty years of age in 1620, a bed-lier, and had been blind for many
years, so that he was not able to appear himself; and, the chief
business of the Heralds at their Visitations being to put money into
their own pockets, they never registered any arms without their fees.
The ancient motto used by this family is said to have been:

     Kenz ol tra, Tonkein! ouna Deu, Mahteror yn.
    (Before all things, Tonkin! fear God, the King also.)

  St. Agnes contains 6,657 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          9,929    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                     1,914    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   4161   |   5024   |   5762   |   6642
  Increase on an hundred in thirty years 59.63, or nearly 60 per cent.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is one of the great mining districts of Cornwall,
abounding in tin and copper ores, but more particularly in the former.
It differs, however, from all the other districts, in being remote
from the great central masses of granite. This peculiarity has often
attracted the notice of several observers, and has long been
considered as a strange anomaly by geologists.

The case is not, however, without example; for, although this tract is
distant from the granite both of Redruth and of St. Dennis, yet a
small mass of that rock does not exist at Cligga Point, on the
confines of the parish. This granite has, indeed, been called by some
an elvan, and by others a secondary formation of granite, as has been
also that of St. Michael’s Mount; but, although the rock is not in
this place of any great extent, it has all the mineralogical and
geological characters of the larger masses.

Large courses of granite elvan are common in the northern part of the
parish, containing short irregular veins and bunches of tin ore. These
courses are extensively exposed in the cliffs, and present a singular
appearance, somewhat resembling a bank of earth perforated by rabbits’
burrows, in consequence of the miners having taken the ore wherever it
has been exposed to view.

The Beacon, a high hill near the church town of St. Agnes, merits
particular attention. The lower part is formed of a schistose rock,
composed of granular felspar intermixed with particles of quartz and
minute scales of mica. Ascending towards the summit, the quartz
gradually increases in quantity, till at last it becomes the
prevailing ingredient of the rock, and preserves it against the
natural causes of decay; whilst lower down, where the felspar abounds,
the rock is extensively disintegrated. On the side of the hill, about
three or four hundred feet above the level of the sea, is a deep
deposit of diluvium, consisting of alternate layers of clay and sand.
To point out the origin of these layers, and to explain the reason of
their occurrence in such an elevated situation, would require long
details. For this, and for other interesting particulars respecting
the phenomena of this parish, the fourth Volume of Transactions,
published by the Geological Society of Cornwall, may be consulted.

St. Agnes’ Beacon was chosen as one of the principal western stations
in the great Trigonometrical Survey of England. The position of the
summit was then determined with extreme accuracy: Latitude 50° 18′
27″, Longitude 5° 11′ 55″.7. In time 20 m. 47″.7. Height above low
water 621 feet. See the Philosophical Transactions for 1800, pp. 636
and 714.


     [5] It appears, however, by Mr. Tonkin’s notes, that St.
     Agnes was deemed a distinct parish, and had a parochial
     chapel in it, so early as the year 1396. A licence to build
     a new chapel was dated Oct. 1, 1482. _Lysons._

     [6] This gentleman was the lessee of the great mine before
     described. Borlase says, “It is judged that the late Mr.
     Donnithorne, who had the whole adventure, and worked it at
     his own expense, in a few years last past got at least
     40,000_l._ clear by this mine, and much more he might have
     raised yearly if he pleased.”

     [7] For the latter name Hitchins substitutes Thomas Warren,
     Esq. and Mr. John Tregellas, of St. Agnes.




ST. ALLEN.


HALS.

St. Allen is situate in the hundred of Pow-dre-ham, id est, the
hundred of the old ancient county or province town (viz. Lestwithell),
for so it is called in the first Duke of Cornwall’s charter 1336――now
contracted and corrupted to Powder Cantred.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this district of St. Allen was
taxed under the jurisdiction of Laner or Lanher, i. e. templer; so
called, for that long before that time was extant upon that place a
chapel or temple dedicated to God in the name of St. Martin of Tours,
the memory of which is still preserved in the names of St. Martin’s
fields and woods, heretofore perhaps the indowments of that chapel or
temple; this Laner is still the voke lands or capital messuage of the
Bishop of Exeter’s manor of Cargoll, whereunto it was annexed; in
which place of Lanher (formerly a wood or forest of trees) the Bishops
of Cornwall, and afterwards the Bishops of Exon, had one of their
mansion or dwelling-houses for many ages,[8] till Bishop Voysey,
tempore Henry VIII. leased those manors to Clement Throckmorton, Esq.
cup-bearer to Queen Katherine Parr, from whom it passed by sale to
Williams, and so from Williams to Borlase, by whom this mansion or
barton of Laner was left to run to utter ruin and dilapidation, having
now nothing extant of houses but old walls, stones, and rubbish. Out
of this manor of Lanher the Bishop of Exon endowed the church of St.
Allen with the glebe lands thereof now in being, and the sheaf of two
tenements, viz. Laner and Tretheris,[9] so that the said church is a
vicarage endowed, and was valued by Oliver Sutton, Bishop of Lincoln,
and John de Pontefexia, Bishop of Winchester, to the Pope’s taxation
of benefices, in order to take his first-fruits, 20 Edward I. 1294,
Ecclesiam de Sancto Alune, in Decanatu de Powdre;――vi _s._ & viii _d._
The patronage of this church is still in the Bishop of Exon for the
time being, the incumbent Richards. The rectory or sheaf formerly in
Cook, now Boscawen [Viscount Falmouth]; and the parish as aforesaid
rated to 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, in 1696, 157_l._ 14_s._ 10_d._

Gwarn-ike, _i. e._ lake, river, or leate, summons, notice, or warning,
so called from Gwarnike Castle, a treble intrenchment or fortification
lately extant on the woody lands thereof, is the voke lands of the
manor and barton of Gwarnike, the old inheritance and dwellinge of the
once rich and famous family of the Bevills for many generations; whose
ancestor came out of Normandy into England with William the Conqueror,
and was posted an officer at Truro under William Earl of Morton and
Cornwall (or Robert his father). Of his posterity, tempore Edward III.
Sir Richard Bevill held by the tenure of knight service 20_l._ per
ann. in lands and rents, and therefore was commanded by that king to
attend him, with a horse-trooper furnished cap-a-pee, on his
expedition into France, in the 25th year of his reign. (Carew’s Survey
of Cornwall.) John Bevill of this place was sheriff of Cornwall 5
Richard II. Finally, the name, blood, and estate of those Bevills
terminated in two daughters and heirs of John Bevill, Esq. sheriff of
Cornwall 16 Eliz. 1573, married to Grenville of Stowe, and Arundell of
Trerice, to whose younger son by Bevill’s heir this barton and manor
of Gwarnike was given, but the said Mr. Arundell, commonly called the
Black Arundell by reason of his complexion, dying without issue, gave
those lands to his kinsman Mr. Prideaux, of Fewburrow in Devon, whose
heir sold the same to Mr. Kempe, of Penryn, now in possession thereof.
Over the entry door of this house, in a stone or piece of brass, is
cut the arms of Bevill, viz. Ermine a bull passant Sable, surmounted
with an oak-tree Proper or Vert; near which is this inscription
likewise in stone in Saxon-English letters:

     Man, aboue all thinge
     Feare god and the kinge.

[In 1704 it was sold by the Prideaux family to Jamss Kempe, of Penryn,
and in 1731 purchased by Edward Prideaux, Esq. of Place House,
Padstow, ancestor to the Rev. Charles Prideaux Brune, of the same
place, who is the present proprietor. There were formerly two chapels
at Gwarnike; one at a small distance from the house, which was
demolished before the year 1736, and another attached to it, which,
together with “the old hall, curiously timbered with Irish oak,” was
then remaining. These old buildings were not long ago pulled down, and
a farm-house built on the site with the materials. Talgrogan, in this
manor, was some time the seat of a younger branch of the Prideaux
family. _Lysons._]

For the name of this parish (Allen), Alfred the Saxon grammarian and
Verstegan tell us that it is plain Saxon, and is the common
contraction of Alwyn, all-beloved, or beloved of all, and for St.
Allen church must be construed as the holy or consecrated church,
beloved of all Christians, which perhaps was the old name of that
little ancient chapel, now the minister’s chancel, to which in after
ages the present church of St. Allen was annexed; however, let it be
remembered also, that in Armoric-Cornish, St. Alan or Allen is holy
breath or respiration, or gift of speech.

Treon-ike, Saxon-Cornish, trees on the lake, or spring leate, or bosom
of waters, in this parish, is the dwelling of James Borlase, Gent. who
married Hobbs, and his father Cooke’s heir, by whom he had this place;
and giveth for his arms in a field Ermine, on a bend Sable two hands
issuing out of two clouds, or nebules, tearing of a horseshoe in
sunder Argent (see St. Wenn). Otherwise, Tre-on-ike is the town or
tenement situate on the lake or river of water.

[Mr. Hals here relates a story of some child being missed by his
parents and afterwards found; imputing the temporary loss to
supernatural agency, perhaps of fairies, usually denominated in
Cornwall “The Small People, or Piskies.”]

From the inferior officers of this church, the sexton and clerk, or
sub-deacon tempore James I. have sprung two notable rich and eminent
families in those parts, of justice of the peace and senators or
parliamentary degree; viz. Tregeagle and Vincent; viz. Vincent from
the clerk of Resheafe, and Tregeagle from the sexton of Bosvallack, of
whom more in their proper places; the one burgess or member of
Parliament for Truro, the other for Mitchell, whose sons by ill
conduct have wasted and sold all their lands, tempore George II.

In this parish, at Tretheris, is yet extant the walls and ruins of an
ancient free chapel and cemetery, wherein heretofore God was duly
worshipped, built perhaps by the Bishops of Cornwall and Exon, when
they resided at Lanher aforesaid contiguous therewith.


TONKIN.

Partly in this parish is the great lordship of Gwairnick, id est, the
Hay River; a name not unsuitable to the circumstances of the place,
for a pleasant river passeth through most fertile meadows beneath the
house.

This place was the seat of the Bevill family, whose ancestor came into
England with the Norman Duke, and was an officer under William Earl of
Morton and Cornwall. One of his posterity married a Gwairnick heiress,
and so it became the seat of the Bevills for about ten descents; and
then, for want of issue male, this lordship, with other fair lands,
descended to the two daughters of the last gentleman of that name, who
were married to Grenville of Stow and to Arundell of Trerice.

The manor of Boswellick, which I take to signify the house by the
mill-river, upon the division of Bevill’s estates between Grenville
and Arundell, this fell to Grenville, who sold it to Sir Richard
Roberts, of Truro. This gentleman, afterwards Lord Roberts, was in
possession of the estate towards the latter part of Queen Elizabeth’s
reign, for his son John Roberts, first Earl of Radnor, was nursed here
by Mrs. Tregeagle, the daughter of Degory Polwhele, Esq. and wife of
John Tregeagle, Gent. who held a lease of this estate from Sir Richard
Roberts. And this was the rise of the Tregeagles; for John Tregeagle,
their son, being foster-brother to the said Earl, was afterwards by
him made his chief steward, and brought forwards in the world. [The
heiress of Tregeagle brought the lease to the Cleathers, who continued
to possess it for several generations. The manor is now the property
of John Thomas, esq. Vice-Warden of the Stannaries, by purchase from
the representatives of the Robartes family. _Lysons._]

Adjoining to this barton is Nancarrow; and this being the first
occasion for noticing the adjunct word “carrow,” I shall be somewhat
the more prolix in discussing of it. Karo, or Caro, signifying in
Cornish a hart or deer, Nancarrow has generally been considered to be
the deer’s valley, and Pencarrow the head of the deer; but how
improperly let any one guess who sees these places. I rather take
Carrow therefore to be softening of Karrog, a brook or rivulet, so as
to signify, in this instance, the valley of brooks; and in Pencarrow,
the head of the brooks. Nancarrow was formerly inhabited by a family
of that name, one of whom was stannitor for Blackmore in the
Convocation of 13th Elizabeth. It passed by sale to the Borlases of
Treludra, and from them to the Scawns. [It now belongs to Mr. Oliver
Adams Carveth. _Lysons._]

Adjoining to the barton of Gwerick, which means simply “on the river,”
is a tenement called the Gerras, that is, “the summit or top,” from
its high situation; which I notice in this place on account of its
lead mines.

Trerice in this parish belonged to a younger branch of the Arundells
of Trerice in Newlyn; from whom it is said to have been wrested not
very fairly, by an attorney, Mr. John Coke. The estate now belongs to
Lord Falmouth.

Near to Trerice is Trefronick, contracted, as I believe, from
Tre-vor-in-ick,――“the dwelling in the way to the rivulet.” This also
belonged to the Arundells; passed to John Coke, from him to Borlase,
and from Borlase to Kempe.

Adjoining is Talcarne――“the high heap of rocks of stones.” Tal
properly signifies the forehead, and hence any high or eminent thing;
whereas Tol, often confounded with it, means a hole.


LYSONS.

The principal villages in this parish are Lane and Zela or Zealla,
through which the high road from Exeter to the Land’s-End passed,
before the present turnpike road was made. The antient mile-stones
remain, and a house at Zelah is still called the Tavern.


THE EDITOR.

Nothing satisfactory appears to be ascertained respecting the name of
this parish; nor does the anniversary of the Feast afford any clue, as
it is celebrated on Rogation Sunday, that is on the Sunday before
Easter.

  St. Allen contains 3493 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2468    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           388   19    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    360   |    418   |    471   |    637.
  Increase of population on a hundred, in thirty years 76.9, or 77
    per cent.
  Present Rector, Rev. Nicholas Dyer, instituted in 1794.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

To the geologist this parish does not afford many interesting objects.
It is, however, more favourable than the last to agriculture; although
it contains several tracts of barren ground of the same nature as
Prince’s Common, which will be described in another place. Its rocks
are not distinctly characterised, being situated on the transition
between the porphyritic and the calcareous groups of slate formation.


     [8] William of Worcester describes the Bishop’s castle here
     as dilapidated temp. Edw. IV.

     [9] The church of St. Allen was given to the college of
     Glaveney by Bishop Stapleton, and appropriated to the vicars
     of that college in 1314. Rot. Pat. 8 Edw. II. p. 2. m. 15.




ALTAR NUN.


HALS.

Altar Nun is situate in the hundred of Lesnewth, and hath upon the
north Davidstow and St. Cleather, south part of Northill and Lawanack,
east Trewenn, west Temple, and was taxed in Domesday Roll either under
the name Trewint, Treuint, the spring, fountain, or well town, situate
upon the fens or springs, otherwise under the jurisdiction of Trewen.
In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester aforesaid,
1294, this church was rated to the Pope’s first-fruits, Ecclesia de
Altar Nun, in Decanatu de Lesnewith viii_l._ the vicar xl_s._ In Wolsey’s
inquisition 1521, temp. Hen. VIII. 18_l._ 14_s._ 10_d._; the patronage
in the Dean and Chapter of Exon, who endowed it; the incumbent Hatton.
This parish was rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land-tax 1696, 204_l._
16_s._

For the modern name of this church, Mr. Carew, in his Survey of
Cornwall, is of opinion it is derived from the Altar of St. Nun’s Pool
in this parish, heretofore much frequented for the cure of mad people,
the manner of which cure is set down by him, liber ii. p. 123, (p. 289
of Lord Dunstanville’s edition,) but, for my own part, I conceive the
word Altar in this place is not to be construed as a derivative from
altare, an altar, whereon offerings or sacrifice was made to God by
fire or otherwise at this pool; but rather, as I am better informed,
the chancel of the present church was a chapel pertaining to the nuns
or nunnery once here, afterwards augmented and converted to a vicarage
church as it now stands; and that the ground whereon the vicarage
house is now extant. Contiguous therewith was of old the nunnery-house
itself, wherein those virgins resided; the stones and materials of
which old house are concerted in the new vicarage brave mansion, and,
to prove this tradition, there yet appears in the fields the channel
or water-course wherein the waters of St. Nun’s Pool was carried into
this old nunnery-house in former ages.

So that I conclude the name Altar Nun must be interpreted as a
corruption of or derivative from Alter-Nun, to alter or change from
one thing to another, from that of a nunnery of religious votaresses,
to that of a parochial and vicarage church, from whence the same hath
its present denomination, as aforesaid.

In this parish stands the barton of Tre-lawn-y, id est, the oak grove
town, or, “I am the oak grove town,” a name at first given and taken
from the natural circumstances of the place, situate between two
hills, then notable for woods or groves of oak timber. Though now
there is not left standing any house or trees to countenance this
etymology, yet I have been told by some of the inhabitants of this
parish, that tradition saith the greatest part of the stones that
built the present church and tower of Altar Nun, were brought from the
dilapidated walls of Trelawny, and much of the oak timber that roofs
the same was also cut and carried from that barton.

From this place was denominated that old and famous family of
gentlemen surnamed Trelawney, now baronets, as I was informed by my
very kind friend Coll. John Trelawney, of Trelawney, deceased, and
that one Sir William de Trelawney, lord of this place, suffered it to
go in marriage with his base daughter to ――――, from whose heirs, by
descent or purchase, it came to Cloberry Hickes, and ―――― now in
possession thereof, and is now set for about 70_l._ per ann. The arms
of those Trelawneys were, in a field Argent, a chevron Sable between
three oak-leaves Vert, probably in allusion to the leaves of that sort
of timber whereof this _lawne_ consisted.

In this parish, tempore Charles II. lived Peter Jowle or Joull, _id
est_, Peter the Divell, under clerk or deacon of this church, who was
150 and odd years old when he died, and at the age of 100 years had
new black hairs that sprung forth on his head amongst those that long
before were white with age; and then also new teeth grew up in his
jaws in the places of those that many years before were fallen out of
his head. [The name of Joll is still extant in the village; and the
family have been remarkable for longevity; but we cannot learn that
any tradition exists relating to Peter Joll, nor does his name appear
in the register. _Lysons._] Fuller tells us, that John Sands, of
Horborne in Staffordshire, lived 140 years old, and his wife 120, he
died 1625. Thomas Parr lived 153 years old, and is buried in
Westminster Abbey, tempore Charles II. It is reported of Zamkees, the
Samothracian, that after he had lived 104 years, new young teeth
sprung up in his jaws in the room of those that were fallen out long
before. Henry Brenton, of St. Wenn, weaver, lived 103 years old, and
died tempore George I.

This parish hath in it tin loads and streams.


TONKIN.

It is obvious to any one, that the name of this parish can signify no
other than an Altar or church dedicated to St. Nunne; which St. Nunne,
being in some accounts called Naunita or Nannites, and in others
Novita, is (as Leland tells us) said to have been the daughter of an
Earl of Cornwall, and mother of St. David, the famous Archbishop of
Menevia, from him called St. David’s.


THE EDITOR.

St. Nun is stated to have been the mother of St. David. About a mile
from the cathedral of St. David’s are the remains of a chapel, near a
consecrated pool or well, dedicated to St. Nun, where trifling
oblations are said to be still made. This coincidence of the two pools
is curious, although I do not find that the water at Menevia has the
virtue of curing insanity. The account given by Mr. Carew of the
practice at Altar Nun is as follows:

     “The water running from St. Nun’s well fell into a square
     and inclosed walled plot, which might be filled at what
     depth they listed. Upon this wall was the frantic person set
     to stand, his back towards the pool; and from thence, with a
     sudden blow in the breast, tumbled headlong into the pond;
     where a strong fellow, provided for the nonce, took him, and
     tossed him up and down, alongst and athwart the water, till
     the patient, by foregoing his strength, had somewhat forgot
     his fury. Then was he conveyed to the church and certain
     masses sung over him; upon which handling, if his right wits
     returned, St. Nun had the thanks; but if there appeared
     small amendment, he was bowssened again and again, while
     there remained in him any hope of life or recovery.”

The second of March is dedicated to St. Nun, and said formerly to be
observed throughout Wales, as was the third to St. Lily, surnamed
Gwas-Dewy, David’s men.

This parish is the largest in Cornwall. It measures 12,770 statute
acres. The principal villages are Tredawl, Trethym, Treween, and
Trewint. At Five-Lanes, in this parish, are fairs for all sorts of
cattle, on the Monday week after June 24th, and the first Tuesday in
November. The tower of Alternon church, which is said to be the
highest in the county except Probus, was much damaged by storms in
1791 and 1810.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6147    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           497   18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    679   |    784   |    885   |   1069.
  Increase of population on each hundred in thirty years, 57.44, or
    57½ per cent.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The western and south-western parts of this extensive parish are
composed of granite and of hornblend rocks, which surround the former,
and recline upon them. This portion is in every respect similar to the
parish of Advent. At Trewint a very fine compact felspar occurs,
imbedded in green stone; and proceeding eastward on the Launceston
road, hornblend slate prevails, and affords a very fertile soil.
Descending the hill to Pellaphant, masses of compact rock protrude
from beneath the soil. They are composed of compact felspar,
aggregated with lamellar hornblend, forming a kind of sienite. But the
most interesting object in this parish is to be found a little to the
north of this last place, on the side of the hill sloping down to the
river Inny. It is a magnesian rock, and it is quarried for
building-stones, yielding large blocks, which are sufficiently soft at
the time of their being raised, to allow of their being cut through by
a common handsaw. A considerable quantity of this stone has been used
in building a very large house, denominated a cottage by the Duke of
Bedford, at Ensleigh, on the eastern bank of the Tamma. The stone
appears, however, to have one bad quality: the surface, after a slight
disintegration from exposure to the atmosphere, becomes covered over
with ocherous spots, owing to the presence of a scaly mineral
resembling diallage, which is disseminated through the rock. This
magnesian rock has all the characters of pitstones, the lapis ollaris
of the ancients; and it is a curious circumstance, that on opening
some old workings near this place, several antique vessels were found
resembling pipkins and shallow pans made out of this material.

The immediate connection of this bed of ollareous serpentine with the
adjacent rocks, is not disclosed; but it is succeeded by talc ore,
slate, and limestone, on the other side of the river.




ST. ANTHONY IN POWDER.


HALS.

St. Anthony in Powder is situate in the hundred of Powder; and hath
upon the east Gerance and St. Just; north, Carike road, or part of
Falmouth harbour; upon the south and west the British Channel. In
Domesday Roll there is no such parish or district charged as St.
Anthony, neither therein had any church in Cornwall the appellation of
Saint given to it, except St. Wene or St. Wena. But this district was
then taxed under the jurisdiction of Treligan or Tregeare, and
obtained not the name of St. Anthony till the year of our Lord 1124,
at which time William Warlewast, Bishop of Exon, founded here a
church, and dedicated it to St. Anthony, having before dissolved the
dean and four prebendaries in the collegiate church founded at
Plympton in Devon by the Saxon kings, and in the room thereof erected
a priory of Black Canons (and dedicated the same to the Virgin Mary):
who also in this church of St. Anthony erected a priory or cell of two
Black Canons, canons regular or Augustines, under the same tutelar
guardian as its superior, so called from St. Augustine, Bishop of
Hippo in Africa, who died in the 4th century, and was institutor of
their rule; viz. 1. to live in common as the Apostles did, on the
stock revenues or endowment of their church. 2. That all such as
received baptism should for several days wear a white garment in token
of their new birth. 3. That all priests should wear a black cassock
over their white garment, as himself did; such afterwards became the
habit of his order, whether collegiate or hermits. 5. Over their
sculls he appointed a hood or scapular of the same black cloth as
their cloaks, and the hair of their heads to be worn at full length,
whereas the monks were always shaved. 6. He gave a liturgy or rule to
be observed by those of his order in time of divine service (whereas
before every one in a monastery served God, prayed, and fasted, as
they best liked). 7. To live single persons, without marriage. This
Priory was called St. Mary de Vall or de Valle, to distinguish it from
St. Mary de Plym in Devon, so named from the rivers on which they are
situate. This priory, together with its superior’s revenues, when it
was dissolved, was valued at 912_l._ 12_s._ 8_d._ per ann. 26 Henry
VIII. See Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum.

Ecclesia de Sancto Antoni, in Rosland, 20 Edward I. was valued to the
Pope’s first fruits xl_s._ though its value be not mentioned in Valor
Beneficiorum, or Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521. The patronage formerly in
the Prior of Plympton, afterwards in Hals of Fentongolan, now
Boscawen, its revenues being wholly impropriated. The parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound land tax 1696, 45_l._ 4_s._

St. Anthony’s name is derived from ανθος (anthos) flos, a flower; and
for his person, he was a native of Egypt, about the yeare of our Lord
253: a most strict and severe Christian, that lived a retired and
hermetical and begging life in the deserts thereof.

Plase, Place, id est, in Cornish a palace, was heretofore the mansion
and dwelling of the prior and his two black canons, erected here as
aforesaid. This house and barton is now in possession of Arthur George
Sprye, Esq. that married Bullock; his father Martyn; his grandfather
Heale, his great-grandfather, of Blisland, attorney-at-law, married
――――. He gives for his arms, in a field Azure, two bars and in chief a
chevron Or. The name Spry, Sprey, Spray, is Cornish, and signifies a
sprout, branch, sprig, twig, split, or slip of any matter or thing.
The name Spye I take it is local, from some place called Spye in
Devon.

This promontory of land, commonly called St. Anthony point, which on
the east side boundeth Falmouth harbour from the British Ocean, not
only from the name of the priory here St. Mary de Vall aforesaid, but
from the natural circumstances of the place, I take to be the Valuba
or Valubia of Ptolemy, which consisteth of a compound of two British
words Val and Ubia, which signifies the Vale point or promontory, or
the point or promontory of land that bounds or terminates the river
Val as aforesaid. Note also, that in British Cornish, B, V, and F, are
letters indifferently used one for the other; so that Falubia and
Valubia are synonymous words. Otherwise, Val-eba is the ebbing or
reflux of the river Val.


TONKIN.

In this parish lies the manor of Bohurtha, or Boswartha. The higher
house or dwelling under Boswartha, is situated on a small creek of a
sea, a small place called Porth: this belongs to the family of Spry.
The land immediately beyond it, being covered with sand, is known by
the name of Tower, which is common to all like places along the coast.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals states St. Anthony, the hermit of Egypt, to be the patron
Saint of this parish, and of the other two known by the same name.
This St. Anthony is the reputed founder of the ascetic Anchorites,
from whose assemblies in after times, monks, and subsequently friars,
or begging monks, derive their origin. He is said to have lived from
the year 251 to the year 356; to have been the friend of St.
Athanasius, and to have held some correspondence with Emperor
Constantine. But as the two western points form part of the sea coast,
and the third is situated on a navigable river, it seems to be most
probable that they are all dedicated to the more popular Saint in
modern times, St. Anthony of Padua, the universal patron of fishermen.

This St. Anthony was a native of Lusitania, having been born at Lisbon
in 1195, and christened Ferdinand, which name he laid aside for that
of Anthony, in honour of the Egyptian hermit, on his entering into the
order of St. Francis. His long residence at Padua is said to have
procured for him the cognomen of that place, but the addition of Padua
is much more likely to have derived its origin from the locality of
his legendary miracle. Actuated by the spirit of fanaticism common in
those times, St. Anthony endeavoured to conceal and to render useless
all the learning and all the powers of eloquence which he had
previously acquired as a canon regular of St. Austin at Lisbon, and
during a residence of eight years with the same order at Coimbra.
Having become a friar, he employed himself as a menial in the kitchen,
or in sweeping the cells, till an accident discovered to the superiors
the value and importance of their newly acquired brother. The
intelligence was conveyed to St. Francis, the renowned founder of the
Friars Minors, from whom a letter to our Saint is preserved:

     “To my most dear brother Anthony, Friar Francis wisheth
     health in Jesus Christ. It seemeth good to me, that you
     should read sacred Theology to the friars; yet so that you
     do not prejudice yourself by too great earnestness in
     studies; and be careful that you do not extinguish in
     yourself or in them the spirit of holy prayer.”

All the accounts remaining of St. Anthony agree in representing him to
posterity as an example of learning, of piety, and of zeal. These
qualities, possessed however in common with thousands of others, would
have failed to make his name known to after times, if a legend had not
established his fame as a Saint, and elevated him to the high station
of protector and patron of fishermen all over the Christian world.

The legend may be best conveyed in the poetry of Dr. Darwin:

  So when the Saint from Padua’s graceless land,
  In silent anguish sought the barren strand,
  High on the shatter’d beach sublime he stood,
  Still’d with his waving arm the babbling flood;
  “To man’s dull ear,” he cry’d, “I call in vain,
  Hear me, ye scaly tenants of the main!”
  Misshapen seals approach in circling flocks,
  In dusky mail the tortoise climbs the rocks,
  Torpedoes, sharks, rays, turbots, dolphins, pour
  Their twinkling squadrons round the glittering shore;
  With tangled fins, behind, huge phocæ glide,
  And whales, and grampi swell the distant tide.
  Then kneel’d the hoary Seer, to Heaven address’d
  His fiery eyes, and smote his sounding breast,
  “Bless ye the Lord!” with thundering voice he cry’d;
  “Bless ye the Lord!” the bending shores reply’d;
  The winds and waters caught the sacred word,
  And mingling echoes shouted, “Bless the Lord!”
  The listening shoals the quick contagion feel,
  Pant on the floods, inebriate with their zeal,
  Ope their wide jaws, and bow their slimy heads,
  And dash with frantic fins their foamy beds.

The parish feasts do not serve in these parishes to indicate the
patron saint.

Anthony in Kerrier has its feast on the Sunday nearest St. Stephen’s
day, December 26th.

Anthony in Powder on the Sunday nearest to the 10th of August.

Anthony in East has not any feast.

The day consecrated to St. Anthony of Egypt is January the 17th; to
St. Anthony of Padua June the 13th.

  The measurement of this parish is 571 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1050    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                          108   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    163   |    157   |    179   |    144
  Decrease on a hundred in thirty years 8.83, or somewhat less than
    nine per cent.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

St. Anthony is situated in the calcareous group of the slate
formation, and is composed of a glossy blue and fine grained slate,
which alternates with a coarse blue rock abounding in scales of mica,
and is more or less lamellar according to its proportion of this
mineral: this compact rock readily disintegrates, assuming various
yellowish tints, and an arenaceous appearance; indeed, it is seldom
seen but in that condition, and it has therefore been sometimes
mistaken by geologists for a variety of sand-stone.

At Porth there is a narrow neck of land, on the upper part of which
lies a sandbank abounding in perfect shells, which are arranged in
layers, and appear similar to those of the adjacent beach. This bank
is at least thirty feet above high water-mark, and it is covered with
a stratum of earth in cultivation. The sand is silicious, and becomes
in the lower part intermixed with pebbles, resembling in this respect
the banks on the shores of Mount’s Bay. This affords an example of an
ancient beach elevated above the one now in existence. The whole coast
of Cornwall furnishes numerous instances of this occurrence, and the
former beach is uniformly at the same elevation above that actually in
existence, indicating that the sea must, at some former period, have
joined the land at a line now higher than the present beach by that
difference.




ST. ANTHONY IN EAST.


HALS.

St. Anthony hath upon the north St. German’s Creek; south, St. John’s;
east, Tamesworth Haven, or Saltash River, with part of Sheviock. This
parish is situate in the hundred of Eastwell-shire, so called from
Mark’s-Well, in Landrake, that is to say, the Earl’s well, viz. the
Earl of Cornwall’s well, perhaps by some of those princes founded, and
accordingly from them denominated, who were originally lord of all the
Cornish cantreds. At the time of the Conqueror’s tax, as I said
before, there was no such district charged therein as Anthony; so that
this parish or tract of land then was rated either under the names of
Abbi-town, now St. German’s or Cudan-Beke. In the Pope’s inquisition
into the value of benefices in Cornwall, 20 Edward I. 1294, Ecclesia
de Antoni, in decanatu de Eastwellshire, was rated to first fruits
vi_l._ In Wolsey’s inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, 12_l._
17_s._ 6_d._ the patronage in ――――; the incumbent Taylor. The
rectory, or sheaf, in possession of ――――. This parish was rated to
the 4_s._ per pound land tax, 1696, 244_l._ 4_s._

East Anthony, in this parish, is the dwelling of the ancient and
famous family of gentlemen, the Carews, now Baronets; which lands
descended to them by marriage from one of the daughters of Sir Edward
Courtney, Knt. of Boconock, whose mother was Philippa, the sole
daughter and heir (or one of the coheirs) of Sir Warren Archdeacon,
Knt. of this place, a person and family of great fame and estate in
former ages; for thus it is recorded that Thomas Archdeacon, of this
place, was Sheriff of Cornwall 7th Edward II. Walter L’erch-Deacon was
also Sheriff of Cornwall 6th Rich. II. 1383. Which family gave for
their arms, in a field Argent, three chevronels Sable, which was
lately extant in the glass windows of Leskeard church.

From Sir Nicholas Baron Carew’s fourth son, Alexander, by the
aforesaid Jone Courteney (he is called Baron St. Carew, for that he
was summoned by writ, and by that name to sit in Parliament 3d Edward
IV. as a Baron), the gentlemen ever since, and him now in possession
of this lordship, are lineally descended. The said Alexander Carew,
Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 3d Henry VII. His son, John Carew, Esq.
was Sheriff of Cornwall 6th Henry VIII. His grandson, Richard Carew,
Esq. author of the Survey of Cornwall, was Sheriff thereof the 24th of
Elizabeth; whose son, Richard Carew, Esq. was, by letters patents
bearing date the 9th of August, 17th Charles I. 1641, created the
278th Baronet of England; whose son or brother, Sir Alexander Carew,
was executed for pretended treason against the Parliament of England,
about endeavouring to deliver up to Kinge Charles the Island of
Plymouth, whereof he was Governor, 23d Dec. 1644. His son, Sir John
Carew, Baronet, was one of the Shire Knights of this County 1660, who
died about the year 1686, and left issue by ――――, daughter of Sir
William Morrice, Knt. Sir Richard Carew, Bart. and William his brother.

Mr. John Carew, son or brother of Sir Alexander last mentioned, was
executed as one of the Regicides of King Charles I. 1661. Mr. Carew,
in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 65, (p. 180 of Lord Dunstanville’s
edition,) tells us that his first ancestor came out of France with
William the Conqueror, by the name of Karrow. In the same book, p.
103, (p. 246 of Lord Dunstanville,) he said that Carew, of ancient
Carru, was, and Carrue is, a plough in French; but then it should have
been written Carue, or Charoue; and to countenance this opinion of
this family’s French descent, Camden, in his Remains, p. 143, tells us
that the same holds by tradition, I know not how truly, that Adam, or
rather Arnold de Montgomery, marrying the daughter of Carew of
Molesford, her son, relinquishing his own name, left to his posterity
his mother’s name, Carew, from whome the Carews of Surrey, Devon, and
Cornwall, are descended. Contrary to this opinion, Prince, in his
Worthies of Devon, p. 148, saith that Walter de Windsor, about the
time of the Norman Conquest, a Norman Frenchman, (as some say
Governor, Castellan, Constable, or Steward of Windsor Castle, son of
that Otho, that came in with William the Conqueror,) had issue William
and Gerald his sons, who styled themselves after the mode of that age,
William and Gerald of Windsor from the places of their residence, or
for that they were born there; from William, the Lord Windsor is
descended, and from Gerald, the Fitz-Geralds Earls of Kildare, and the
Carews of England. Gerald of Windsor was Steward or Castellan of the
Castle of Pembrook, of Carew, in Wales, upon whom King Henry I.
bestowed Molesford, in Berkshire; he married Nesta, daughter of Rosse,
Prince of South Wales, to whom the said King gave the Castle of Carew
in those parts; Gerald had issue by Nesta, Otho de Windsor, who had
issue William de Windsor or Carew, to whom King John, by deed dated
1212, made a further grant of Molesford, reciting the former deed of
King Henry I. to his grandfather. So that this William was the first
of this family that assumed the name of Carew. Thus Prince again, the
author of the Antiquities of Oxford, is positive that this family of
Carew was denominated from Castle Carew, in Pembrokeshire, and not
otherwise. Thus God in his providence, to check our presumptious
inquisitions and pretensions, hath wrapped all things in uncertainty,
bars us from long antiquity, and bounds our search within the compass
of some few ages, scarcely affording any true record of pedigrees or
descents as far back as the Norman Conquest, whatsoever to the
contrary is by some men and families pretended.

Lastly, as this family was denominated from one of their ancestors
being Constable or Castellan of the Castle of Carew, in Pembrokeshire,
for carew doth not signify a plough in British, for ardar, aradr,
arar, is a plough in Welsh, Cornish, and Armoric, and kaer, caer, is a
castle or fortified place. Carew, caer-ew, care-eff, is he, his, or
her, Castle, as ipie, ipea, ipeum. See Ffloyd. Caer-eau, British
Saxon, is a castle or fortified place of water, referring perhaps to
the medical or purgative waters there.

As Mr. Carew saith his family was denominated from one Carrow or
Karrow that came into England with William the Conqueror, so I must
tell you that there was in Cornwall and Devon, not long since, a
genteel family surnamed Carrow (id est, deer) who gave for their
armes, as appears from Nich. Upton’s Latin manuscript book of
Heraldry, before printing was invented, now in my custody, dated 1444,
in those words, “Monsieur Joh’is de Carrow, port d’or iii lyons
passant sable,” which is now the arms of those gentlemen
before-mentioned, named Carew. Care-w, after the English Cornish, is
he, his, or her care, watchfulness, or circumspection.

In this parish or manor, as I take it, stands Intsworth, alias
Inis-worth, synonymous words signifying an island of worth, price, or
value, viz. a peninsular formed by rivers of water, which leaves
between them an angled or three-cornered promontory of land, called in
British inis, signifying the same as amnicus mediamnis in Latin. See
Gluvias. This place, before the Norman Conquest, was the land of
Condura and Cradock, Earls of Cornwall, by one of whose daughters or
granddaughters, Agnes, it came by marriage to Reginald Fitz-Harry,
base son of King Henry I. by Anne Corbet; who, in her right, long
after William Earl of Cornwall, of the Norman race, forfeited the same
to the King by attainder of treason, was made Earl thereof, from whose
heirs it passed to the Dunstanvills and Valletorts; and by Valletort’s
daughter Joan, the widow of Sir Alexander Oakston, Knt. who turned
concubine to Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, who had by
her a sole daughter named Joan, married to Richard Champernowne, a
second son of Sir ―――― Champernowne, of Clift Champernowne, in Devon,
in whose posterity it remained till Henry VII.’s days, when, his issue
male failing, his three daughters and heirs were married to Monk,
Fortescue, and Trevillian, from some of whose heirs it came by
purchase to Edward Nosworthy, Esquire, Member of Parliament for
Saltash, son of Edward Nosworthy, merchant and shopkeeper in Truro,
temp. Charles II. who married Hill of that place, as his son aforesaid
did Maynard and Jennings. The arms of Nosworthy are (see St. Stephen’s
by Saltash). The name Nos-worthy signifies a “night of worth,” price
or value so called, for that the first propagater thereof was born by
night, or was notable for some profitable fact done at that season.
And John Nosworthy was steward of Exon 1521.


TONKIN.

East Anthony. Mr. Carew hath given a full account how this manor came
to his family (p. 244 of Lord Dunstanville’s edition); I shall
therefore only take notice here that the present Lord of East Anthony,
so called in respect of its situation from the church, is Sir William
Carew, a gentleman that in every respect comes up to the merits of the
greatest of his ancestors. He married the Lady Anne Coventry, only
daughter and heir of Gilbert Earl of Coventry, by whom he hath one
son, Coventry Carew, Esq. He had also a daughter, Anne, who died in
the bloom of her age. Sir William Carew hath lately built a stately
house here of Penteran stone; and hath adorned it with gardens, &c.
suitable to it. From the bowling-green above the house is a beautiful
prospect of the river, and of all the country round.

Thanks, in this parish; perhaps from Angosa conspectus, sight through
Angosa, the sight or view as lying open to the river. This was
formerly the seat of a family, Searle, who gave for their arms,
Argent, a chevron Sable, between three birds Azure, with breasts,
bills, and legs Gules. Thanks now belongs to Thomas Graves, Esq. who
hath been for several years a captain of a man-of-war. [Ancestor of
the present Lord Graves.]


THE EDITOR.

I may repeat the words of Mr. Tonkin, in respect to the Right Hon.
Reginald Pole Carew, the present possessor of East Anthony in right of
his mother (1832)――“He is a gentleman that in every respect comes up
to the merits of the greatest of his ancestors.”

  This parish measures 2,903 statute acres.
  The annual value of the Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          6,361    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1832                       994    1    0

In the church is a monumental tablet to Richard Carew, author of the
Survey of Cornwall; several other memorials to the Carew family; and
an elegant monumental brass of Margery Arundell, lady of the manor of
East Anthony, who died in 1428.

  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1795   |   2144   |   1795   |   3099.
  Increase on an hundred in 30 years 72.65, or about 72⅔ per cent.
  Present Incumbent, the Rev. Duke Yonge, presented by R. P. Carew, Esq.
    in 1806.

Dr. Boase states that the geology of this parish includes the same
group of rocks as those found in the western St. Anthony, although the
two parishes are so remote from each other, and separated by such
ranges of hills. The slate is, however, more coarse and argillaceous
in this parish, and the massive rocks imbedded therein are more
compact, and almost entirely quartzose. The whole formation is
evidently more remote from the granite.




ST. ANTHONY IN KERRIER.


HALS.

St. Anthony in Kerrier is situate in the hundred of Helston and
Kerrier, West Louer or Consort, and hath upon the east the harbour of
Helfon, north Manackan, west St. Kevorne, south the British Channel.
This parish, as those before of this name, are not mentioned in the
Domesday tax, neither do I know under what title it then passed. In
the Pope’s Inquisition, as to the value of its first fruits, 20 Edward
I. 1294, Eccles’ de S’cto Antony in Decanatu de Kerryar, is rated
iiii_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._ the vicar thereof xiii_s._ iiii_d._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1541, £4. 15_s._ 11_d._ The patronage in the
Bishop of Exon for the time being, whose predecessors endowed it; the
incumbent Edwards; the Rectory or Sheaf in possession of ...; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound land tax, 1696, £66. 12_s._ And
the tutelar guardian of this Church is St. Anthony before-mentioned.

Tre-woth-ike in this parish, “the town of the known or familiar cove,
creek, or bosom of waters” (Tre-werh-ike or ick, is evidently the
town, _on_ the water, or cree,――Editor;) alias Tre-wood-ike, “the town
of the wood creek or bosom of waters,” was formerly the lands of
Tre-gow (id est, “the wood town,” in or about those parts) gentlemen
that flourished here for several generations in good fame and credit
till about the middle of the reign of King Charles II. when Mr.
Tregoze sold this lordship to John Vaughan, of Ottery, in Devon, Esq.
who married Drew, his father Hals of Efford, sister to Sir Nich. Hals,
Knt., his grandfather ――――, and giveth for his arms, in a field,
―― three boars heads erased. The arms of Tregose were, Azure, two
bars gemelles, in chief a lion passant Or, langued Gules, which name
and tribe I think is now quite extinct.

Roscruge or Rossereige Burough, in this parish (id. est, the valley
and promontory or highland, tumulus or burying place) gave name and
original to a family of gentlemen now or lately in possession thereof,
who gave for their arms ――――. Otherwise Roscrugh, may be interpreted
as the valley or covered tumulus for or of music.

In this parish are the two camps or treble intrenchments of our
ancestors the Britains, called Denis and Great Denis or Dunes, words
of two import, signifying the great castle and the little castle,
fort, fortress, or fortified place, wherein the inhabitants heretofore
posted themselves for their safety against foreign invaders. See St.
Colomb Major.


TONKIN.

By this church is a small promontory of land running out into the sea,
which, from its resemblance to Pendinas, is called the Little Dinas.
It was formerly fortified, and had some guns planted upon it to secure
the entrance of Hailford harbour, which not being very broad it well
may command. And in time of wars, it were very convenient there should
be still some guns there, for the safety of the ships that trade to
and again in this harbour, which, as the case now stands, may be
easily carried off by privateers. Thus much may be said for the honour
of this place――it was the last which held out for King Charles in
Cornwall;[10] for, after the taking of Pendinas, it sustained a siege
of several weeks, and at last was forced to surrender for want of
ammunition.


THE EDITOR.

  The measurement of this parish is 1265 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2095    3    0
  Amount of Poor Rate in 1831                 186    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    261   |    224   |    330   |    300.
  Increase on an hundred in 30 years 14.9, or very nearly 15 per cent.

On an estate near the churchyard, celled Lantenny, foundations of
buildings and remains of human bodies have been found; the presumed
relics of a cell of black monks of Angiers, belonging to the priory of
Tywardreth, which existed at this place as early as the reign of
Richard I. _Lysons._

Dr. Boase remarks that the rocks of this parish are precisely similar
to the rocks of St. Anthony in Powder, on the other side of Falmouth
Harbour; and that it is a very curious circumstance that three
parishes of the same name should be all based on the same kind of
rocks, notwithstanding their being situated at a considerable distance
from each other, and respectively belonging to distinct groups of
granite.


     [10] Except, says Lysons, the Mount and Pendennis Castle.
     Little Dinas was surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax in March
     1646.




ST. AUSTELL.


HALS.

St. Austell is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the
north Roach, east St. Blaze, west Mewan, south the British Channel; in
Domesday Roll, 1087, the modern name of this parish was not extant,
but the same and the districts of St. Blazy, Mewan, and Menagnissy,
passed then in tax under the jurisdiction of Earl Cradock’s manor of
Towington, now duchy, Treverbyn, Trenance, and Pentewan. Note further,
that, if Saint Austell be a corruption of Sancto Hostell, it signifies
the holy inn or court.

The Prior of Tywardreth, with divers other benefactors, as appears
from the carving and inscriptions on the stones thereof, founded and
endowed this church, within the town of Trenance, now St. Austell
Town, after which it was indifferently written Trenance Prior (Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall, p. 57), that is to say, the valley town prior (or
pertaining to him) and again by him Trenance Austell (id est, the
cell, chapel or hole, valley town); and again, Tre-nance Aus-tell (id
est, the valley town out, or remote cell or chapel) so called in
respect of Tywardreth, its superior or mother church. The patronage
now in the King; the incumbent Tremayne; the rectory or sheaf in May.
In the Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester’s Inquisition into the Pope’s
Value of Benefices in Cornwall, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Austello in
Decanatu de Powdre, was rated to first fruits x_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._
The vicar xl_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £21. This parish was
charged to the 4_s._ per pound land tax, 1696, £432. 6_s._ (See
Tywardreth.)

From this place was denominated an old family of gentlemen surnamed De
Austell, of which family William de Austell was Sheriff of Cornwall 25
Henry VI. as also of Somerset and Dorset 27 and 28 of King Henry VI.;
who gave for his arms, Argent, a saltire raguled Vert, but in what
families the name, blood, and estate of those gentlemen are terminated
I know not, or where they dwelt. At the town of St. Austell, alias
Trenance, is weekly held upon Friday a considerable market, wherein is
vended all commodities necessary for the life of man at a reasonable
price.[11] Its also privileged 10th fairs or greater marts, on the
30th of November, Palm Sunday, and Thursday after Whitsunday, which
benefits were doubtless first obtained from the Earls of Cornwall, by
the Priors of Tywardreth aforesaid.

Treverbyn, alias Tre-verbin, in this parish, was the voke lands of
considerable manor long before the Norman Conquest, as appears from
the Domesday tax aforesaid (it signifies in Cornish the herb, rape,
root, or navew town, famous it seems in former ages for those
vegetables,) from which place was denominated that old and knightly
family of the Treverbins (who had there free chapel and burying place
here lately extant), and of public use before the Church of St.
Austell was erected; of which house was Walter Treverbyn, Sheriff of
Cornwall 1223, the successor of Reginald de Valletort 7 Henry III. who
had issue Sir Walter Treverbyn, Knight, who had a daughter married,
named Katherine, to Peter Prideaux, of Boswithgye in Luxsillian 10th
Edward II. From this Walter also lineally descended Sir Hugh
Treverbyn, Knight, tempore Henry VI. whose two daughters and heirs
were married to Edward Courtenay, of Boconnock or Haccomb, in Devon,
and Trevannion, of Caryhays, in whom the name, blood, and estate of
those Treverbins ended. But Henry Courtenay, Marquess of Exon, and
Earl of Devon, forfeited one moiety of those lands to the Crown by
attainder of treason against that butcher of the branches of the house
of York, Henry VIII.; so that the same is now in copartnery between
the King of England and Trevanion.

Penrice, alias Penric, in this parish, (id est, head jurisdiction or
dominion) perhaps heretofore, if not now, the voke lands of some manor
(otherwise it must be interpreted the head or chief lopping of trees,
or _rice_, faggots) is the dwelling of my very kind friend Joseph
Sawle, Esq. that married Trevanion, his father Glanvill, his
grandfather Rashleigh, a gentleman notably famous for his humanity,
hospitality, and charity to the poor, who giveth for his arms, Argent,
a chevron between three falcons’ heads Sable. Originally, the first
ancestor of this family came out of Normandy, a soldier under William
the Conqueror, 1066, and in all probability he was posted in those
parts, an officer under William or Robert Earls of Morton and
Cornwall, some time after in those standing troops of soldiers the
Conqueror kept here, in order to awe the people thereof to a
submission to his dominion. For I take it beyond the records of time
at Towan in this parish, and elsewhere in Devon, this family or tribe
hath been extant in fame and splendor as the descendants of that
Sauley or Sawle, mentioned in Battle Abbey Roll in the year
above-mentioned.

Mena-Gwins, in this parish, i. e. white hills or hills white, is the
dwelling of Francis Scobell, Esq. (in English broom) that married one
of the coheirs of Sir Joseph Tredenham, Knight, his father Carlyon’s
heir, and giveth for his arms, as I take it, the same as the
Scobhalls, of Devon, viz. Argent, three fleurs de lis, two and one,
Gules; perhaps originally descended from that family. [At Mena-Gwins
resided Richard Scobell, clerk of the Parliament to Oliver Cromwell.
_Lysons._]

Ros-eundle, (id est, bundle of rushes,) in this parish, is the
dwelling of Charles Trubody, Gent.

At Roscorla, in this parish, (that is the promontory and fat valley of
land,) is the dwelling of that old family of gentlemen from thence
denominated De Roscorla. The present possessor George Roscorla, Gent.
that married Bullock. [The seat of the ancient family of Roscorla has
been pulled down. George Roscorla, the present representative of this
decayed family, is a day-labourer at Roche. _Lysons._]

Trenaran, (id est, the still lake, leat, creek, cove, or bosom of
waters,) in this parish, is the dwelling of Samuel Hext, Gent.
attorney at law, who by his skill and conduct in that profession, hath
advanced his reputation and estate to a considerable pitch in those
parts: he married Moyle of this place.

Merther in St. Austell, bordering on the sea, and joining to the Perr,
was formerly the seat of the Laas, but now the lands of Hext, who in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth came from Kingston, in Stuerton,
Devonshire, an ancient seat of that family. His coat is, Or, a castle
triple-turreted, between three battle-axes Sable.

[Mr. Hals exhibits the strong feelings of his time in the story of
Laa, when he says,]

At the time of the unhappy Rebellion, when the Lord Hopton had
disbanded his army, some of Fairfax’s forces entered the house at
Merther, threatening to murder Mrs. Laa and the family, for being too
dilatory in dressing meat for them. Mr. Laa, then riding about his
estate, had intimation that the rebels were in his parlour, carousing
at the expense of his bacon, poultry, and strong beer. He with all
possible expedition alighted at the door, enters the kitchen, which is
opposite to the parlour, and being warmed with an honest zeal for his
King, took down a loaded gun from the chimney-piece, and shot one of
the rebels, who was at the head of the table, dead on the spot.
Immediately he took horse, and rode towards the Perr, and preserved
his life from the vile pursuers, being providentially well mounted, by
leaping a five-barred gate, and swimming across the Perr, it being at
that time high water.

In the town of St. Austell liveth Henry Hawkins, Gent. attorney at law
(younger brother of Mr. Hawkins of Creed), who by his judgment, skill,
care, and pains, in his calling hath exalted his fame and estate to a
great degree. He married Scobell, and giveth for his arms, Argent, on
a saltire Sable, five fleur de lis. His two sons by Scobell died
without issue, and his daughters were married to Hoblyn, Moyle, Hext,
and Hawkins, of Helston; and the youngest of that sex, with all his
lands and riches, was married to Tremayne, of St. Ive, Esq.

The manor of Tow-ing-ton, alias Taw-ing-ton aforesaid, taxed in the
Domesday Book, 1087, is invested with the jurisdiction of a court
leet; and signifies “silence in town,” or “extraordinary silence in
town,” viz. when that court sitteth; which was afterwards by King
Edward III. 1336, concerted or fixed into the Duchy of Cornwall, by
charter (see Lestwithell), with its appurtenances.

In this parish was born Jonathan Upcott, son of George Upcott, Gent.
by Mrs. May, of High Cross, Ranger of the Parks to John Lord Robartes
in Cornwall, as also in Ireland, when he was Lord Deputy there. This
gentleman, having risen through various steps in the army, during the
reigns of Charles II., James II. and William III. commanded a company
in Flanders in the great war against France under Lewis XIV. At last,
being ordered to take part in a desperate assault on the French at
Enghein, where the Dutch and Spanish soldiers had proved better men at
their heels than at their hands, he bravely lost his life, together
with the greater part of his men.

King William is said in the course of this war to have grown prodigal
of Englishmen’s valour, blood, and lives, as he had before been of
their money; for when any dangerous fort was to be attempted, which
the Dutch and Spanish soldiers refused, he commanded the English to
perform it, who, being led away by the vanity of being accounted
valiant soldiers, and for the honour of the English nation, quickly
undertook such direful posts, though to their own destruction.


NORDEN.

Polruddon, the ruynes of an auntient howse somtymes the howse of John
Polruddon, whoe was taken out of his bed by the Frenche in the time of
Henry the 7. and caried away with violence, and then began the howse
to decaye, and Penwarn, the howse of Mr. Otwell Hill, was buylded with
Polruddon stones. The howse (as by the ruyns it appeareth) was a large
howse, and by the arched freestone windowes which it had curiouslye
wroughte, testifieth it to be for the time elegant. [Polruddon was
afterwards rebuilt, and became a seat of the Scobells. It belonged to
the late Sir Christopher Hawkins, Bart. who was descended from that
family in the female line. It is occupied as a farm house. _Lysons_]


TONKIN.

The manor of Tewynton, alias Tewington, takes its name from the chief
place, Tewor, which, though it generally means “heaps of sand,” cannot
be so interpreted here; and much less applicable is the etymology
given by Mr. Hals, of “silence in town,” but Tewor means a hillock
generally, so that Tewynton means, in the mixed derivation common in
Cornwall from British and Saxon, “the town on a small hill.” This
place was the seat of the Sowles before they removed to Penrice, and
affords a quarry of excellent stone.

Pentwan, the “head of the hillocks of sand.” Lower Pentwan is situated
at the mouth of the St. Austell river, which would form a pretty
little port, were it not for the bar of sand made by the waste brought
down from the tin-works, so that small craft only can get in, and that
at spring-tides. It is a handsome village, and in good seasons great
stores of fish are brought in here.

Pelniddon, “the top of the ford,” from “nyd,” a ford, was the seat of
the knightly family bearing the same name.

Trenorren, which I take to be compounded of Tre-nore-en, “the town of
the point,” from the Bleak Head, close by which it lies.


THE EDITOR.

In Henry the Eighth’s reign, Leland described St. Austell as a poor
village, nor is it mentioned as a place of any consequence either by
Carew or Norden. It first rose into consequence from its vicinity to
Polgooth and other considerable mines: it is now a considerable
thoroughfare; the great road from Plymouth to the Land’s End was
brought through it about the year 1760. The export of china clay, the
decomposed or never consolidated felspar, to all the great
manufactories of earthenware throughout England, affords employment to
industry and to capital, in a manner more steady, and therefore more
permanently beneficial, than can ever be produced by the working of
mines.

To facilitate their commerce, and generally to improve the whole
district, a harbour was constructed at Seaforth about forty years ago
by Mr. Charles Rashleigh; a gentleman who will long be remembered, as
uniting strong abilities with energy of mind, and liberality as well
of practice as of sentiment. His name is perpetuated in the port and
in the buildings surrounding it, which have received by public
acclamation the appropriate distinction of Charlestown. [The spot was
formerly called Porthmear, and was too inconsiderable to be mentioned
in Martyn’s map. In 1790 it contained only nine inhabitants. In
consequence of the commodious harbour, the docks, and shipwrights’
yards, and the pilchard fishery established by Mr. Rashleigh, it has
gradually increased to be a large village. _Lysons._]

More recent inventions have suggested an iron railway from St. Austell
along the descending vale to a new harbour at Puntner, The works are
just now completed (1832), and they promise to add still greater
facilities to commerce than those at Charlestown.

The other principal villages in this parish are Carvath, Corbean,
Pentewan or Pentuan, Porthpean, Rescorla, Tregonissy, Tregorick,
Trenarren, and Trethergy.

The church and town of St. Austell are well worthy of notice. The
church is much decorated on its exterior surface of freestone by
figures and scrolls worked on the stone; and over the south porch is
an ancient inscription, KYCH INRI, never explained (engraved in
Lysons, p. ccxxxii). The tower, although not so lofty as that at
Probus, is perhaps more elegant in its form and proportion. The inside
of the church presents a light and pleasing appearance, in consequence
of the large space occupied by the windows.

The font is in the form of a bowl, carved with rude monsters, standing
on a round column, and supported by four small pillars, which have
monks’ heads for their capitals. It is engraved in Lysons, p.
ccxxxiii.

An almshouse, with six apartments for poor persons, was erected in
1809.

In the Archæologia, vol. ix. pl. viii. and vol. xi. pl. vii. are
engravings of a silver cup, several rings, and other pieces of
jewellery, of very early workmanship, which were found, together with
a coin of Burgred king of Mercia (expelled from his dominions in 874),
in a stream-work in this parish, in the year 1774. They were deposited
in a silver cup, which has since been used for the sacramental wine at
the church; and therefore had probably been originally collected at
some earlier period.

  St. Austell measures 10,018 statute acres.
  The annual value of the Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,628    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                     2,890    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   3788   |   3686   |   6175   |   8758.
  Increase on an hundred in thirty years, 131.2, or above 131 per cent.
  Present incumbent, the Rev. T. S. Smyth, presented in 1815 by the King.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, so important in an economical point of view, on account
of its minal production, affords a vast fund of geological
information. Its northern part is composed of granite; its southern
part of various rocks belonging to the porphyritic group. Its granite
on the eastern side is like that of Alternun, and contains layers
which abound in porphyritic crystals of felspar. On the western side
it comprises several kinds of this rock; some characterised by the
proportions of shorl that enter into their composition; and others by
containing talc instead of mica, and by the felspar being prone to an
extensive decay, in which state it furnishes porcelain clay (or china
clay) for the potteries. A more particular description of these kinds
of granite will be given hereafter, in the accounts of St. Stephen’s,
and of the adjacent parishes. Carclaze tin mine must not, however, be
passed by, as it is one of the greatest curiosities in Cornwall. This
mine is worked “open to the day” (according to the miners’ term), that
is, like a quarry. It is of a considerable depth; and its superficies
exceeds several acres in extent. It is excavated entirely in a white
granite, somewhat similar to the disintegrating variety above alluded
to; and when the sun shines, the reflection of light is so exceedingly
dazzling as to be almost insupportable. The tin ore occurs here
intermixed with shorl and quartz, in the form of short irregular
veins, which traverse the granite in every direction, and so abundant,
that the whole rock requires to be pounded and washed to complete an
entire separation of the ore.

Hornblend rocks succeed the granite, and produce a red fertile soil.
These extend a little to the south of the town of St. Austell, and are
followed by a blue lamelar slate, in which the mines are situated.
This rock is much softer, and more argillaceous than the hornblend
slate, and decomposes into a light-coloured soil. The matrix of its
lodes abound in chlorite: it is probably a chlorite schist. This
formation is traversed by several beds of felspar, porphyry (elvan
courses), in the western side of the parish, which run north-east and
south-west, in a somewhat tortuous manner, and dip towards the
granite. One of these elvans, near Pentewan, has been extensively
quarried, and is much esteemed as a building material. This chlorite
slate also contains, in the cove at Duporth, a bed of compact
magnesian rock, abounding in asbestos; and passes on either hand into
the surrounding slate, by means of layers of talcous schist.

This parish has long been celebrated for its stream works, which are
diluvial beds containing tin ore. They are generally found in deep
vallies where rivulets flow, which are used in separating the tin ore,
by its inferior specific gravity, from common stones or pebbles; hence
the name of “stream-works.” The nature of these deposits varies
according to the positions which they occupy between the sea and the
granite; whence the stanniferous strata were derived.

Pentewan stream-work is one of the most interesting in the whole
county. Its lowest bed consists of pebbles, gravel, and tin ore, and
it rests on the solid rock. Immediately above this tin-ground is a
black stratum of vegetable remains, among which are stumps of trees,
standing erect, with their roots penetrating downwards into the bed of
gravel. This subterranean forest stands forty-eight feet below
high-water mark; showing that there must have been a change in the
relative sea level. On this vegetable bed reposes a thick stratum of
silt, intermixed with horns of deer, and with other relics of land
animals, and also with detached pieces of timber. This silt is of the
same description as that now forming in the Truro river, and in other
estuaries on the coast; and it contains layers of shells peculiar to
such situations.

This silt is covered by a deep deposit of siliceous sand, in which
occur various remains, principally of marine origin; and lastly, over
this lies another bed of silt like the preceding, which reaches to the
surface, where a thin marsh soil is now in a state of cultivation. The
upper bed of silt is nearly on a level with the sea, being separated
and protected from it by the interposition of a sandy beach.

Many theoretical observations and reflections would naturally present
themselves, after a statement of these facts; but such would be more
appropriate to a separate treatise, than to a series of notices on
individual parishes.


     [11] The market continues to deserve this character; the
     tolls, persuant to the charter of Queen Elizabeth, are
     assigned to the relief and maintenance of the poor.




ST. BLAZEY.


HALS.

St. Blazey is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the east
Tywardreth and the Parc; south, the British Channel; north, Luxulion;
west, St. Austell. At the time of the Norman Conquest this district
was rated either under Tywardreth, Towington, Trenance, or Treverbyn.
In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
before mentioned, Ecclesia de Fanum, appropriata Dom’ni de Tywardreth,
in Decanatu de Powdre, this parish was taxed to the Pope’s first
fruits, or annats, iiii_l._ vicar ejusdem nihil propter paupertatem.
In Wolsey’s Inquisition, and Valor Beneficiorum, it goes as a daughter
church in presentation and consolidation with St. Austell. The
patronage in the King, the incumbent Hugoe, the sheaf or rectory in
Mr. May; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ in the pound tax, 1696,
£92. 3_s._

Quæry, whether the word fanum be not, by the scribe, a corruption of
Foy-town? In the inquisition aforesaid, however, let it be remembered
that, Ecclesia de Fanum must be interpreted as the church or temple,
consecrated to divine service, appropriated to the house of
Tywardreth, as both those churches of Fowey and St. Blazey are. As for
the tutelar guardian from whom the same and the parish is denominated,
Blaze, he was born in Sebaste, a city of Cappadocia in Asia, whereof
he was bishop, and governed his church so well, that the priests of
the idols (then worshipped comparatively all the world over,) took
distaste at him for his preachments against idolatry; and exhibited a
complaint against him to Agricolaus, the emperor Dioclesian’s
president in those parts, by whom he was examined as to this and other
parts of Christian religion; which he would not retract; wherefore he
was by him committed to prison, scourged with the utmost severity that
could be invented, and afterwards, by a special order, under the hand
of Agricolaus, beheaded by the common hangman, 15th Feb. anno Dom.
298, temp. Dioclesiani. The church celebrateth the festival of this
famous saint, bishop, and martyr, February 3. The Council of Lyons,
ann. Dom. 1244, under the Emperor Frederick and Pope Innocent the
Fourth, amongst other things instituted certain new festivals for
canonizing of saints; after which time, in the Inquisition but now
mentioned, we shall find most of the names of our Cornish churches
distinguished by the prefixed title of saint, viz. such person as the
same when first consecrated was dedicated to (who before that time had
been canonized by the church of Rome); though, as I hinted before,
there is but one church or person named in Domesday Roll to whom is
given the appellation of saint, about two hundred years before. In
this church town of St. Blazey there is a public fair kept on the
festival day of this saint, February 3, and the festivals of most
other Cornish saints, to whose guardianship churches are dedicated,
are solemnly kept yearly in other places.

Ro-sillian, in this parish, formerly the lands of Kellyow, is now the
dwelling of Henry Scobell, Gent. brother to Mr. Scobell of St.
Austell, before mentioned, who giveth the same arms as that family
doth.

In this parish also, not long since, lived Hugh Williams, Gent.
attorney-at-law, youngest son of Richard Williams, of Trewithan in
Probus, that married Robins and Frowick, and gave the same arms as
that family doth; who at length, upon some discontent, with a rope or
halter privately hanged or strangled himself to death in his own house
(as was reported), though the coroner’s inquest found it a chance
only, tempore William III. Upon news of this fact of Mr. Williams, the
uncharitable country people, whom he had persecuted with lawsuits,
wished that all the rest of his brethren of the inferior practice of
the law, would make up of the same expedient to hasten out of this
life to Paradise as he did, for the ease and public good of the
inhabitants of this county.

In this parish liveth Cur-lyon, Gent. that married Hawkins, and giveth
for his arms, in a field ――――, a bezant between two castles. Now,
though the name be local, from a place in Keye parish so called, yet
if I were admitted to judge or conjecture, I would say this family of
Cur-Lyon, by its name and arms, were the descendants of Richard
Curlyon, alias King Richard I. of whom our chronologers say, that a
priest of France told him he had three daughters, Pride, Covetousness,
and Lechery; which three daughters the King replied he would thus
dispose of: 1, Pride to the Templars and Hospitalers; 2, Covetousness
to the Monks of the Cistertian order; and, 3, Lechery to the clergy in
general.


TONKIN.

St. Blaze, usually called St. Blazey. In this parish is Roselian, or
Rose-Sillian, an ancient seat belonging to the family of Kellio, and
was lately the residence of Shadrack Vincent Vincent, Esq. in right of
his wife, daughter of Richard Kellio, Esq.

This Shadrack Vincent was the second son of Henry Vincent, of
Tresimple. He signalized himself in the wars of Flanders, and since
the Revolution he has been member of parliament for the borough of
Fowey, and has nobly founded a school there.

Adjoining to Roselian is Trenawick, which was sold by .... Kellio, Esq.
to Hugh Williams, Gent. son to Williams of Trewithon in Probus, who
built a new house on the estate.

The manor of Trengreene, or Tregoryon, is the dwelling of Thomas
Carlyon, Gent. a branch of the Menagwins family, who has lately built
a very neat new house here, which being seated on a rising grround,
from whence there is a good prospect of the sea, and having a fruitful
spot of land around it, is as pleasant a seat as any in the
neighbourhood. His son Thomas has married Elizabeth, the eldest
daughter of Mr. Philip Hawkins, of Pennance, by whom he hath several
children. This last Thomas was in the commission of the peace, and
died in this present Jan. (1732) leaving his eldest son, Philip, a
minor. This property belonged in former times to the Bodregens.


THE EDITOR.

The popular legends of St. Blaze relate that he was most barbarously
lacerated with wool-combs, which sufficiently accounts for his having
been adopted as the patron of all persons concerned in the manufacture
of cloth.

There is an idle tradition of the exact spot where St. Blaze landed;
but it is quite certain that he never was in the west of Europe; nor
can any reason now be assigned for the selection of this saint, beyond
that of his general popularity. About the year 1774 a curious piece of
machinery was exhibited all over England, which represented the whole
manufacture of broadcloth, from the shearing of the wool to the last
operation of pressing. A small figure was actually at work on each
separate process; and over them all, as a general director, and
arrayed in his pontifical habit and mitre, appeared Bishop Blaze. He
is the patron of Ragusa.

The derivation of Carlyon from Richard Cœur de Lion, seems to be
equally puerile, unfounded, and absurd. Car, or Caer, is evidently a
fortified place; and Lyon must be one of those corruptions, more
common than any other, of a word which has lost its appropriate
meaning, into another word of a similar sound and in common use. The
arms of Carlyon are, Argent, a chevron Gules between three moor cocks
Sable, limbed and wattled Gules.

In modern times St. Blazey has acquired distinction by giving birth to
Ralph Allen, known over England as Mr. Allen of Bath. This gentleman
acquired a large fortune through the medium of conferring important
benefits on his country, and he employed it in promoting literature
and sciences on the most extensive scale. Pope, Swift, Arbuthnot, Gay,
were the inmates of his house. Warburton was mainly through his
influence advanced to the highest station in our church. And,

  On all occasions was his hand held forth
  At pity’s call to succour modest worth.

This extraordinary man was the son of an innkeeper in a village on the
road-side, called St. Blazey Highway. He is stated by Mr. Polwhele to
have been placed under the care of his grandmother, who kept the
post-office at St. Columb; and that an inspector was so much struck by
the neatness and regularity of young Allen’s accounts as to procure
for him some situation in a more extensive establishment. It is
probable that he must have been placed in the post office at Bath. Mr.
Polwhele adds that he was there patronised by General Wade.

Previously to this period, letters were conveyed along certain great
roads emanating from the capital, but without any communication one
with the other. Mr. Allen first conceived the idea of uniting these
lines by what has been termed cross posts, and Bath became the
original station of this most important contrivance, which has now
expanded itself over the whole country like the meshes of a net,
affording such facility and speed as to astonish those who experience
their benefit, and which could not have been hoped for in times past.

It is much to be lamented that the progress of Mr. Allen, from the
commencement of his career in this most interesting pursuit, up to the
attainment of his object by its complete establishment at Bath cannot
be traced; nor the source ascertained from whence his funds were
derived. It appears that Mr. Allen risked the chance of taking the
revenues to be derived from his new institution for a term of years,
at a certain annual payment to the State; or, in official language,
that he farmed them; and his success proved commensurate to the
ability, exertion, and persevering industry employed in carrying the
plan into effect: so that on the expiration of the first term, a
renewal was taken at an advanced rent of some tens of thousands
a-year.

Mr. Allen fixed himself at Bath, and built the splendid mansion of
Prior Park with the oolite of that district, or Bath stone, which he
first quarried on an extensive scale and brought into general use. At
Prior Park every man distinguished in any way was a welcome guest, and
the proprietor has received most justly, deserved tributes of applause
from many capable of erecting monuments to his memory more durable
than those of brass or stone; but one frequently noticed has ever
appeared to me inadequate. It does indeed represent the image of a
private gentleman, endowed with goodness of heart, some learning, and
a tolerable judgment; but if Mr. Fielding’s Allworthy was really meant
to pourtray Mr. Allen, one may seek in vain for any resemblance of a
man, who, by energy of mind and indefatigable exertions conferred so
great a benefit on his country, that the wealth acquired by himself
seemed no more than the necessary appendage to such public service.

Mr. Allen died in 1764; but his spirit still hovered over Bath, and
impelled individuals brought forward in his school, to make the second
and last improvement in our mail conveyances by substituting the rapid
speed of a coach, with its safety and accommodation of passengers, for
the slow and solitary progress of a postman on horseback. This system
commenced in 1784, twenty years after Mr. Allen’s decease. Mail
coaches led to a general improvement of roads, and this again to an
increase in the speed of coaches, while the reticulations of cross
posts became more fine, with intersections in every possible
direction, and the whole continues still improving; so that, morally
speaking, the illustrious founder still lives and breathes among us.

Mr. Allen had a sister, whom I faintly remember the widow of a Mr.
Elliott, and left with an only daughter. The old lady had great
pleasure in relating what she had seen and heard at Prior Park, her
having been there in company with Pope, Swift, Thomson, &c. and from
her is derived the story related by Mr. Polwhele of Mr. Hugh Boscowen.

The daughter married Mr. Thomas Daniell, then chief clerk to Mr.
Lemon, an individual not moving in a sphere so splendid as that of Mr.
Allen, but probably at least his equal in all the qualities essential
to those who fix a new era in the history of whatever they undertake.
On Mr. Lemon’s decease in 1760, Mr. Daniell was enabled by the bounty
of his wife’s uncle to take all the large mercantile concern on
himself, and having soon afterwards constructed a residence in Truro,
Mr. Allen presented him with several ship-loads of Bath stone; and
thus Truro, having quarries of excellent silicious building-stone
almost in its streets, and with granite distant only a few miles,
exhibits the front of its most handsome house encrusted with oolite
from Bath. To a similar act of liberality on the part of Mr. Allen,
the hospital of St. Bartholomew in London is indebted for an exterior
casing of the same stone; which, in consequence of the recent
improvements and extension of inland navigation, is now brought in
great quantities to the metropolis, to Oxford, and to places still
more remote from the quarries.

I may here perhaps introduce with propriety a relation descriptive of
the immense difference between our own times and those of Queen Anne,
in respect to the sources and to the diffusion of intelligence.

Mr. Sidney Godolphin, occupying the office of Lord High Treasurer,
visited more than once the seat in Cornwall from which he derived his
appellation of Earl; no regular conveyances at stated intervals
proceeded further west than Exeter, but when certain masses of letters
had accumulated, the whole were forwarded by what was called the post.
The Lord High Treasurer had a weekly messenger from Exeter bringing
letters, despatches, and a newspaper; and on the fixed day of his
arrival all the gentlemen assembled at Godolphin from many miles round
to hear the newspaper read in the great hall. This was told to my
father by Mr. John Borlase, father to the two Doctor Borlases, who had
himself been present. From ten to twenty daily papers now reach
Penzance in about forty hours from London.

Within my own remembrance a letter leaving London on Monday night
arrived at Penzance on Friday morning, a letter and its answer
occupying at present precisely that time.

  This parish measures 1480 statute acres.
  The annual value of its Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1878    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           636   16    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   467    |    442   |    938   |  2155.
  Increase on an hundred in 30 years, 361.45, or more than 361 per
    cent.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The northern part of this parish rests on granite, and it approaches
very nearly to the church. Proceeding southward, the granite is
succeeded by the same kind of slate as that which is found in the
adjacent parish of St. Austell, both parishes lying parallel to each
other, in respect to a line extending from the granite hills to the
sea shore, have the same geological structure.

It is known that within the memory of the last generation the sea
flowed up to St. Blazey Bridge; and various indications of its having
reached half a mile further up the river have been detected: thus
showing that the sea, which has encroached on most parts of the coasts
of Cornwall, has at the same time been driven back from the land. This
effect is usually attributed to the accumulation of detritus brought
down from the hills by rivers, more especially when they are in flood,
and undoubtedly this must be a generally operative cause; but in this
particular instance the effect must be mainly ascribed to the wearing
away of the diluvial sand-bank at the head of the adjoining bay. The
volume of this river, and its consequent momentum, not having been
sufficient to counteract the deposition of sand by the waves running
up the estuary, with which, in their rapid motion, they are always
charged.




BLISLAND.


HALS.

Blisland is situate in the hundred of Trig-minor, id est, sea-shore
the less; so called minor, to distinguish it from Trig-major, which
encompasseth a larger tract of land on the sea-shore of the Irish
Channel, viz. that now divided into Strator and Lesnewith; and hath
upon the east, Temple; west, Helland; north, Brewer and St. Udye;
south, Cardinham. The modern name Blisland is a corruption of
Bliss-lan, id est, happy, rejoicing, gladsome temple or church, which
is testified by the Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester’s inquisition
into the value of benefices, in order to the Pope’s annats 1294,
Ecclesia de Bliss-lan in Decanatu de Trigminorshire, vi_l._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor Beneficiorum, £13. 10_s._ The patronage
lately in Sprye, Parker, Reynolds, in right of the manor of Blis-land,
now Molesworth; the incumbent Hicks. This parish was rated to the four
shillings in the pound land tax 1696, £104. At the time of the Norman
Conquest I judge it was taxed under Udy or Pengally.

This manor of Blisland was heretofore invested with the jurisdiction
of life and limb within its precincts (the lords whereof doubtless
built or endowed the present church); and within memory of the last
age, the inhabitants will tell you, that a person was executed, in the
gallows-field there, for robbing this parish church of its silver cup
and pattens belonging to the altar (vide Mitchell). This manor of
Blisland, tempore Hen. VII. was the lands of ――――, who forfeited the
same by attainder of treason in Flammock’s rebellion, whereby it fell
to the crown; from whence it was conveyed to the Stanhopes, and from
them to Parker, and from Parker to Reynolds, from Reynolds to Sprye,
from Sprye to Molesworth.

In this parish somewhere liveth Trese, Gent. The name Tres, or Treas,
is Cornish British, and signifies in that language “the third,” and
was a name taken up in memory of the third son or person of the family
from whence he was descended, and is derived from the same Japhetical
origin as τριτος, tertius, “the third,” as the Latin word _tres_.
Treas is also “the third” in the Scots and Irish tongues.

This parish hath in it loads and streams of tin.


TONKIN.

The etymology of this parish is plain, being wholly Saxon, bless and
land, as contrasted with the moors and craggy hills around it. Norden
says that the sheriff’s writ runneth not within this parish.


THE EDITOR.

  Number of statute acres 6025.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          3,643    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           328    5    0
  Population, { in 1801,  | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    437    |    487   |    637   |    644.
  Increase on an hundred in 30 years 47.4, or more than 47 per cent.

It is worthy of remark, that Mr. Pye, the present incumbent, has been
in possession of the living fifty-three years; and that his
predecessor, Mr. Hicks, held it during sixty-two years; so that one
change of rectors has alone taken place in the long period of an
hundred and fifteen years; a case of successive longevity almost
unparalleled; and the more extraordinary in comparison with the
inheritance of family estates, when it is recollected that each of
those gentlemen must at the least have completed the twenty-fourth
year of his age before he received induction to the benefice.


GEOLOGY.

Doctor Boase remarks the eastern half of this parish is situate on
granite, which is of the same kind, and belongs to the same insulated
group, as that extending into the parishes of Advent and of Alternun.
The western half consists of alternate layers of schistone and of
compact rocks, some of which approach near to greenstone. These rocks
are, however, more fully exposed in the adjacent parish of St.
Breward, or Simonward, under which head they will be described.




BOCONNOC.


HALS.

Boconnoc is situate in the hundred of West-well-shire, so called from
foys-fenton in St. Cleother, id est, walled well or spring of water,
the original fountain of the fay’s river, to distinguish it from
East-well-shire aforesaid; and hath upon the north, Bradock; west, St.
Wenow; south, St. Neepe; east, St. Pynock. For the compound name
Bo-connoc, it is taken from the barton and manor of land still extant
there, with reference to the beasts that depastured thereon; and
signifies, prosperous, successful, thriving cows, kine, or cattle.
Which place it seems was the voke lands of a considerable tithing or
lordship, with jurisdiction, at the time of the Norman Conquest; for
by the name of Boconnoc it was taxed in Domesday roll 2d William I.
1087.

However, let it be observed that at the time of the inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, before mentioned, 1294, there was
no such endowed church extant in Cornwall as Boconnoc; though in
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it was taxed to the Pope’s annats 9_l._
17_s._ 3_d._ The patronage is in the Lord Mohun in right of his
lordship of Boconnoc aforesaid; and the parish rated to the 4_s._
8_d._ per pound tax, temp. William III. 80_l._

This barton and manor of Boconnoc, in the time of Edward III. was the
lands of Sir John Dawney, of Sheviock, knight, whose daughter and
heiress Emelyn, was married to Edward Courtenay, Earl of Devon (and
third of that name and title, being the son of Hugh Courtenay the 10th
Earl of Devon, by Margaret, daughter of Humphrey de Bohun, the 8th
Earl of Hereford and Essex, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of King
Edward I.) and had issue by the said Emelyn Dawnay, Edward Courtenay
the 12th Earl of Devon, surnamed _the blind_ (that married Eleanor,
daughter of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March and Ulster, by whom he had
issue Edward Courtenay the 13th Earl of Devon) and Hugh Courtenay his
second son, to whom his mother gave Boconnoc, in the beginning of the
reign of King Henry IV. 1416. Upon this Hugh Courtenay, afterwards Sir
Hugh Courtenay, Knight, his elder brother Edward, surnamed _the
blind_, at the especial request and instance of his mother, Emelyn,
(as Brooke, York Herald, informs us) did by his indenture, bearing
date the 2d of King Henry V. confirm and assure to him, his heirs and
assigns for ever, the manors of Gotherington, Southallington, and
Slancomb-Dawney (from whence that family was denominated) in the
county of Devon, who afterwards married Philippa, one of the daughters
and heirs of Sir Warren Archdeacon, Knight, of Haccomb in the county
of Devon, after which time he lived sometimes in that place, at other
whiles at Boconnoc; whence it is we find in some authors this
gentleman is called Sir Hugh Courtenay of Boconnoc, and Sir Hugh
Courtenay of Haccomb, as if they had been different persons. This Sir
Hugh Courtenay had issue, by Archdeacon’s daughter, Edward Courtenay
of Haccomb; who after the death of Humphrey Stafford was restored in
blood, and made the 16th Earl of Devon, in the first year of the reign
of King Henry VII. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip
Courtenay, of Moland, Knight, and had issue William Courtenay, 17th
Earl of Devon, who married Katherine daughter of King Edward IV. and
by her had issue, Henry Courtenay, Marquis of Exeter, executed for
treason, temp. Henry VIII. 1538. He married Elizabeth Blount, by whom
he had issue Edward Courtenay the 18th Earl of Devon (and last of the
family of these Courtenays) that died at Padua, in Italy, without
issue, 1556, 4th of October.

Edward Courtenay of Haccomb, or Boconnoc, aforesaid 16th Earl of
Devon, had four sisters, as is set down in his will, dated 1509, in
the first year of the reign of King Henry VIII. which were thus
disposed of in marriage,――Elizabeth was married to John Trethyrfe of
Trethyrfe, from whom Courtenay of that place, and Vyvyan of
Trelowarren is descended; Maud to John Arundell of Tolverne, from whom
the Arundells of Sythney, and by females the Trefusis of Trefusis, and
the Halses late of Fentongollan are descended: Isabel, the third
daughter, was married to William Moune, from whom the Lord Mohun
descended: Florence, the fourth sister, was married to John Trelawney,
from whom the Trelawneys of Trelawne are descended.

Whether this lordship of Boconnoc fell to the Crown by attainder of
treason, upon the death of Henry Courtenay, Marquis of Exeter, or was
purchased from the Crown, or of the sisters and heirs of the said
Edward Courtenay, by Carmenow of Fengollan, I know not; he sold it to
the Earl of Bedford; as the said Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford sold
it, in 1566, to Reginald Mohun, Esq. (son or grandson of William
Moune, who married Isabel Courtenay aforesaid) that married Joan
daughter of Sir William Trevanion, Knt. whose son, Sir ―――― Mohun,
Knt. married Joan, one of the sisters and coheirs of Sir John Horsey,
Knt. by whom he had issue, Sir Reginald Mohun, Knt. that married two
wives; the first, Sir William Killigrew’s daughter; the second, a
daughter of ―――― Heale, of Wembury in Devon; the which Sir Reginald,
15 November 1612, was created a Baronet of England, temp. James I. and
had issue, John Mohun, Esq. who in the lifetime of his father was
created Baron Mohun of Oakhampton in right of his grandmother
Isabel ――――, sister of Edward Courtenay, the 16th Earl of Devon,
lord of the manor, honour, and borough of Oakhampton, who married and
had issue Warwick Lord Mohun, who had issue Charles Lord Mohun, who
had issue, as I take it, another Charles Lord Mohun, who was slain in
a duel between him and the Duke of Hamilton, who both died on the
spot, temp. Queen Anne: after which his daughters and heirs sold this
lordship and all his lands to Mr. Thomas Pitt, recently returned from
the East Indies.

The ancestor of this ancient and famous family of the Mohuns came into
England with William the Conqueror, by the name of William Mowne or
Sapell, and was after the Conquest by him made Governor of Dunster
Castle, who had issue William Mowne the second Lord of Dunster Castle,
whose son, the third William, as Matthew Paris saith, did keep and
fortify the same against King Stephen, for the use of Maud the
Empress. It is told us by our chronologers and historians, that he was
made Earl of Somerset by King Henry the First, 1135, and that he was
founder of a priory of Black Canons of Bruton in Somersetshire, where
Edgar Earl of Cornwall had before founded an abbey of Benedictine
monks. (Vide Monasticon Anglicanum, tom. ii. p. 205,) to which charter
were witnesses William de Moyn, his son, and others.

This William Earl of Somerset had issue another William, who is said
also to have been Earl of Somerset: but Brooke, York Herald, says that
this William and his son Reginald Lord Dunster both died in the time
of William Earl of Somerset, so that Reginald de Moyn his grandson was
the second and last Earl of Somerset of his name and family, who lost
this hereditary office by siding with the Barons against King Henry
the Third, A.D. 1297, after it had remained in his family about fifty
years.

After the family became private gentlemen at Boconnoc, their names are
found sometimes noticed; the first Sheriff of Cornwall, 6th Edw. VI. 1
Eliz. 13 Eliz. and 19 Eliz.


TONKIN.

Bo-con-oke; the name is Gaulish-Saxon,――the town or village of Stunt
Oke.

After copying Mr. Hals’ narrative, Mr. Tonkin adds, Charles Lord
Mohun, the last Baron of this family, being killed in a duel by the
Duke of Hamilton, on the 5th of November 1712, left his whole estate
by will, dated some time before, to his widow, who sold all the
Cornish and Devonshire estates in 1717 for fifty-four thousand pounds
(a very cheap bargain) to Thomas Pitt, Esq. commonly called Governor
Pitt, in whose possession the manor of Boconnoc now remains.

This Charles Lord Mohun was a nobleman of very bright parts, and great
natural endowments both of body and mind; but having had the
misfortune to lose his father, while he was yet in the cradle――and the
estate being left to him much involved in lawsuits between his nearest
relations, and with a considerable debt――he had not an education
bestowed on him suitable to his birth; and happening to fall into ill
company, he was drawn into several extravagancies: but, however, as
his years increased, he became so much reclaimed as to give great
hopes that he would one day equal the greatest of his predecessors;
when he was thus unfortunately cut off in the flower of his age.

He was twice married. First to Charlotte daughter of ―――― Manwaring,
Esq. by whom he had only one daughter, whom he never owned, and he
lived for several years separated from his wife. He had the good
fortune, however, to get rid of her at last, she being drowned in a
passage to Ireland with one of her gallants, about six or seven years
before his own death.

Fitton Gerrard, Earl of Macclesfield, her maternal uncle, to make him
some amends for his bad bargain, gave him by will a good part of his
estate, in 1701, which was the occasion of the quarrel between his
Lordship and the Duke of Hamilton; so fatal to them both.

His second wife was the widow of Colonel Griffin, of the Green Cloth,
by whom he had not any issue. His sister died before him unmarried.


THE EDITOR.

Boconnoc is universally allowed to be the finest seat in Cornwall. The
house stands on an elevation near the union of two valleys, each
rendered interesting, beautiful, and picturesque by streams of water
flowing through uneven ground, and by native woods of beech and oak,
rivalling the trees of our most favoured inland counties, although
these vallies originate in wild tracts of land where not a stunted
shrub is to be seen.

Mr. Thomas Pitt, although remotely descended from a good family, is
said to have been the son of a person concerned in trade at Brentford.
He must have gone to India at a time when some merchant adventurers,
wholly unconscious of impending events, were engaged in laying the
foundation of an Empire so vast as to exceed in the number of its
subjects even the majesty of Rome itself. Mr. Pitt returned to Europe
possessed of a diamond, superior, perhaps, in its combination of size
and transparency, to any one ever exhibited in the western world. It
was offered to Queen Anne, and ultimately sold to the Regent Duke of
Orleans for the French nation, at a sum exceeding one hundred thousand
pounds.[12] With about half of this large sum Mr. Pitt acquired the
property in Cornwall of the last Lord Mohun, and settled at Boconnoc.
He also purchased the burgage tenures, giving the right of franchise
at Old Sarum, and represented that place in Parliament.

He had two sons, Robert and Thomas. Robert Pitt who succeeded him at
Boconnoc, married Harriet Villiers, third sister of John Earl
Grandison. He died in May 1727, leaving two sons, Thomas Pitt, and
William, afterwards Earl of Chatham. Thomas Pitt, his brother, was
created Earl of Londonderry, in consequence of his marrying the
heiress of Ridgeway, who had borne that distinction; this younger
branch became extinct in 1764. Thomas Pitt, his son, engaged most
extensively in the political speculation, for which Cornwall was then
become an ample field. But, having supported the party of Frederick
Prince of Wales, he failed of obtaining any of the objects to which
most speculations are supposed to lead. He married Christiana, sister
of George first Lord Lyttelton; by whom he left Thomas Pitt, who, on
the elevation of his first cousin, William Pitt, to the chief office
in the State, when under twenty-five years of age, was created Baron
Camelford in Jan. 1784. He died in 1793, leaving a son Thomas Pitt,
the second and last Lord Camelford, and a daughter married to William
Wyndham Grenville, Lord Grenville, the present possessor of Boconnoc,
having succeeded to her brother in 1804.

The personal history of this young man is curious and extraordinary.
He became an object of attention in Cornwall almost from his birth. On
the event of his christening, in 1775, Boconoc was thrown open for
public and indiscriminate entertainment, accompanied by exhibitions of
the peculiar athletic exercise in which the Cornish boast to excel all
their contemporaries, and to rival the Palæstræ of ancient Greece. A
silver bowl of fifteen guineas was the prize of the victor (the first
who threw five falls), and about fifty pounds were distributed among
the vanquished.

His education was conducted under a private tutor alone in the
seclusion of Boconnoc; but having made an excursion to Plymouth at a
time when naval preparations were in full activity, he acquired a
passion for the sea so strong and rooted, as not to be overcome by all
the efforts of authority or of advice.

He went on the perilous voyage of discovery conducted by Captain
Vancouver, and in the course of it, he is said to have experienced
some harsh treatment on the part of the commmander, which seems to
have stamped a new impression on his mind, rendered permanent by the
long period during which it was necessarily concealed.

On Lord Camelford’s return to England, the effects burst forth in acts
of violence against Captain Vancouver, and from that time,

     On each adventure rash he roved,
     As danger for itself he loved.

It is impossible not be struck by a general resemblance between the
two individuals who last possessed Boconnoc, of the families of Mohun
and Pitt. Both seem to have been men of ability and of genius, of
intrepid courage and of honour, fond of enterprise, and with vigour of
body commensurate to their mental energies; but each unfortunately,
obeying the impulse of passion and of strong feelings rather than the
dictates of reason, was hurried on to an untimely fate. The latter
fell by the hand of a person born to the situation of a gentleman, but
in other respects little entitled to that distinction.

The first Lord Camelford might not only claim a full share of the
hereditary talent connected with the names of Lyttelton and of
Pitt;[13] but also literary acquirements and taste obtained under the
guidance of his two uncles William Pitt Lord Chatham, and Lord
Lyttelton. His gratitude to the latter is commemorated at Boconnoc by
a lofty obelisk.

Lord Camelford introduced to the rectory of his parish the Reverend
Benjamin Forster, a contemporary at Cambridge of congenial taste, and
worthy of his friendship, the associate of Gray and of Mason; and with
a mind like theirs suited for retirement and for literary leisure.[14]
In his hours of relaxation he adorned the woods and shades, the vales
and the rivulets, of Boconnoc with descriptive and appropriate
illustrations from ancient and from modern poetry. To the Glebe-house
he applied,

  A little lowly hermitage it was,
    Down in a dale, hard by a forest’s side,
  Far from resort of people that did pass
    In travail to and fro.

Mr. Forster has been long since deceased, his rectory taken down, and
most of his friends departed from this life. His memory is for the
present preserved by a tablet (brevi et ipsa interitura) bearing the
following inscription:

Underneath rest the remains of Benjamin Forster, B.D. of C.C.C.
Cambridge 1760; Lady Camden’s Lecturer at Wakefield in Yorkshire 1766;
Rector of St. Mary Abchurch in London 1772; from thence removed to the
Rectories of Boconock with Braddock in Cornwall, and to Carshayes, St.
Michael, St. Stephens, and St. Dennis, in the same county, 1773.

Born Aug. 7, O.S. 1736. Died Dec. 2, N.S. 1805.

Epitaph written in the 33d year of his age:

  Here, hapless mortal! thy sure refuge find,
    Crost in each fond device, each hope of joy;
  Life’s busy day was not for bliss design’d,
    Toils, struggles, sufferings, its sad hours employ.
  Yet meekly bow to Heaven’s imperious sway,
    Nor deem thyself a prey to unmixt woes;
  The gentler virtues sooth the cares of day,
    And life’s calm eve shall lead to long repose.

       *     *     *     *     *

Finally, Boconnoc-house is distinguished by having been the head
quarters of King Charles the First in August and September 1684, when
the army commanded by General Lord Essex, capitulated at Fowey.

  This parish contains 1772 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1252    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           142   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    212   |    236   |    253   |    259.
  Or somewhat more than 22 per cent. in 30 years.

The Geology of this parish has nothing peculiar or characteristic. Dr.
Boase remarks that the eastern part is a continuation of the barren
downs which extend nearly to Lostwithiel, and that the southern, which
is the fertile part, belongs to the calcarious series of the schistose
group, but that the rocks are too much concealed under the alluvial
soil to allow of their nature being very evidently manifest.


     [12] The exact weight of the diamond is said to be 136¾
     carats. A carat is equal to 3⅙ grains (see the Universal
     Cambist by Dr. Kelly, vol. i. p. 220, article London). It
     weighed therefore 433 grains, very nearly nine-tenths of an
     ounce troy of 480 grains.

     [Illustration: diamond]

     For these 433 grains of diamond, the Regent Duke of Orleans
     is stated to have given 135,000_l._ or two thousand eight
     hundred and eighty-nine pounds troy of standard gold, or
     nearly one ton one hundred and a quarter avoirdupoise; above
     thirty-eight thousand four hundred times its own weight, or
     seven thousand five hundred and eighty times its bulk.

     The Regent and his two successors in the government of
     France, used this diamond as an ornament to their hats on
     occasions of state. It was stolen during the license of the
     great Revolution, but recovered.

     Napoleon had it placed between the teeth of a crocodile,
     forming the handle of his sword, unaware perhaps of how much
     this gem had contributed towards raising up the most
     formidable opponent to his ambition and ultimate
     aggrandisement.

     [13] A series of his letters to Mr. Justice Hardinge has
     been published in Nichols’s Literary Illustrations of the
     Eighteenth Century, vol. vi. pp. 74-139.

     [14] A large quantity of Mr. Forster’s lively correspondence
     with Richard Gough, esq. Director S. A. and John Nichols,
     esq. F.S.A. has been printed in Nichols’s Literary Anecdotes
     of the Eighteenth Century, vol. ix. pp. 648-650, and the
     Literary Illustrations, vol. vi. pp. 290-328, 860-864.




BODMIN.


HALS.

Bodmin is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the north
Helland, south Lanhydrock, west Lanivet, east Cardinham. In Domesday
Roll 1067, or 1087, it was rated by the name of Bod-ran, id est,
command, authority, or jurisdiction share, or division. In some other
ancient manuscripts, Bod-man.

[Mr. Hals gives here a long detailed account of the supposed Bishopric
of Bodmin, and of the Bishops themselves, with a great variety of
collateral incidents; but the late Mr. Whitaker has shown, in his
learned work on “The Cathedral of Cornwall,” that the whole is devoid
of any foundation whatever. It is therefore omitted; and the reader
desirous of information and entertainment is referred to that curious
production of our learned antiquary.]

Algar Earl of Cornwall, successor of Ailmer, (as the Monasticon
Anglicanum, tom. i. p. 213, and tom. ii. p. 205, informs us,) at his
own proper cost and charges re-edified the church of St. Peter at
Bodmin, as it now stands; consisting of three roofs, each sixty
clothyards long, thirty broad, and twenty high, so that for bulk and
magnificence it is parallel to the cathedral of Kirton, and little
inferior to that of Exeter. Earl Algar gave the church to a society of
Augustines or Black Canons.

Afterwards, if Leland’s manuscripts may be credited, those Black
Canons were displaced, and succeeded by St. Benedict’s monks; and then
again those monks were displaced, and succeeded by a nunnery of
Benedictine nuns. Then again, saith he, those nuns were displaced, and
succeeded by secular priests; who also were again displaced, and
Canons Regular, or Black Canons Augustine, restored to their places;
under which circumstance of religious men Leland found it when King
Henry the Eighth sent him into Cornwall, to inspect the orders and
revenues of the religious houses therein. And in this state it was
found by the Commissioners, 26 Henry VIII. when dissolved, at which
time its revenue yearly was valued at 270_l._ 11_s._ Dugdale; 269_l._
11_s._ 11_d._ Speed. Now this value, the reader must observe, was only
the conventionary or annual rent reserved on leases of the priory
land, set out to tenants for 99 years, determinable upon lives, and
the common way of valuing those old rents was after the rate of ten
per cent.; so that 270_l._ rent was then worth 2,700_l._ now worth
6,000_l._ per annum: which lands and rents are now chiefly in the
hands and possession of Godolphin, Buller, Robarts, Morrice, Prideaux,
Vivian, Rashleigh, Nicholls, Moyle, Molesworth, and many others.

The churches appropriated to this priory were, 1. Bodmin, 2. St. Wenn,
3. Withiel, 4. St. Kew, 5. St. Breock, 6. Little Pederick, 7. Padstow,
8. St. Ervan, 9. Crantock, 10. Cubert, 11. St. Colomb-minor, 12.
Tregony, 13. St. Minver, 14. Lanhydrock, and some others, whereof the
priors were either patrons or founders.

The Prior of this church of St. Peter kept his treasurer, his steward,
almoner, hospitalarius, et infirmarius, that took care of sick and
weak beggars and travellers. The priory-house wherein he dwelt is yet
extant, though his domestic chapel and burial-place be dilapidated and
demolished, all contiguous with the church aforesaid.

The jurisdiction and royalty over the river Alan, from Camelford to
Padstow Rock, was given to this Prior by Algar Earl of Cornwall, in
right of his manor of Helston, in this hundred, excepting the right of
free fishing to the tenants thereof; a river famous for infinite
number of those kings of fishes called salmon, which between Midsummer
and Christmas are taken there, reputed, by such as are skilled in the
gusto or palate, the best of that kind in Cornwall (except the salmon
of the Val river, in this county). But, since the dissolution of this
priory by King Henry the Eighth, this royalty is disjointed, if not
dismembered from it, and enjoyed in co-partnership by such as are the
now owners of its lands and revenues, and by some others whose lands
are contiguous with that river; though the now Duchy tenants of the
manor of Helston aforesaid still pay barbe-agu, or bar-ba-gut money,
id est, barbed-spear money, annually to the Duke of Cornwall, who is
Lord thereof, for free fishing with salmon-spears.

The list or catalogue of the names of the Priors of this church is
lost, except Thomas Vivian, the last save one;[15] a man famous in his
days for his piety and charities, as his benefactions make him still
memorable in ours; for he built the rectory-house at Withall, the
mansion-house at Ryalton, the south roof at Edleshayle church, and the
lofty spire and steeple lately upon his prioral, now parochial church
of Bodmin aforesaid, which was all struck down with lightning and
thunder anno Dom. 1699, and since again re-edified as it now stands,
without a spire, at the proper cost and charge of the inhabitants of
Bodmin town and parish.

This Prior Vivian was by the Pope consecrated Bishop of Megara, in
Achaia, a city of Greece. He lies entombed with his bust or skeleton
within a costly and curious stone chest or monument, about seven feet
long, and three feet high above ground, on the top of which is cut at
full length his portraiture as a man, and on this figurative body his
episcopal robes, his mitre on his head, his staff or crosier in his
hand, his face encompassed over with the wings of two cherubim
standing by: somewhat defaced in the interregnum of Cromwell, as a
superstitious monument. This tomb is also adorned round with crosses;
the arms of his Bishopric of Megara, viz. in a field Gules, three
human thigh-bones saltirewise Or, or Proper; the arms of his priory
aforesaid; the arms of England, France, and Ireland; and lastly, that
of his own or his ancestors’ arms, viz. in a field Argent, on a
chevron Azure three annulets, between three bears’ heads erased and
muzzled Sable, on a chief Gules three martlets Or; which are arms of a
strange confused bearing, according to the rules of heraldry, composed
or consisting of two of the honourable ordinaries, a chevron and a
chief, and the same charged with martlets and annulets, of colours
yellow, white, red, blue, and black, charge upon charge, and colours
upon colours; all which monument is surrounded with an ancient and
broken inscription to this purpose:

     Hic tumulatus venerabilis Pater Thomaus Vivian, Megarensis
     Episcopus, hujus domus Prior; qui obiit tertio die Junii,
     anno Dom. 1533. Cujus animæ propitietur Deus. Amen.

This church of the Prior’s, after dissolution of the priory aforesaid,
was converted to a parochial church for the parish and town of Bodmin,
and the secular church of Beni left to fall into utter ruin and decay,
as it now stands; and is discontinued either for use of living or dead
human creatures, the tower only standing, and cattle daily depasturing
in the same, and the cemetery thereof, as in other places.

Also this prioral rectory church, long before its dissolution, was
converted by the Prior into a vicarage church; for in the Inquisition
of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester before mentioned, anno Dom.
1294, Eccles. de Bodmin, in Decanatu de Trigg minor, was taxed to the
Pope’s annats vi_l._ xiii_s._ 4_d._ Vicar ibidem nihil propter
paupertatem. The rectory or patronage now in Prideaux, the Incumbent
Wood (Key), and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, 89_l._ 1_s._ per annum; the borough of Bodmin 178_l._ 12_s._; in
all 267_l._ 13_s._

In Bodmin churchyard is a well-built school-house, built over a very
spacious charnel-house or grott, where are piled up the dry bones of
such men and women as are found in new-made graves, to put the
scholars and townsmen in mind of mortality; and is now commonly called
the Bone-house. This school Queen Elizabeth endowed with about 16_l._
13_s._ 4_d._ per annum revenues out of the Exchequer for ever.

The name Bodmin anciently comprehended no more than the town or
borough itself, as it is now taxed in the Exchequer; for in the
Domesday tax Beni, Lanlaran, now St. Lawrence, and Lantallan, were
districts rated by themselves, though now consorted under that name of
Bodmin parish and town. It is called a burge, or burghs, from the same
Japhetical original as the Cornish word purguse, πυργος [purgus],
turris, a tower, castle, fenced or fortified place, from whence the
Latins had their word burgus, of the same import; and suitable
thereto, notable it is, this town hath in it still a place called
Tower-hill; as also, that every considerable town or burg in Cornwall
heretofore had near it, for its defence, some castle, tower, or
citadel, to defend it from the invasion of enemies. And agreeably to
this interpretation and custom, Bodmin town, upon the east part
thereof, upon a high-mounted hill, hath still extant the ruins and
downfalls of a treble British entrenchment, containing above twelves
acres of ground, formerly and still called Castle Kynock, alias
Cunock, synonymous words, i. e. the King’s, or the supreme and
sovereign castle. (See Truro, Launceston, Saltash, Helston, &c. for
the like.)

Hence it is in the Cornish-British we have πυργες, purges, Anglice
burgess, or a citizen (from whence the Latins had their word
burgensis), which signifies an inhabitant of such a place as kept a
tower, castle, fort, or hold, or had a college-court of purgesses (now
burgesses) in it. And I doubt that, long before the Norman Conquest,
or bishopric here was erected, this town of Bodmin by prescription was
invested with the jurisdiction of a court-leet, (id est, a court that
kept a law-day, or festival,) though the same was not confirmed by a
charter or incorporated before King John, A.D. 1216, granted one
thereto; whereby he privileged the same with the tribunal also of a
mayor, recorder, town clerk, twelve aldermen, and twenty-four
common-councilmen, or assistants, who have power to nominate and elect
a new mayor annually by the majority of voices, as also members of
parliament. The mayor and town clerk, and last preceding mayor,
justices of the peace for one year after within the said borough; the
town clerk during life. This town and borough is held of the King of
Great Britain, and pays annually to the King’s Audit at Launceston
between five and six pounds per annum rent, beyond the records of
time.

By the same charter it was made also one of the towns for coinage of
tin, though long since discontinued (see Lostwithiel for the Tinners’
Charter); and made also the only staple town in Cornwall where in a
public market merchants might carry their goods for wholesale, and
whereby the mayor and town clerk also were authorized to take the
acknowledge of statute staple bonds between party and party as the law
directs.

Now to remove an action depending in this court-leet of Bodmin to any
superior court, the writ must be thus directed:

     Majori et Communi Clerico Burgi sui de Bodmin, in comitatu
     Cornubiæ, salutem.

The chief men within this town, and within the circumstances
aforesaid, are Mr. Philipps, Mr. Bullock, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Bligh, Mr.
Wymond, Mr. May, Mr. Smith, Mr. Tomm.

The precept for electing members of parliament is thus directed:
Majori et Burgensibus Burgi sui de Bodmin, &c.

This town, for number of inhabitants (as in Mr. Carew’s time, 1602)
far exceeds any other town in Cornwall; which is also privileged by
its charter with keeping a weekly market on Saturdays, wherein is
vended of all creatures both living and dead, corn, fish, and fowl,
and all other things necessary for the life of man, in such great
abundance, and at a moderate price, as the same equals if not exceeds
the markets of Tavistock and Exeter, in Devon. It is also
appurtenanced with fairs, upon January 25th, December 6th, Saturday
after Mid-lent Sunday, and on Wednesday before Whitsun-day. There is a
street in this town called Cassiter-street, that is to say,
Woodland-street. (See Falmouth, for Cassiter and Cassiteros.)

I have been told that, within the memory of sixty years last past,
there was extant within this town and parish the remains, ruins, and
dilapidated walls of no less than 13 churches or free chapels, wherein
heretofore God was duly worshipped, perhaps first erected by those
religious persons mentioned by Leland, who had so often been displaced
or turned out from the priory as aforesaid.

But, above all others, there is still extant in this town the stately
church of the Franciscan Friars, dedicated to St. Nicholas, and their
cells, consisting of one roof twenty clothyards high and fifty long,
with two stone-windows, admirable for height, breadth, and
workmanship; which, after the dissolution of their house and order by
King Henry the Eighth, the justices of the peace of this county
appointed for a house of correction for such vagrant and idle persons
as the same afforded, by the name of the Friary and Shire-hall; which
the townsmen taking notice of, soon after converted or profaned it
further to a common market-house, for selling corn, wool, and other
commodities weekly; yea, and within the same is kept yearly several
fairs for selling all sorts of merchandize, the altars being pulled
down, and in the churchyard, or burial-place, a fair for cattle. It
also lately made the tribunal or hall for the judges of assize yearly,
and the justices of the peace in their sessions, and is undoubtedly,
except Westminster Hall, the fairest and best in England.

The stone font of this church for baptizing infants is now converted
to a measure for corn in this hall, which also, as I said, is the
weekly market-house. On the same is an inscription in old characters,
which I leave for abler capacities than mine to interpret.

The founder of those Cordelier or Franciscan Friars was Francis of
Assium, in Italy, who was born about the year 1140. His parents placed
him to school for some time to study the liberal arts and sciences,
and afterwards placed him to the trade and occupation of a merchant,
which in Italy still, as anciently it was amongst the Jews, is so
reputable an employment that even princes themselves are merchants:
which trade or occupation Francis followed, with small gain or
advantage, in a fair and righteous way, for some time, but growing
discontented thereat, and not knowing thereby well how to subsist, he
resolved, as others did, to follow indirect arts and practices to get
more riches, by stealing the duties of such goods and merchandize as
he bought and sold, which then was, and still is, a capital crime in
Italy; and accordingly put the same in practice, and much enriched
himself thereby, though at length his fraud was detected, himself
indicted, tried for his life, and condemned to death for the same.
Whereupon, in order to prevent the sentence inflicted upon him, and to
avoid the halter, he gave the greatest part of his goods and estate to
his prince, to grant or procure his pardon, and the other part to
pious uses, in relieving the poor, and re-edifying and endowing three
churches. Afterwards he fell into such great horror and trouble of
conscience for those facts, and that he was fully informed from Hosea
xii. 7 and 8, that a merchant cannot be without guile, nor a
victualler without sin, it so wrought upon him, that he did not only
renounce his trade of a merchant, but also forsook all worldly
affairs, and took upon himself the vows of obedience, poverty, and
chastity; and under the habit of a grey cover, or scapula, and a coat
of the same, surrounded or girded in the middle with a twisted rope,
cord, or halter, in memory of his deliverance from it and the gallows,
as aforesaid, with naked legs and discalceated feet, he forsook his
house, and went about the country preaching the Gospel gratis,
subsisting only on the alms and charity of his hearers, and what was
wanting in that particular was made up by downright beggary. And in
short time he so far prevailed with the people by his predicatements,
that divers brethren went about with him, following the same manner of
life, under the rules and habit aforesaid, which gave him occasion or
opportunity to lay the foundation of the first convent in Christendom
of his order at Assissium aforesaid, and obtained a confirmation of
his rule from the Pope; and two years after his death, 4th Aug. 1228,
was by him canonized for a saint.

However, let it be remembered here, that afterwards St. Bonaventure,
being at the 18th year of his age entered of this order of St.
Francis, and in the general chapter of Narbonne chosen minister
general of those friars, he then so altered and regulated his rule and
order, or rather reformed it, that ever since it might more aptly be
called the order of St. Bonaventure than that of St. Francis. Which
St. Bonaventure afterwards being made a Bishop, and one of the
Cardinals of Rome, wrote the Life of St. Francis in Latin, and therein
recounted so many stories of his conversion as aforesaid, of his
perfection, religion, reparation of three churches, his sincere,
mortified life, and the manner of preparing creatures for his
refection, his humility, obedience, condescension, and bowing
downwards of himself, his love of poverty, the wonderful supply of his
wants, his affections towards piety, his desire of martyrdom, his
study, and virtuous orations, his skill in Scripture and spirit of
prophecy, his efficacious predicatements, his sacred marks, and holy
chastisements of his body, his patience in undergoing the pangs of
death, 4th Oct. 1226, that in this place I have only room to name
them. And as a surplusage thereto, St. Bonaventure, as also Alosi
Lepomani, Bishop of Seville, ascribe to St. Francis, before and after
his death, the doing of no less than 113 miracles, or supernatural
acts, which, I think, are more than are recorded by the sacred
writings to be done by our Saviour Jesus.

But, notwithstanding all that is done and said by St. Bonaventure in
praise of St. Francis, he did not much rely upon the merit of him or
any other Saint, since it is an established sanction at the end of all
his hymns pertaining to this order of Franciscans,

     Soli gloria tibi, Domine, qui natus es de Virgine.

Now though this Order of St. Francis, after convents were erected and
endowed, for the most part lived in convents under these rules as
aforesaid, without alms or begging, yet a particular sort of them went
abroad to preach the Gospel in parochial churches and free chapels,
where the rector, vicar, curate, or chaplain was no preacher, and
administered the sacraments as occasion required; having, moreover,
committed to their charge or jurisdiction, by the Pope, the
commutation of penance for sins committed; and, because by their rule
they were not to take money, they took the same in corn, wool, fruits,
fields, goods, and chattels, for their Superior. Those kind of
missionaries were called Friars Observants, and went at large as
supervisors, who pretended to a stricter observation of their rule
than the master conventuals that went not abroad. What revenues this
stately church of St. Francis at Bodmin had at its dissolution I know
not, neither doth the Monasticon Anglicanum inform me; besides five
quarterly pence, and twenty penee by the year out of every family or
dwelling-house in Cornwall, that was not excused propter paupertatem.
Supplication of Beggars to Henry the Eighth, p. 2.

Those Franciscan friars, Mendicant or Minors, came not into England
till Henry the Third’s days (since which time this church at Bodmin
must be erected) in all but nine in number, who landed at Dover; five
of which went to Canterbury, where, by the King’s leave, they built
the first convent in England of their order; four went to London, and
had a place given them in St. Nicholas Shambles, anno Dom. 1260, to
erect another convent or monastery, by John Jewyn, merchant. However,
let it be remembered that the Black Friars Mendicant, or Augustines,
were founded by William de Paris, and first brought into England in
the time of William the Conqueror, to whom Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop
of Canterbury tempore William I. at the west end of London, on the
bank of the Thames, founded and endowed there a monastery to them. For
White Friars, or Cistersians, see Kilkhampton; for Dominicans, St.
Dominick. Carmelite Friars were founded at Carmellus, a town in Syria;
as also a latter order of those discalceated friars were founded by
St. Mary de Theresa, of Jesus, of the blessed Lady of Mount Carmel,
1540. She was a native of Castile, and died 4th October, 1582, in the
68th year of her age, and 47th of being religious. She was canonized
by Pope Gregory XV. 12th March 1622. The Friars of St. Francis of
Paula, in Italy, were founded by him 1414; little different from those
others. Finally of these friars: Bishop Usher, in his Discourse of the
Primitive Church, fully demonstrates that, before the Reformation of
religion, besides monks there were in this land, of the five orders,
above thirty thousand begging friars.

At Lan-car, in this parish, (rest-rock, or rock-temple, if ever any
church or chapel was extant here, otherwise, by the rock may be
signified some notable stone-quarry found in those lands,) was the
dwelling of John Mountstephens, Esq. sometime member of parliament for
West Looe, who purchased the same from Mr. Bullock. He was the son of
Mounts or Stephens, alias Mountstephen, of St. Mabyn, and had his
first education under Mr. Stephens, sometime schoolmaster of Bodmin,
to whom at length he became usher; afterwards was clerk or servitor to
William Lilly, Esq. and so became an undergraduate in Oxford; and,
being recommended by him to the notice of the Earl of Sunderland, Lord
President of the Council temp. James II. he made him one of his clerks
or secretaries, which circumstance further brought him to the
knowledge of Jonathan Lord Bishop of Bristol, by whose interest he
obtained a burgess-ship at West Looe for the parliament, and was
afterwards made one of the Commissioners for the King’s Tin-farm in
those parts; by which ways and means he got himself considerable
wealth and reputation.

But, notwithstanding all those his prosperous successes of fortune, in
the month of December, or beginning of January, 1706, aged about 60
years, when he was at London, a member of parliament as aforesaid, and
in his own house till eleven of the clock, one day upon some
discontent went from his company, and so into a more retired
apartment, where he took a razor and cut his own throat, and instantly
fell dead on the spot, the razor by his side all bloody, to the great
terror and amazement of his domestics, who found him in that posture.

Various were the reports and sayings of people upon occasion of this
sad accident; some said it was for that he made addresses of marriage
to a gentlewoman above his degree, who rejected his amours, upon
account of some concubine, or bedfellow, he kept at Truro; others,
with more probability, gave out that he was detected by the Earl of
Sunderland (who raised him) for eighteen years’ space to have been a
French pensioner, and to have received a great sum of money annually
for communicating the secrets of the Queen and Parliament to the
Secretary of the French King, which as soon as he understood, by a
letter shown him under his own hand, he instantly went home to his
lodgings, burnt all his papers, and committed the felo-de-se
aforesaid.

Bo-carne,[16] in this parish, id est, cows, kine, cattle, and white
spar-stones, comparatively rocks, is the dwelling of William Flammock,
Gent. that married Reynolds, and giveth for his arms, out of a
supposed allusion to their name, Argent, a chevron between three
estoiles Sable, (that is, in a wavy or flaming posture,) for flammock,
after the Cornish-British, must be interpreted a flame and smoke;
since the Latin words _flamma_, or flame, or bright burning
fire-sparkle, and _flammans_, burning, flaming, are both derived from
the British word flam; for _exæstuo_ is the proper and native word, to
burn, or flame.

Again, this family indifferently wrote their name Flam-mank,
Flam-manc, id est, in Cornish, flaming or burning glove, sleeve, or
gauntlet; so called, perhaps, for that some of this family was a
notable soldier, and famous in the combat at sword and gauntlet, (viz.
military glove,) or a sleeve and gorget of mail, as the above name.
And flammock may relate to some soldier of this tribe that was as
renowned in his charge with the fusee or firelock, soon after the
invention of guns: for Camden, in his Remains, tells us that in Edward
the Third’s French wars gunaria, or gunarii, had its pay; which was
before the invention of guns in Germany.

But if flammeck, flammeg, flammock, be a monosyllable, and not a
compound or conjugated word, it signifies in British blear-eyed-ness,
or one that hath a sparkling or flaming eye, either by natural or
accidental infirmity, an obstruction of sight.

I take this gentleman to be the lineal descendant of that Mark Le
Flemanc who was possessed of 16_l._ rents in lands and tenements in
Cornwall, 40th Henry III. (Carew’s Survey,) that were held by the
tenure of knight’s service, and was no knight; who was obliged by his
tenure to send into the King’s army a man and horse armed with lorica,
capello ferri, gladio, et cultello, a breastplate, a brigandine, an
iron headpiece, a sword and cuttler. As was also that Thomas Flammock,
a lawyer, in the reign of King Henry VII. 1496, who, together with
Michael Joseph, a smith of these parts, stirred up the Cornish people
to a rebellion against that prince, under the pretence of the severity
of a land tax, though it was but a subsidy of an hundred and twenty
thousand pounds, charged by Act of Parliament for one year of the
thirty-seven shires of England, towards the Scotch war; which, after
the severest imposition, could not amount to above 2,500_l._ on this
county. But really the ground and design of this insurrection was to
depose King Henry from his crown and dignity, and in his stead to set
up Edmund de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, the true heir male of the House
of York, sister’s son to King Edward the Fourth. Which being well
understood by the inhabitants of Cornwall, gave Flammock and Joseph
opportunity to raise such an army, as thereby to become so formidable
that John Basset, of Tehidy, then Sheriff, with his posse comitatus,
dared not encounter them. Whereupon they marched with their army,
consisting of about six thousand men, from Bodmin to Launceston, and
from thence into Devon; where also they appeared so tremendous that
Sir William Carew, Knight, then Sheriff thereof, with his posse
comitatus, would not venture a battle with them, but suffered them
(either through fear or affection) to pass through his Bailiwick into
Somersetshire, and so Taunton there; in which place they slew the
Provost Perrin, a commissioner for the subsidy aforesaid, and then
advanced to Wells; where James Touchet, Lord Audley, knowing the
mystery of their design, confederated with them, and became their
general. Soon after, they published their declaration of pretended
grievances, chiefly concerning the said land tax, and wholly laying
the blame of that exaction upon John Martin, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Reginald Bray, Knt. two of the King’s Council, whom they would
have removed from that station.

Upon which pretence (and the secret reserve aforesaid) the people,
being better affected to the House of York than to that of Lancaster,
suffered these rebels quietly to march from Wells to Salisbury, from
Salisbury to Winchester, and from thence into Kent, where they
expected great aid and assistance; but when they came there, contrary
to promise and to expectation, no person came to their help: but on
the contrary, for the King there appeared in arms against them, with
the Earl of Kint, the Lord Abergavenny, Sir John Brook, Lord Cobham,
and divers other gentlemen, with great forces, to stop their further
proceedings that way. Upon which disappointment, the rebels turned
their march towards London, and encamped upon Blackheath, about four
miles from thence; where they had not long been before they were
encountered by Giles Lord Daubeny, King Henry’s general, who, after a
short conflict with them, and the loss of three hundred soldiers on
the King’s part, and two thousand on the Rebels’ side, the remainder
of them fell into despair, threw down their arms, craved mercy, and
yielded themselves prisoners. The King pardoned many; but of the chief
authors of the insurrection none. The Lord Audley was committed to
Newgate, and from thence drawn to Tower-hill in his coat-armour
(painted on paper), reversed and torn, where he was beheaded. Flammock
and Michael Josepp the smith, were hanged, drawn, and quartered, and
has their heads and quarters pitched upon stakes set up in London and
other places, June 26, 1496. [See Lord Bacon’s History of King Henry
the Seventh. An opinion is still prevalent in Cornwall, that after
themselves the people of Kent are the most brave in England.]

This town and parish of Bodmin is also notable for the rendezvous of
Perkin Warbeck’s army from St. Michell’s Mount, which he had also
raised to the number of six thousand in opposition to King Henry the
Seventh, anno Dom. 1498, as the pretended Richard of Shrewsbury,
second son to King Edward the Fourth; where he was proclaimed King of
England and France, and Lord of Ireland, by the name of Richard the
Fourth: but he and his army at length underwent the same fate as the
former rebels did. (See St. Michael’s Mount, in this our History.)

Here also was the rendezvous of the Cornish rebels under Humphrey
Arundell, Esq. anno 3 Edward VI. who pitched their camp upon Castle
Kynock aforesaid, and imprisoned such gentlemen as would not willingly
ride with them, till the King’s forces vanquished the one, and
delivered the other, at and near Exeter. (See St. Hillary.)

Now Sir Anthony Kingston, Provost Martial of the King’s Army, coming
from Exeter to do justice in Cornwall according to the law of arms
against such rebels as had escaped thence, executed Thomas Boyeer, the
mayor of this town, and the miller’s man, is set forth in Mr. Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall, p. 124 (p. 292 of Lord Dunstanville’s Edition).

In this parish is St. Laurence, so called from the chapel dedicated to
his guardianship. The name is derived from the Latin words, laureat
and ensis, that is, a laureat sword, or a sword of triumph. St.
Laurence was a native of Osca, in Spain, born about the year 280. He
received holy orders from St. Xysten, who was raised to the chair of
St. Peter in 257. During the persecution by the Emperor Valerian, St.
Laurence, finding that not even the sacred vestments nor the
decorations of the church were safe from profane hands, availed
himself of the office of chief deacon, which he then held, to dispose
of the whole, and to distribute the wealth thus acquired among the
indigent of his spiritual brethren. This having been made known to the
Prefect of Rome, a man devoted to the worship of false gods, but more,
as the biographer observes, to the adoration of silver and gold, he
demanded from St. Laurence the riches of the church, who promised in
three days to produce them; and on the third day he returned with the
poor persons among whom their value had been divided. When the
Prefect, transported with rage, is said to have ordered his
destruction by the most cruel death. The legend reports him to have
been fastened on an iron bed, and consumed by fire placed under it.
Hence the familiar emblem attributed to this martyr, of a gridiron.
The event is referred to the 10th of Aug. 261.

In this parish the town, or rather village of St. Laurence, is
situated between two hills, and with a pleasant river running through
its street, about a mile and a half west from Bodmin. In it stands a
lawres hospital, that is to say, a hospital for lepers (loure, or
lower, in British is a leper), which hath good endowment of lands and
revenues appertaining thereto, founded by the piety and charity of the
well-disposed people of this county in former ages, for the relief,
support, and maintenance of all such people as should be visited with
that sickness called elphantiasy, in Latin lepra or elphantia, in
English leprosy, in British lowerery; being a white infectious scurf
running all over the bodies of such persons as are tainted therewith.
Which disease heretofore in many families was hereditary, and infected
the blood for generations.

This disease, though common in Asia, was thought to have been first
brought into England from Egypt by seamen and traders, so that
generally it spread itself over this kingdom about the year 1100. Soon
after which, a general collection of charitable benevolences was
gathered throughout the land by one of the Mowbrays, a gentleman
tainted with the disease, for erecting and endowing the lazar-house or
hospital of Burton, in Leicestershire, to which place was made subject
all other hospitals of this sort in England, as the Master of Burton
Hospital was afterwards made subject to the Master of St. John’s
Hospital of Jerusalem, in London, and then, soon after the erection of
lazar-houses throughout this kingdom, was invented that writ called
Leproso amovendo, for removing a leper from his country-house to the
hospital. But the custom in this place was such, that none were to be
admitted by the governors of the same for the time being, unless the
person so brought in paid them 5_d._ a pot for dressing their meat, a
purse and a penny in it to receive alms. At present I hear of no
lepers in this hospital, nor any person visited with this disease in
Cornwall: however, daily in the chapel of Lawrence, by the
townspeople, God is duly worshipped by a chaplain in deacon’s orders,
who reads divine service to them according to the church of England;
and at three several times at least in the year the Vicar of Bodmin,
and Rector of Lannerat, for a small stipend preach and administer the
sacraments to them. Infants baptized, and the dead bodies thereof
buried, at Bodmin church.

The lands, customs, and privileges of this lazar-house,[17] or lower
hospital, were much augmented or enlarged, and also confirmed by a
charter from Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning of her reign, with
the jurisdiction of a court-leet within the precincts of its manor of
Ponteby, (id est, by the ford or bridge whereon the town of St.
Lawrence is situate,) the white-rod erected or held up yearly whilst
the court is sitting. It is also by that charter privileged with a
weekly market, to be kept on Wednesday, within the town of St.
Lawrence, though of late discontinued; as also with fairs yearly on
the 10th of August and the 18th of October.


TONKIN.

In respect to the etymology of the name Bodmin, or Bodman, I have no
difficulty. I looke upon the word as Saxon-Kernawish, bode and man, or
bode-men in the plural, which may safely, and without a catachræsis,
be interpreted, the preacher-man, or men. That bode signifies priest,
or preacher, in the Cornish, the Gaelic, and other cognate tongues, I
confirm by the authority of Alfred, the Saxon grammarian, and of
Verstegan, from which is derived our modern Kernawish word for a
priest.

And this sense is preserved in the names of divers other churches
throughout the land; as in the hundred of Weston, Herefordshire, where
we find Boddenham Vicarage, bod-den-ham, preacher-man-dwelling, den
being in Kernawish synonymous with man.

[The remainder of Mr. Tonkin’s narrative agrees so nearly with that of
Mr. Hals as not to require its insertion.]


WHITAKER.

“The paroch chirch standith at the est end of the town, and is a fair
large thyng,” says Leland, an author with whom Mr. Hals had no
acquaintance (though the Itinerary of that author was published in
1710, and in some years immediately following; and the Collectanea in
1715); “there is a cantuarie chapel at th’est ende of it.” This is the
present school, situated a few yards east of the eastern end, raised
upon vaults, ascended by steps, entered by an arched door of stone
peaked, having a large arched window peaked; at the east two windows
in the arch, two on the south, arched and peaked; with three stalls of
stone on the south, near the eastern end. The space below, lately a
bone-house to the church, now atttached to the school, must formerly
have been a walk under the vault.

“Bodmyn hath a market on every Saturday, lyke a fair for the
confluence of people.” (Itin. ii. 114.) Bodmin was then at the height
of its glory: it began soon afterwards to sink. The many decayed
houses, says Carew, 120 years afterwards, prove the town to have been
once very populous. What occasioned this decay was the Reformation,
probably, throwing the revenues of the priory, and of the house of
friars, into the hands of men laical and distant.

“There was a good place of Gray Freres in the south syde of Bodmin
town. One John of London, a merchaunt, was the beginner of this house.
Edmund Erle of Cornewaul augmentid it. There lay buried in the Gray
Freres Sir Hugh and Sir Thomas Peverel, Knightes, and benefactors to
the house.”――(Leland.) The remains of this form the south side of an
open space, which must have been the quadrangle or court of the
Friars, and have been surrounded by its buildings, on the east, the
north, and the west. On the west end, near the grand door in these
remains, was the church-yard, or burying-place, which Mr. Hals says
was made a fair for cattle; and here were very lately found, by
sinking a saw-pit, bones in a considerable quantity.

The remains themselves are, a long and lofty room, once a church, but
since used as Mr. Hals describes. It has a fine window at the east
end, peaked in the arch; the only part of it that is not blocked up
being very pleasingly broken into small parts by mullions of stone.

It has another arch for a window to the west, but not so fine; and
four arches on the north and south sides, all peaked, but those most
easterly more sharply than the others. What Mr. Hals calls a font is
still there; and a font it assuredly is, the Friars having just as
much right to a font as to a burying-place; but the inscription upon
it is on two or three squares of the hexagon in which the font is
shaped, and is too modern to mean any thing.

“There is a chapel of St. ―――― at the west ende of the toune. There
is another chapel in Bodmyn beside that at the west ende of the toune,
and an almose house, but not endowid with landes.” (Leland, Itin. ii.
114, 115.) Query, says Tanner, respecting the latter, Whether this
alms-house was St. Anthony’s or St. George’s? for the will of John
Killigrew, proved A.D. 1500, gives legacies Pauperibus Sancti Antonii
de Bodmyn, et Pauperibus Sancti Georgii de Bodmyn. Both these chapels
had an almshouse. The latter is that chapel which stood on the summit
of a hill north of Bodmin, called Berry, from some castle or fort upon
it, I suppose, and giving name to the valley below it, Berrycoomb, or
Bereum. The remains of this chapel are merely a tower, neat but
slight, making a considerable object to the road from its elevation,
yet small in its rise, or its pitch, and carrying a face of no great
antiquity, being merely three hundred years old. The town, says
tradition, stood formerly here, was burnt down, and then removed to
its present site. That this is false as history we know for certain,
as we know the town to have been where it now stands, but that the
town in the days of its high prosperity had shot out hither.

“The showe and the principale of the toun of Bodmyn,” says Leland, “is
from west to est along in one streate.” (Itin. ii. 114.) There were
(says Mr. Hals upon the credit of information) within these sixty
years past no less than thirteen churches, or free chapels, remaining
either whole or ruined in the town and parish, and this was one.

The church of the priory, notes Mr. Hals, after the dissolution of
religious houses, was converted to a parochial church. It was, indeed,
such from the beginning: so Leland tells us concerning it in his time,
“that the parish church standeth at the east end of the town,” &c. It
was even converted as such from a rectorial to a vicarial church
before 1290.

This prioral rectory church, Mr. Hals himself informs us, (long before
the dissolution, and therefore not after the dissolution of the
priory, as said before,) was converted by the Prior into a vicarage
church; for in the Inquisitions of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, Ecclesia de Bodman was rated to the Pope’s annats at 6_l._
13_s._ 4_d._ Vicar. ejusdem nihil propter paupertatem. So directly
does Mr. Hals confute himself; but the words of the record are not
cited fairly, and are in reality these:

     Ecclesia de Bodmynia vi_l._ xiii_s._ 4_d._
     Vicar. ejusdem xi_s._

Nor could any one of the thirteen be a free chapel, as no such chapels
existed in the first or in the second valuation, and therefore none
are mentioned therein.

Vivian’s “tomb is adorned round with crosses.” In truth, it has only
one, and that is upon the northern side. “The arms of his Bishopric of
Megara,” the arms of this Priory, and lastly, “those of his own or of
his ancestors.” But there are three fishes repeated as arms twice; and
Mr. Hals affirms himself that the jurisdiction and royalty over the
river Alan, from Camelford to Padstow Rock, was given to this Priory
by Algar Earl of Cornwall; and in further testimony of Algar’s
donation of the royalty of this river, he gave for the perpetual arms
of him and his priory, In a field Azure, three salmon-fishes in fess
barwise Argent; which arms were lately extant in all the church
windows of the churches under the priory.

Castle Kynock, as called by some to this day, but called simply the
Castle by the generality, lies more than half a mile to the
south-west, has two ditches and two ramparts; the outer are very deep
and very massy, the inner are much shallower and slighter. It takes in
the whole crest of the hill, the ground within rising from the sides
to the summit; is circular in form, because the hill is so; and has
its only entrance on the east, denoted as an original entrance by the
bridge of earth, as it were, which leads across the hollow of the
ditches into it. The whole is double, I believe, to the extent that
Mr. Hals gives it; and, from the position of the entrance on the east,
appears to be Roman in its origin.


THE EDITOR.

It is not my intention to enter on any discussion relative to the
remote and obscure antiquity of Bodmin. Tanner, in his Notitia
Monasticon, says Bodmin, or Bodmanna.

There was a church built here to the memory of St. Petroc, a religious
man born in Wales, but who, coming from Ireland, is said to have built
a monastery on the north coast of Cornwall, about A.D. 520, and to
have been there buried; but his body being afterwards removed to
Bodmin, a church was built to his memory, and the episcopal see for
Cornwall was believed to have been therein placed by King Edward the
Elder and Archbishop Plegmund, A.D. 705. Here King Æthelstan is
reported to have met with old Saxon, or rather British, monks
following the Rule of St. Benedict, to whom he granted so great
privileges and endowments that he is accounted founder of the
monastery here, about A.D. 926. That settlement was destroyed by the
Danish pirates, A.D. 981; yet the religious continued here under
several shapes, and much alienation of their lands, both before and
after the Conquest, till about the year 1120, when Earl Algar, with
the King’s license, and the consent of William Warlewach, Bishop of
Exeter, re-established this religious-house, and placed therein
regular canons of the Order of St. Austin, who continued till the
general suppression, when it was styled the Priory of St. Mary and St.
Petroc, and was valued at 270_l._ per annum according to Dugdale, and
289_l._ 12_s._ according to Speed. The site, with the demesnes, were
granted, 36th of Henry VIII. to Thomas Sternhold, one of the first
translators of the Psalms into English metre.

Any one desirous of learning all that can be known or conjectured
respecting the Western Bishopric, is referred to “The Ancient
Cathedral of Cornwall historically surveyed,” by the Rev. John
Whitaker; where that subject and various others are discussed, with
the eloquence, ability, erudition, and confidence, usually displayed
by that eminent writer; who appears always to assume throughout the
whole of his work the very questionable fact, that monastic
historians, distant both in time and in space from the events which
they relate, are possessed of perfect information, and that their
narratives flow with unerring accuracy, at a period when none of the
inventions for rapidly carrying intelligence, and for stamping it with
the authentic impression of public notoriety, had yet occurred to the
human mind.

I willingly leave these recondite, and, in truth, little interesting
researches, for others of a more modern date, the objects of which are
still extant, and their effects influencing the present times. Those
connected with Bodmin we owe, in a great measure, to the ability, the
industry, and the laudable zeal of Mr. John Wallis, the present vicar,
on whom I would readily bestow more praise, if his merits had not
rendered commendation from me superfluous.

One event, however, intermediate between the Saxon antiquities of
Bodmin and those disclosed by Mr. Wallis, is so very curious, and so
illustrative of opinions and of habits long passed away, that I cannot
help inserting the details of it from Benedictus Abbas, an author of
high reputation, Abbot of the great monastery of St. Peter at
Medeshamsted, or Peterborough, and contemporary with the transactions
which he relates.

In his work “De Vita et Gestis Henrici secundi et Ricardi primi,” ex
editione Thomæ Hearnii, Oxon. 1735, 2 vols. 8vo. vol. i. pp. 228-229.

Eodem anno, quidam Canonicus de Abbatiâ Bothmeniæ, quæ in partibus
Cornubiæ sita est, Martinus nomine, statim post Epiphaniam Domini,
furtivè asportavit Corpus Sancti Petroci; et cum eo fugiens
transfretavit, et illud secum detulit usque ad Abbaciam Sancti
Mevenni, sitam in partibus Minoris Britaniæ. Quod cùm Rogero Priori
Bothmeniæ & Canonicis ibidem Deo servientibus innotuisset, predictus
Prior, consilio Fratrum suorum, D’n’m Regem Angliæ Henricum, filium
Matildæ Imperatricis, adiit, ut, per ipsius potentiæ auxilium, Corpus
Sancti Petroci, quod per furtum amiserant, recuperassent. Ad
instantiam autem illorum, concessit eis præfatus Rex auxilium suum; &
mandavit per litteras suas Rollando de Dinamno Justiciaris Britanniæ,
quod sine dilatione faceret illud Corpus reddi. Audito itaque mandato
Regis, prædictus Rollandus venit cum armatâ manu & potenti ad Abbatiam
Sancti Mevenni, et præcepit illud corpus reddi; quod cùm Abbas et
Monachi ejusdem loci reddere nollent, ipse minas addidit, jurans se
per vim, nisi celerius redderetur, extrahere velle illud. Quod ipsi
audientes, noluerunt iram prefati Regis Angliæ incurrere: sed beatum
Corpus illud reddiderunt prænominato Rogero Priori Bothmeniæ, die
Dominicâ Clausi Pentecosten, festo scilicet Sanctorum Gervasii et
Prothasi, Martyrum, scilicet 13 kalendas Julii; redditumque est ei
corpus illud Sanctum cum omni integritate, & sine aliquâ diminutione,
Abbate & Monachis Ecclesiæ Sancti Mevenni, jurantibus super Reliquias
ejusdem Ecclesiæ quòd de Corpore illo nihil retinerent, sed idem
Corpus non alternatum redderent. Quod cùm factum fuisset, prænominatus
Prior Bothmeniæ cum gaudio in Angliam rediens, Corpus beati Petroci in
Teca Eburnea reconditum, usque Civitatem Wintoniæ detulit; et cùm in
conspectu Regis allatum fuisset: Rex, viso eo & adorato, permisit
prædictum Priorem in pace, cum Sancto suo, ad Abbatiam Bothmeniæ
redire.[18]

Which may be thus translated:

     “In the same year (1177), immediately after the Epiphany of
     our Lord, a certain Canon of the Abbey of Bodmin, in
     Cornwall, by name Martinus, secretly took away the body of
     St. Petroc. Flying with it, he passed beyond the seas, and
     carried the body to the Abbey of Saint Mevennus, in Lesser
     Britany.

     “When this transaction became known to Roger the Prior of
     Bodmin, and to the Canons who served God in the same place,
     the aforesaid Prior, with the advice of his brethren, went
     to Henry King of England, son of the Empress Matilda, that
     by his powerful aid they might again get possession of the
     body of St. Petroc, of which they had been fraudulently
     deprived. The King granted his aid to their entreaty, and by
     his letters commanded Rollandus de Dinamnus, the Justiciary
     of Britanny, that, without any delay, he should cause the
     body to be restored. When, therefore, Rollandus had received
     the King’s command, he came with a powerful and armed band
     to the Abbey of St. Mevennus, and ordered that the body
     should be given up; and when the Abbat and the Monks were
     unwilling to comply, he added threats, that, unless the body
     were yielded immediately, he would use force and take it;
     which when they heard, they feared to incur the displeasure
     of the King of England, and therefore restored that blessed
     body to the before-named Roger, Prior of Bodmin, on the
     Lord’s Day (Clausi Pentecostes), being the feast of St.
     Gervasius and of St. Prothasius, martyrs, the thirteenth
     before the calends of July (June the 19th). And that sacred
     body was restored in all its integrity, without the least
     diminution; the Abbat and Monks of St. Mevennus having sworn
     on the relics belonging to their church that they had not
     retained any part of the body, but had restored it wholly
     unaltered.

     “When this was done, the before-named Prior of Bodmin,
     returning with joy into England, brought the body of the
     blessed Petroc, closed in an ivory case, to the City of
     Winchester. And when it was brought into the King’s
     presence, the King, having seen and adored it, permitted the
     Prior to return in peace with his Saint charge to the Abbey
     of Bodmin.”

It would appear that such depredations must have frequently occurred,
since one precisely similar, but not followed by a restoration of the
relics, took place in the neighbouring monastery of St. Neot. In this
case, the stolen body of the Saint, having been enshrined at
Eynesbury, in Huntingdonshire, bestowed his name as a new appellation
to the place. See “A Description, accompanied by sixteen coloured
plates, of the Church of St. Neot, in Cornwall,” by J. P. Hedgeland, 1
vol. 4to. 1830, with Illustrations by Davies Gilbert.

Mr. Wallis has collected a very great variety of curious and
interesting particulars respecting this town and parish, and given
them to the public in a work entitled, “The Bodmin Register; or,
Collections relative to the past and present State of the Parish of
Bodmin.” And, in doing so, he has proved that the antiquities of a
county cannot in any way be illustrated, except by the exertions of
individuals locally residing in the district to which their attentions
are directed, and that from zeal and ability in such persons every
thing may be expected.

The following are extracts from this publication:

The benefice is a vicarage in the gift of Lord de Dunstanville,
situated in the Deanery of Trigg Minor, and in the hundred of Trigg.
The following are the dimensions of the church: length 151 feet,
breadth 63 feet. The greater part was built in the reign of King
Edward the Fourth. It was roofed in 1472, as appears by an inscription
on the cornice on the northern side of the south aile of the chancel.
The northern chancel and the tower appear to be of an earlier date.
The walls of the tower are eight feet thick at the base, made for the
support of a lofty spire, which was destroyed by lightning, between
seven and eight o’clock on Saturday evening, December the 9th, 1699.
The present awkward pinnacles were then erected: three of them are
dangerous from the decay of the stone.

The ancient building in the church-yard, adjoining to the
vicarage-house, was, it is believed, a chantry chapel dedicated to St.
Thomas. The interior, 44 feet 9 inches by 19 feet, was used till
lately for the free grammar-school. It is now converted to a national
school for girls. Under is a crypt or bone-house.

The isolated tower at Berry, on the north of the town, belonged to the
chapel of the Holy Rood. The building of this tower was commenced on
the 12th of September, 17th of King Henry VII. 1501.

Since the year 1814, both the church and church-yard, which were in a
very ruinous and neglected state, have been greatly altered and
improved.

Over the porch are the remains of two small rooms, each about eleven
feet square, formerly the record and the council rooms of the
corporation. The floor of the higher one, the record room, gave way
about eighty years ago, as some gentlemen were inspecting the
documents. In the lower room some valuable records had remained for a
long time neglected, till in the year 1807 or 1808 they were removed
to the guild-hall, and there examined and arranged. They contain many
curious particulars relative to the history of the parish, and
incidentally of the county, during a period of five hundred years, the
oldest document bearing date in the 14th Edward II. (1320). Among them
is a charter of the 36th Edward III. (1362); another, in good
preservation, of the 3d year of Richard II. (1380), having reference
to the reigns of Henry the First and Second. A minute of the receipts
and payments for the rebuilding of the church, in the years 1469,
1470, and 1471; and also for the erection of Berry Tower, in 1501; the
contract with Matthy More, carpenter, for making the pulpit and open
seats throughout the church in 1491, the carved remains of which are
at present much admired; Resolutions of the Corporation on the
destruction of the spire in 1699; also a Petition to King Henry the
Eighth, on the eve of the Reformation, conveying some ludicrous
charges against the Prior; with various others.

In the north chancel is the altar-tomb of Prior Vivian, the
inscription on which has been inserted in page 76. The tomb was
repaired, and placed between two pillars of the chancel, in 1819, by
the late Sir Vyell Vyvyan, of Trelowarren.

The very splendid organ was given, in the year 1775, by Mr. James
Laroche and Mr. George Hunt, at that time Members for the town.

Mr. Wallis enters into a very minute detail of particulars highly
interesting to the immediate neighbourhood, but which would occupy too
much space in a general parochial history of Cornwall.

The carving in the church is indeed greatly admired, but a large part
of that admiration is excited by the appropriate and judicious manner
in which it has been rendered ornamental by the present vicar.

The inscriptions on various monuments are noticed by Lysons, and other
writers.

But a splendid addition has been recently made to the decorations of
the church by Lord De Dunstanville, on his retiring from the office of
recorder in the corporation. The large east window of the chancel is
entirely filled with painted glass, and the middle part contains a
well-drawn representation of the Ascension.

  Bodmin parish contains 5279 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
      returned to Parliament in 1815:
    The Town                     7784
    The Parish                   3077
                                 ――――      10,861    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831:
    The Town                     1012  0
    The Parish                    318 10     1330   10    0

  Population,  in 1801: | in 1811: | in 1821: | in 1831:
    The Town      1951  |  2050    |  2902    |  3375.
    The Parish     348  |   383    |   376    |   407.
                 ――――――   ――――――――   ――――――     ――――――
   Total          2299     2383       3278       3782
  Increase on a hundred in 30 years, sixty-four and a half per cent.


GEOLOGY.

Dr. Boase says of the Geology: the town of Bodmin is about midway
between two insulated groups of granite, and it is principally built
of a stone quarried on the spot, and which well deserves the attention
of geologists. This rock in the deeper parts of the quarry becomes
more blue; but its common appearance presents various shades of drab
or fawn colour, with irregular spots of an ochreous yellow. It breaks
into thick laminæ, or slabs, which are traversed by parallel joints;
so that, with care, this stone may be obtained in oblong quadrangular
masses. It is soft; sometimes so much so as to lose its cohesion. The
substance appears to be almost entirely argillaceous.

All the cultivated parts of this parish, north and north-west of the
town, rest on this rock: and the barren parts on a schistose rock,
which is very siliceous, affording by its partial disintegration no
more than a shallow, meagre soil; silica predominating in the one, and
argillaceous earth, or alumine, in the other. The characteristic rocks
of these genera occur next to the granite in the parishes of Blisland
and St. Breward, and they will be noticed in the description of the
latter parish.

       *     *     *     *     *

The editor is aware that the article Bodmin has extended to a very
great length. It might easily have been extended much further from
interesting materials collected by Mr. Wallis relative to the past and
present state of this chief seat of our ecclesiastical establishments.
On their abolition the town unquestionably fell into great decay, till
about the middle of the last century, when roads were made in all
directions, and Bodmin, from being almost inaccessible by the modern
system of travelling, became an extensive thoroughfare; the market has
grown into one of the first in Cornwall, and the whole town is
renovated by trade and industry.

If any further apology is required, the editor hopes that he may be
excused for some partiality towards a place which he has represented
in eight successive Parliaments, after as many unanimous elections.


     [15] Speccot.

     [16] Bocarne, or Boscarne, seems evidently the house [on] a
     rock.

     [17] This establishment having completely degenerated, and
     become a mere receptacle for persons of the very worst
     description, the charter was, about twenty years ago,
     declared forfeited; and the revenues have been attached to
     the county hospital, reserving a preference for lepers over
     all other patients, if any such should present themselves.

     [18] A similar account of this curious affair is given by
     Hoveden, another contemporary author, who continued the
     history of England from the year 731, where that of Bede
     ceases, to 1202, the fourth year of King John.

     A.D. 1177. Eodem Anno, Martinus, canonicus regularis
     ecclesiæ de Bomine, furtivè asportavit corpus Sancti
     Petroci, et fugiens secum detulit in Britanniam ad Abbatiam
     Sancti Mevenni. Quo comperto, Rogerus Prior Ecclesiæ de
     Bomine, cum saniore parte capituli sui, adiit Regem Angliæ
     Patrem; et adversus cùm effecit, quòd præcipiendo mandavit
     Abbati et Conventui Sancti Mevenni, ut sine delatione
     redderent corpus Beati Petroci, Rogero Priori de Bomine,
     jurantes super Sancta Evangelia, et super sanctorum
     reliquias, quòd ipsi idem corpus, et non alternatum, cum
     omni integritate reddiderunt.

     But King Athelstan is said to have given a part of the
     bones, the hair, and the garments of this saint to the
     church of St. Peter at Exeter.




BOTUSFLEMING.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north, Pillaton;
south, Salt-Ash, and part of St. Stephen’s; east, Landulph; west,
Landrake. For the first name, it signifies “Flemings’ Parish;” for
blo, bleau, pleu, in Cornish, is of that signification (viz. a
parish); for the second name, it signifies “Flemings,” making amends,
or supplying defects (see Verstegan on the word Bote), and seems from
the name to be a church founded or endowed by some gentlemen of that
name, in order for the commutation of penance for sins committed, and
to pray for the founder’s soul, his ancestors, and relatives; by which
expedients most religious houses and churches heretofore were built.
Originally these Flemings came from Stoke Fleming in Devon, so called,
for that once a nobleman of Flanders resided there, and was lord
thereof: one of whose posterity, tempore Richard I. in this place,
held by the tenure of knight’s service seven knights’ fees, by the
name of Stephen Flandrensis (Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 48), who
probably was the founder of this church, still bearing his name. His
son Richard Flandrensis was sheriff of Cornwall three years, from the
third to the sixth year of King John’s reign. Finally, the estate,
name, and blood of those Flemings, tempore Henry IV. ended in a
daughter and heir, which was married to John Coplestone, of
Coplestone, in the county of Devon.

This district of Bote-Fleming, at the time of the Norman Conquest, was
rated under the name of Pillaton, still contiguous therewith. But at
the time of the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
into the value of benefices in Cornwall 1294, in order to the Pope’s
annats, Ecclesia de Bote-fflemmen in Decanatu de Est Wellshire, was
rated iii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £16. 15_s._; and
the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, £103. 14_s._

Mutten-ham, id est, the Mutton dwelling or habitation, alias
Mott-an-ham, the meeting or court dwelling, in the year 1689 was the
dwelling of my kind friend John Waddon, Esq. (a justice of peace and
deputy-governor of Pendennis Castle for King James, under John Earl of
Bath); in which house and place his lordship first treated with the
Prince of Orange’s Commissioners, in order to render into his
possession the castles of Pendennis and Plymouth, which soon after was
performed, on condition of the Earl’s holding his former dominion as
governor of those places under him; whereupon he caused the Prince’s
declarations to be first proclaimed or published in those garrisons
amongst the soldiers; who received and heard the same with great joy,
shouts, and acclamations, to the utter destruction of King James’s
jurisdiction and power in Cornwall and Devon, and establishing that
prince’s.

At this time were dispersed those rhymes, said to be made by father
Peters:

    “Henricus Octavus
     Sold the land that God gave us;
     But Jacobus Secundus
     Shall refund us.”

The dispersion of which two papers, made all possessors of church
lands and impropriators, together with all rectors and vicars of
churches in Cornwall (except Mr. Beauford of Lantegles, and Mr.
Polwhele of Newland,) to renounce their allegiance to King James, and
to take an oath of fealty to the Prince of Orange, after his accession
to the crown of England.


TONKIN.

I shall take leave to add this interpretation of the words making up
the name of this parish. Bote signifies help, succour, aid, or
advantage; as in Bridgebote, Burgbote, Ploughbote, &c.; and Fleming,
from its ancient lords the Flemings, which family was heretofore of
good esteem in this county. In the times of Richard I. and of Henry
III., the Flemings are recorded as having large possessions in
Cornwall.


THE EDITOR.

The following very extraordinary occurrence has taken place with
respect to the estate of Hatt in this parish.

A brother of the last Mr. William Symons went through his clerkship as
an attorney with Mr. Rashleigh at St. Austell. He there formed an
attachment to a respectable young woman, but in a situation of life so
much inferior to his own as to excite a violent opposition against
this marriage on the part of his friends. In consequence Mr. Symonds
suddenly disappeared; no trace could be discovered, nor was any
information received about him, either by his relations or by the
deserted object of his affection.

The elder brother died unmarried, and his sisters or their families
took possession of his property; till, about forty years after Mr.
Symonds had left Cornwall, a young man claimed the whole as his eldest
son, and finally substantiated his claim by the verdict of a jury, and
to the entire satisfaction of a full court. His father had disappeared
about the year 1780; he had employed himself in various humble, but
not disreputable occupations, married, and finally settled in
Liverpool, where he was accidentally drowned. His family then first
acquired, from inspecting his papers, any knowledge of Cornwall, or of
the stock from whence they were derived; they found his articles of
clerkship, with various letters and documents, which placed his
identity beyond all doubt, and the son now possesses the manor house,
with a fair private gentleman’s estate.

  This parish contains 995 statute acres.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1887    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                       223    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    210   |    237   |    297   |    279.
  Increase on a hundred in 30 years 32.86, or nearly 33 per cent.
  Present Rector, Rev. William Spry, instituted 1826.

This parish is said by Doctor Boase not to be favourable for
geological pursuits, the rocks being generally covered with a fertile
soil; they belong, however, to the calcareous species.




BOYTON.


HALS.

Boyton is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and hath upon the east
the Tamer River, south Warrington, north Tamerton, west North
Pedyrwyn, and as a mark of its antiquity and grandeur it was taxed in
the Domesday Roll 1067 or 1087, by the present name. In the
Inquisition of the Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester before-mentioned,
Capella de Boyeton, in Decanatu de Stratone, was rated xxx_s._ but
whether rectory or vicarage I am ignorant; the same not being
mentioned either in Wolsey’s Inquisition or Valor Beneficiorum. The
patronage in ――――. The incumbent ――――. This parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £89. 14_s._

Most probable it seems to me, that this place was denominated Boyton
in memory of a colony of the Boii Gauls, that out of that country of
Gaul first planted themselves here; who were a people on the further
side of the Rhine, that with the Helvetians first invaded Gaul, as
Cæsar informs us, and placed themselves amongst the Hedui, a people of
Gallia Celtica, near the Loire River, and possessed a great part of
Burgundy; Cæsar also makes Boia in Gaul the name of a town.

Bradridge in this parish, the broad ridge or farrow of land (Saxon),
is the dwelling of John Hoblyn, Esq. barrister at law, son of Mr.
Hoblyn, attorney at law, of Bodmin; which place came to this gentleman
by marriage with the sole daughter and heir of William Symons, Gent.
attorney at law, as it did to him by marriage with the daughter and
heir of Heale.

The Heales’ arms are, Party per fess Argent and Sable, a pole
counterchanged with three trefoils, one on each side the pole in
chief, and the other thereon, in base counterchanged.

At Northcott, in this parish, temp. Queen Mary, lived Agnes Prest, but
where born, or what her maiden name was, is to me unknown, whose merit
challengeth to be recorded in this place, as being the only martyr
that suffered death for the Protestant religion in the diocese of Exon
during the said Queen’s reign. She is described by Holinshed, Howell,
alias Hooker, and by Fuller from them, to be a contemptible woman in
respect of her person, (as St. Paul was for a man,) little, and short
of stature, and of a brownish complexion. She was indicted, as Mr.
Vowell says, at Launceston, in this county, upon Monday the fourth
week in Lent, the 2d and 3d of Philip and Mary, before the Grand Jury
there assembled. The matter suggested in the Bill was: “For that she
denied the Real Presence in the sacrament of the altar; and for saying
the same was but a sign and figure of Christ’s body; and that no
Christian doth eat the body of Christ carnally, but spiritually.” The
evidence against her were her own husband and children; from whom she
fled, for that they would compel her, by force, to be present at the
celebration of mass. Notwithstanding, upon their testimonies the bill
was found, and indorsed, “Billa vera.” Whereupon she came to her trial
before William Starford, then Justice of Assize, (probably he that
wrote the Pleas of the Crown,) where, upon a full hearing of the case,
the Petty Jury also found her guilty, on the testimony aforesaid;
after which she was presented to James Turbervill, Bishop of Exeter,
for further examination on the premises, but she persisting in her
former opinion, was by him condemned as a heretic.

After her condemnation, she refused to receive any money from
well-disposed people, that formerly relieved her, saying, she was
going to that City where money had no mastery. Soon after she was
delivered over to the secular power to be burnt, to Robert Cary, of
Cockington, Esq. then Sheriff of Devonshire, or to his Under Sheriff,
who saw her executed at Southernhay, without the walls of Exon, in the
54th year of her age, and in the month of November, 1558. This was the
only person in whose persecution Bishop Turbervill did appear, in
matters of religion, during the time he sat in that see, (consecrated
Sept. 8, 1555, deprived in January 1560,) and, as Dr. Fuller saith,
her death was procured more by the violence of Blackston, the
Chancellor, than by any persecution of the Bishop.

And here it may not be impertinent to show, that our ancestors the
Britons of Cornwall received and took the blessed Sacrament in the
same sense as this martyr Agnes Prest did receive it; that is by faith
only, contrary to the doctrine of Transubstantiation: as is evident
from Mount Calvary, a manuscript in verse in the Cornish tongue,
written about five hundred years since, a copy of which is now in my
own custody, which containeth the history of the Incarnation and
Passion of Christ, according to St. John’s Gospel; wherein, amongst
others, verse the 79th containeth these words:[19]

     Du benegas an bara, therag ay ys abestlye,
     An gorfe ay ma, eshenna, ynmeth Chrest, sur rag rye why
     Kemeras a berth, en bysma, dispersys henna nos avyth
     Dybbery tho gans cregyans, thu da gober teck hag gevyth
     Hay gwynsa wor an foys, ef a ranas in tretha
     Yn meth Chrest, henna ys goyse ow, evough why pur Cherity.

Which sounds thus in English:

     God blessed the bread in presence (or among) his Apostles (or
       Disciples);
     The body of me in this, saith Christ, certainly given for you;
     Taken secretly, and in this world despised, this night shall be.
     Eat it with faith, thy good, fair reward, and remission.
     And the wine on the wall he divided amongst them:
     Says Christ, this is my blood; drink you in pure charity.

Anno Dom. 1050, Berengarius, a deacon of Angiers in France, disproved
and refuted the doctrine of Transubstantiation in a large manuscript,
which he sent with letters to Lanfrank, then Abbat of Caen in
Normandy, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury from 1070 to 1089, which
letters and reasons, in the absence of Lanfrank, being opened by some
of his clergy, the same were transmitted to Pope Leo IX. whereupon
calling a council at Rome, and the letters and reasons of Berengarius
being read, he was condemned for an heretic in 1051. In France also
the same year, Pope Leo IX. assembled another council at Versailles
against Berengarius, which likewise condemned him for a heretic. The
like did Victor II. successor of Pope Leo IX. in 1055, in which
council Berengarius answered personally for himself; That, as to the
doctrine he taught concerning the Sacrament, he adhered to no
particular opinion of his own, but to that which was the ancient and
common doctrine of the universal Church.

After Pope Victor II. his successor Pope Nicholas II. assembled at
Rome a council of a hundred and thirteen Bishops against Berengarius’
doctrine; who thereupon submitted the same to the Pope and his
councils’ correction, who prescribed him a form of recantation. But
afterwards he published a refutation of that recantation, and of the
doctrines therein contained, anno 1059. Notwithstanding which, the
fourth council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent III. in 1160,
(Frederick II. being then Emperor), consisting of four hundred bishops
and holy fathers, established the Roman doctrine of Transubstantiantion,
which was afterwards further confirmed by another council at Lateran,
in Rome, under Pope Innocent V. an. Dom. 1215.


TONKIN.

The etymology of this name, Boyeton, may be either from the Cornish
word “byu,” which is pronounced like “boy,” or from the French “bois,”
a wood, which agrees extremely well with its situation in the midst of
woods.

I take most if not all the parish to be a part of or holden from the
manor of Boyton, which belonged to the Priory of Launceston, and was
ultimately given, inter alia, by King Henry the Eighth, to the Duchy
of Cornwall, in exchange for the honour of Wallingford.


THE EDITOR.

For a detailed account of Berengarius, see Le Grand Dictionaire
Historique, par Moreri, under the word Berenger, who refers to a great
variety of authorities.

The account given of Agnes Prest is curious, if she alone suffered in
the whole diocese of Exeter during Queen Mary’s persecution. They
still exhibit at Exeter the place of her martyrdom, and are persuaded
that grass has refused to grow on the spot ever since.

  The measurement of this parish is 3,710 statute acres.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1477   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           240   5    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    319   |    402   |    406   |    452.
  Increase on an hundred in 30 years 41.7, or more than 41½ per cent.
  Present Vicar, Rev. Edward Rudall, instituted 1826.

The hamlet of Northcot lies in Devonshire, and is therefore not
included.

Dr. Boase observes, the dunstone of Devonshire, so ably described by
the late Rev. J. E. Conybeare, in the 2d vol. of the Transactions of
the Geological Society of London, p. 495, constitutes the rock of this
parish. Its compact varieties are very quartzose, and form barren
hills; but the schistose dunstone produces a good substratum, which
near the Tamar affords productive arable and pasture land.


     [19] The whole of Mount Calvary, with a translation by Mr.
     John Keigwin, made in the year 1682, has been printed by the
     Editor of this work from a manuscript in the Bodleian
     Library at Oxford. The passage above cited occurs in the
     44th and 45th stanzas. The general meaning appears to be the
     same, but the words are differently spelt and divided. The
     Editor has also printed “The Creation of the World, with
     Noah’s Flood,” a Play, or Mystery, in the Cornish language,
     and a Translation into English by the same Mr. John Keigwin;
     both from the office of Mr. Nichols, No. 25,
     Parliament-street, London, the printer of this work.




ST. BRADOCK.


HALS.

St. Bradock is situate in the Hundred of West, and has upon the south
Boconock, the west St. Wennow, east St. Pynnock, north Cardinham, and
by this name Bradock or Brodock it was taxed in the Domesday Roll. If
its etymology is Saxon the name means broad oak.

In the Pope’s Inquisition into the value of benefices before
mentioned, anno 1294, Capella de Bradock in decanatu de Westwells,
appropriata domui de Lanceston, was valued at xiii_s._ iv_d._; from
whence it appears that this church was endowed by the college of St.
Stephen, near Launceston. In Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor
Beneficiorum, at viii_l._ xiii_s._ iv_d._ The patronage in the Bishop
of Exeter; and this parish was rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax
for one year in 1696 at 57_l._


TONKIN.

This church is a vicarage; the patronage in Samuel Wetton, Esq.; the
incumbent, Mr. James Pearce, who has also the sheaf.

The manor of Bradoke is one of the two hundred and eighty given by the
Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton.


THE EDITOR.

This living, which is stated in the Liber Valorum to be a rectory, was
consolidated with Boconnoc in the year 1742, and the clergyman’s
residence has recently been removed to Bradock. The united parishes
are now in the presentation of Lord Grenville.

Bradock down was the scene of two important events in the civil war.

First, a victory obtained by the King’s forces early in 1623 under the
command of Sir Bevill Granville, Sir Nicholas Glenning, Sir Ralph
Hopton, Arundell, Trevanion, and other gentlemen of the county, over a
much larger force commanded by Ruthven, Governor of Plymouth. The
victory was so complete that Ruthven with difficulty reached Saltash,
accompanied by a few only of his troops, from whence they were
speedily driven across the Tamar; and this advantage mainly
contributed to the more splendid victory at Stratton, obtained on the
16th of May of the same year; a victory which, rolling on its tide of
success through Devonshire and Somersetshire, over Lansdowne and
Bristol, might have swept the whole of England but for the recoil of
its waves from the walls of Gloucester.

The second event was on a more extensive scale.

Lord Essex having conducted a large army into Cornwall, was followed
by the King in person, till they approached so near that the King had
his head quarters at Boconnoc, and Lord Essex at Lanhidrock, when,
after various skirmishes and proposals for negotiation on the part of
the King, Lord Essex at last, on the 30th or 31st of August 1644,
accompanied by Lord Robartes, and some other officers, abandoned his
army, and reached Plymouth by sea; and on the same day Sir William
Belfour, with Col. Nicholas Boscowen, Lieut.-Col. James Hals, of
Merther, Henry Courtenay, of St. Bennet’s in Lanivet, Col. John
Sentaubyn of Clawanar, his Lieut.-Col. Briddon, Col. Carter, and
others of the horde of two thousand five hundred cavalry, forced their
passage through the King’s army, over St. Winnow, Boconnoc, and
Bradock Downs, to Saltash, and from thence to Plymouth. Their escape
is said to have been mainly owing to the negligence of General Goring,
whose ill conduct and exactions in Cornwall, have left his name as a
term of severe reproach up to the present time.

After these discouraging events, Major-Gen. Skippon found himself in
command of the infantry, for whom he obtained a favourable
capitulation, the particulars of which may be seen in Lord Clarendon’s
History, and they are given by Mr. Hals, from whose statement the
above is chiefly abridged.

Mr. Hals adds a circumstance illustrative of the animosity excited by
internal dissensions; and, as his feelings and opinions were all on
the royal side, the narrative may be esteemed deserving of credit.

Notwithstanding the articles, the disarmed soldiers of the Parliament,
as they marched by the King and his army on Boconnoc and Bradock
Downs, and elsewhere, were barbarously slaughtered and shot upon by
the King’s soldiers, so that many perished thereby, others were
stripped comparatively naked, and robbed of their money, others had
their horses taken from them; whereupon Major-General Skippon, with
undaunted courage, rode up to the King’s troop, and told him
personally of the injury and violence offered, and the slaughter of
his men, contrary to the articles, which in such cases were kept
inviolable by all nations of men; and therefore prayed the King to be
just, and to prohibit those barbarities of his soldiers for the
future, which the King forthwith commanded to be done. But his word
and authority were little regarded while his army were in sight of the
Parliamentary soldiers.

This total discomfiture of Lord Essex’s army left the King without an
enemy in arms through the whole of Cornwall, and a letter is preserved
in the hands of Lord Dunstanville from his ancestor Sir Francis
Basset, respecting the last words addressed to him by the King: “Mr.
Sheriff, I leave the county entirely at peace in your hands.”

  Bradock contains 2935 statute acres.
  The annual value of the Real Property,       £.   _s._ _d._
    as returned to Parliament in 1815        1025    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            83   18    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    173   |    188   |    235   |    301;
    being an increase of 74½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish may be geologically considered as a part of Boconnoc. The
substratum is the same. The rocks and stones are rather more
quartzose, accompanied by an increased appearance of shorl.




ST. BREOCK.


HALS.

St. Breock is situate in the hundred of Pyder, and hath upon the north
St. Issy; east, Wadebridge on the Alan river; south, St. Wenn and
Withiel; west, St. Columb Major.

The name is derived from St. Breock or Briock, the patron of this
church, of one in the island of Guernsey, and perhaps of Breage near
Helston.

This St. Breock was a native of Ireland, born at Cork about the fifth
century. A man famous in his day, for the most strenuous support of
the orthodox faith in opposition to Arianism, the heresy at that time
distracting the Latin Church. He was bishop of a diocese in Armorica,
now called Britany, where the place of his residence is at this day
distinguished by his name.

This parish does not appear in the Bishop of Lincoln’s valuation; but
in that of Wolsey it is rated at 41_l._ 10_s._ 6_d._

In the Domesday survey this parish was rated under the district of
Pelton or Penpow, now Powton.

This Powton was the voke lands of a manor given to the See of our
Cornish Bishop; afterwards to the Bishop of Kirton, and then to
Exeter; finally to the Priory of St. Petroc at Bodmin. After the
dissolution of monasteries, this barton, together with the extensive
manor to which it belonged, passed through a great variety of hands by
sale, so that Mr. Hals says the manor had sixteen lords of different
families in about sixty-two years; a mutability not to be instanced in
any other lands in Cornwall, except Fentongellon in St. Michael
Penkivell, which also contained a religious house, but in 26 Henry
VIII. was converted to secular purposes.

This manor of Pelton has always possessed a court leet, where writs
might be entertained without any limit of amount; but, the lord of the
manor having suffered from various escapes of persons confined for
debt, the prison, and with it the judicial functions of the court,
have been discontinued. Sir William Morice, the secretary of state and
friend of General Monk, acquired this manor by purchase. His second
daughter, Barbara Morice, married Sir John Molesworth of Penconnow,
and brought this property into that family, where it still remains.

Hurston in this parish, which I take to be from the Saxon, and to mean
wood town, is still situated in a wood, and formerly belonged to the
Cormynews of Fentongellon.

Tredinick gave name and origin to an ancient family of gentlemen.
Christopher Tredinick was sheriff of Cornwall in 22 Henry VIII.; he
gave for his arms, In a field Or, on a bend Sable three bucks’ heads
caboshed Argent. His family and name are now, I take it, both extinct.
In the time of Charles II. this property came by purchase to Lord
Robartes.

[Mr. Hals adds a fanciful derivation of this name; but since “doon”
and “din” are well known to signify a place tenable either by nature
or art, and “ick” is unquestionably water, Tre-din-ick will be either
the fortified town, or the hill town, near a river.]

Trevorder, meaning the further town, or the one most distant; also
Trevorder Bickin, the far-off beacon-town, belonged to the Carmynews
of Fentongellon, having come to them by the heiress of Trenowith, as
Trenowith had acquired it by the heiress of Tregago. It passed by sale
from the Carmynews to Vyell, and has subsequently split between six
coheiresses, who married Prideaux, Vyvyan, Dennis, Grensill, Rinden,
and Smith.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing worth inserting that differs from Mr.
Hals, except perhaps his etymology of the name Dunveth, a place
belonging once to Tredinick, and situated near the churchyard, and
therefore named the hill of graves; beth being a grave in Welch and
Cornish, and the labials b and v perpetually changing into each other.


THE EDITOR.

  This parish measures 6875 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6910    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                       776   14    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    962   |    998   |   1225   |   1450;
    being an increase of rather more than 50 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. W. Molesworth, presented in 1816 by Sir W.
    Molesworth, Bart.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

On the north and north-eastern parts of this parish, in the vicinity
of the Camel, the land is fertile, resting on a rock which sometimes
resembles a calcareous schist, but more commonly that kind of
clay-slate which abounds in the calcareous series. This slate at
Penquean splits into very thin leaves, and is then quarried as a
roofing slate, but is softer and has less lustre, and is not so
durable as that raised at Delabole near Camelford. The south and
south-western parts of the parish consist of barren downs; the rock
forming the substratum is, however, very similar in appearance to what
occurs in the other division; but it contains more silex and is less
laminated, does not easily cleave, and is less susceptible of
decomposition than the former, and therefore produces only a meagre,
arenaceous soil.




ST. BREOCK IN KERRIER, or BREAGE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred aforesaid, and hath upon the north, Crowan;
west, Germow; east, Sithney; south, the British Channel. Of the name
and titular guardian of this church I have spoken before. By the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, to the Pope’s annats, 1294,
ecclesia Sancti Breuc in decanatu de Kerryer, was rated 16_l._ Vicar
ejusdem 36_s._ It is now the mother church of Cury, Germow, and
Gunwallo, and goes in presentation and consolidation with them, though
at the time of the inquisition aforesaid they were taxed separate. In
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, they are valued
together in first fruits 33_l._ The patronage in the crown, the
incumbent Trewinard. This parish was rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax 1696, 230_l._ 4_s._ temp. William III. At the time of the Norman
conquest, if this parish was not taxed under the jurisdiction of
Lanmigall, i. e. Michael’s Temple or Church, (now St. Michael’s Mount,)
the priors whereof, or the king or duke, endowed it, together with
those other before named, it was rated under the district of Treskeaw,
that is to say the skeawe, or elder-tree town, a place, as I am
informed, well known and still extant there.

In the pleas of the crown in the Exchequer, 12th Edward I., I found it
thus written of Pengelly in this parish.

“Johannes de Treveally tenet in Pengelly, in comitatu Cornubiæ,
dimidium acram terræ Cornubiensem, (above a hundred English,) per
sergiantiam recipiendi unam capam de grisando ad Pontem de Penleton,
cum Rex fuerit inveniendus versus Cornubiam; et intrando Domino de
Cabilla, qui eam in adventu domini Regis ibidem deferre debet, et eam
tradere eidem Johanni, qui quidem Johannes eandem capam ferre debet
cum domino Rege pro totam in Cornubiam;” which Mr. Hals interprets,
that the half acre Cornish is held by the duty of its owner receiving
a great coat from some one in Devonshire at Penleton Bridge, and to
carry it about for the King’s use, so long as he remains in Cornwall.

In this parish stands the barton and manor of Good-ol-gan, also
God-al-gan, synonymous words, only varied by the dialect, meaning a
place that was altogether a wood down, a name anciently given and
taken from the natural circumstances thereof. Otherwise, if the name
consist of English-Cornish, God-ol-gan signifies a place that was
altogether God’s downs. As for the modern name Good-ol-phin,
God-ol-fyn, it, in like manner as the former, admits of no other
etymology or construction than that it was a place that was altogether
a wood, fountain, well, or spring of water, or altogether God’s
fountain or spring of water. But because the words god, gud, good, in
Cornish, Belgic, and British, are always taken and adopted in the
first sense, to signify only a wood, and the words Du, Due, and Dyu,
are the proper appellations of God, and no other in Cornish, I cannot
apprehend how that sacred name is concerned in the initial part of
this word, Godolphin, which refers, as I said before, to the
circumstances of the place, viz. that no table, fountain, well, or
spring of water here, that passeth beneath the house, through the
gardens, and the woods and groves of timber that still surround the
same.

Contrary to this etymology, Mr. Carew, in his “Survey of Cornwall,”
page 153, says that godolphin signifies a white eagle, than which
nothing can be more untrue; for, in all those compound words, there is
not one particle or syllable relating thereto, or any other than the
British language whatsoever: for wen erew, wen eryr, wen eriew, and by
contraction wen-er, is a white eagle in the Welch, Little-Britannic,
and Cornish tongues. [See Dr. Davis’s British Lexicon, and Floyd upon
Aquila.] In like manner Verstegan tells us, that, in the Saxon tongue,
blond erna is a white eagle; as also in the German and Dutch tongues;
and the French dictionaries inform us that blanch ægle, or aegle, is a
white eagle; ἀετος [aetos] in Greek; aquila, in Latin; nesher in the
Hebrew; from whence our British erew, erier, eryr, eriew, is derived.

In opposition to all those etymologies of the word godolphin, Mr.
Sammes in his Britannia, and the author of the additions to Camden’s
Britannia, tells us that godolac in the Phenician tongue signifies a
land of tin, from whence they apprehend the name of godolphin is
derived, especially because tin is found in the precincts thereof, but
surely not comparable in quantity to what is made in forty other
places in Cornwall, that yet come not under that denomination of
godolphin, as being tin land.

From the name I proceed to the matter or thing itself, viz. the manor
and barton of Godolphin; which lands, in the time of Edward III., were
the lands of Sir John Lamburne, Knight, of Lamburne in Peransand,
whose daughter and heir was afterwards married to Sir Renphry, or John
Arundell, of Lanherne, Knight, one of whose posterity, viz. Edmond
Arundell, Knight, tempore Henry VI. sold the same to one Stephens,
upon condition of a kind of domineering, lording, or insulting tenure,
and reservation of rent to his manor of Lamburne in Peransand, viz.
“that once a year for ever the Reeve of the said Manor should come to
Godolphin, and there boldly enter the hall, jump upon the table, or
table-board, and there stamp or bounce with his feet or club, to alarm
and give notice to the people of his approach, and then and there make
proclamation aloud three times, ‘Oyes! oyes! oyes! I am the Reeve of
the Manor of Lamburne in Peransand, come here to demand the old rent,
duties, and customs, due to the lords of the said Manor from the lands
of Godolphin.’ Upon which notice there is forthwith to be brought him
2_s._ 8_d._ rent, a large quart of strong beer, a loaf of wheaten
bread worth sixpence, and a cheese of the like value; which the Reeve
having received, he shall drink of the beer, taste the bread and
cheese in the place, and then depart, carrying with him the said rent
and remainder of those viands, to the lords of the Manor aforesaid, to
whom they are still duly paid, which at present are Sir John
Seyntaubyn, Bart. and others, who claim it in right of the two
daughters and heirs of the said Edmund Arundell, which were married to
Danvers and Whitington, as Whitington’s heirs were married to St.
Aubyn and others.

After Stephens purchased those lands of Godolphin from Arundell, and
came possessed thereof, his only daughter and heir was married to
Ralph Knava, or Nava, of ――――; which name or word is of quite
another signification in the British tongue than what it signifies in
the English; for knava, nava, nawe, naue, signifies the same as
servus, servulus, famulus, minister, administer, ministrator, in
Latin; hence it is that in Trevisa’s and Tyndale’s translation of the
Bible into English, the word is used in this sense by them; Titus i,
v. 1, “Paul a knava of Jesus Christ;” and the like, 2nd Timothy, chap.
i. v. 1, “Paul a nava of Jesus Christ;” which words, in the
translation of the Bible in James I.’s time, the translators have
rightly rendered into new English, by the names of “Paul, a servant of
Jesus Christ;” and “Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ;” that is, a
messenger, an ambassador, or servant, sent, as apostolus; in the
original Greek δουλος (doulos), servus και et αποστολος (apostolus);
and in all other places in the Old and New Testament, where they met
with the Greek words doulos and apostolus, they are by them so
rendered.

From the British names nave, nava, nawe, knawe, the old name or
distinction of this tribe or family may be plainly inferred, for that
the first ancestor or progenitor thereof was of a mere British
extraction; a servant, steward, ambassador, minister, or messenger of
God, Christ, his king, prince, or other master, (for those words are
all synonymous, only by the dialect varied with the transposing of a
vowel,) and is a name of office of one that is a substitute or
vicegerent, and acts under another.

But more certain I am that John Knava, of Godolphin, Esq. was struck
Sheriff of Cornwall by King Henry VII., 1504, who declared his great
liking of that gentleman in all circumstances for the said office, but
discovered as much dislike of his name after the English, not
understanding the import thereof in Cornish, and so further said,
that, as he was pater patriæ, he would transnominate him to Godolphin,
whereof he was lord; and accordingly caused or ordered that in his
letters patent under the broad seal of England, for being Sheriff of
Cornwall, he should be styled or named John Godolphin, of Godolphin,
Esq. and by that name he accounted at the year’s end with that king
for his office in the Exchequer, and had his acquittance from thence,
as appears from the record in the Pipe Office there.

Since which time his posterity have (ever since) made Godolphin the
hereditary name of their family. His son, William Godolphin, Esq. was
Sheriff of Cornwall 21 Henry VIII.; William Godolphin, Knight, was
Sheriff of Cornwall 29 Henry VIII.; William Godolphin, Knight, was
Sheriff of Cornwall, 3 Edward VI.; William Godolphin, Knight, was
Sheriff of Cornwall 12 Elizabeth; Francis Godolphin, Esq. afterwards
Sir Francis, was Sheriff of Cornwall 21 Elizabeth; Francis Godolphin,
Knight, was Sheriff of Cornwall 2nd James I.; Francis Godolphin, Esq.
afterwards Knight, was Sheriff of Cornwall 13 Charles I., whose son,
Sir William Godolphin, was by Charles II. created the five hundred and
fifty-second Baronet of England 29th April 1661. His younger brother,
Sidney Godolphin, Esq. Member of Parliament for Helston, one of the
Commissioners of the Treasury, who had been sent several embassies to
foreign princes, was by King Charles II. by letters patent bearing
date 8th Sept. 1684, created Lord Godolphin and Baron of Rialton.

Certes, from the time that this family was seised of Godolphin, such a
race of famous, flourishing, learned, valiant, prudent men have served
their prince and country in the several capacities of members of
Parliament, justices of the peace, deputy lieutenants, sheriffs,
colonels, captains, majors, and other officers, both military and
civil, as scarce any other family this country hath afforded, which I
do not mention (for that my great-grandmother on the one side, the
wife of Sir John Arundell, of Tolverne, Knight, was daughter of the
aforesaid Sir Francis Godolphin, Knight, Sheriff of Cornwall 21
Elizabeth,) but as their just character and merit; and I challenge the
envious justly to detract from the same.

This Right Honourable Sidney Lord Godolphin aforesaid, was a
commissioner for the Treasury about twenty years, which trust and
office he discharged with unquestionable justice, fame, and
reputation, during the reigns of King Charles the Second, King James
the Second, and till the latter end of the reign of King William the
Third, when he voluntarily resigned his office. After that King’s
death he was by Queen Anne made sole Lord High Treasurer of England,
1701, in which station he continued with unblamable conduct till the
year 1710, the time of his death, (having been before, by that Queen,
created Earl Godolphin,) a place of such import, trust, grandeur, and
honour, as no Cornishman before him ever arrived to, except the Lord
Benham, (or rather their name of old Cardinham,) temp. Henry VII. Two
such persons perhaps for their skill in accounts, rents, revenues of
the crown, and other matters pertaining to the exchequer, equal to, if
not superior to, any Lord Treasurer of England before them.

The paternal coat-armour of this noble family are, Gules, an imperial
eagle with two necks between three fleurs-de-lis argent.

Pen-gar-wick in this parish, also Pen-gars-wick, id est, the head
word, or command, fenced or fortified place; so called from the
command or authority of the lord thereof heretofore in these parts,
and the strength of the house and the tower thereof, otherwise
Pen-gweras-ike, i. e. the creek, cove, or bosom of waters, head help,
as situate upon the sea, or waters of the British Channel. This barton
and manor, in the latter end of the reign of Henry VIII., was
purchased by one Mr. Milliton, a gentleman of the county of      where
having wilfully or accidentally committed murder, or slain a man, in
order to shun or avoid justice he privately made the purchase
aforesaid in the name of his son, and so immured himself in a private
chamber of the tower of Pengarwick, that he was not seen of any person
but his trusty friends, so that he finished the natural course of his
life without detection of his person, or punishment for the crime
aforesaid; but, alas! notwithstanding his concealment, and design of
perpetuating his name and tribe in this place, his son Job Milliton,
Esq. 1st Edward the Sixth, made Governor of St. Michael’s Mount, (in
the room of Renphry Arundell, Esq. executed for rebellion,) who
married Godolphin, and had issue William Milliton, Esq. sheriff of
Cornwall 7th Elizabeth, 1565, that died without issue, and six
daughters, that became his heirs, married 1. to Erisy, afterwards to
Sir Nicholas Parker; 2. to Lanyon; 3. to Trefusis, and Tregothick; 4.
to Trenwith, Arundell, and Herle; 5. to Bonython; 6. to Abbot, from
some of which heiresses, Sir Nicholas Hals, Knight, at his first
coming from Efford in Devon into Cornwall, purchased their parts of
this lordship, with leases from the rest of the coparceners, and for
some time made it and Trewinard the places of his dwelling till he
removed to Fentongollen. This place afterwards, by his unthrifty son
and heir, John Hals, had all its timber cut down that was growing upon
it, and sold, which tradition saith was great store; the lands also
were sold to Godolphin and some others.

The arms of Milliton were, out of a supposed allusion to their name, a
chevron between three millet fishes hariant or erected; whereas
Milli-ton is a mill town.


TONKIN.

There is not any thing in Mr. Tonkin of importance, differing from Mr.
Hals.

He gives the Cornish distich, which has often been repeated,

     Germow Mathern,
     Breaga Lavethas.

“Germow was a king――Breaga a midwife;” which he explains in a
spiritual sense.

In the church-yard of Germoe, is a small alcove called King Germoe’s
Throne: it may perhaps have been a plain, simple shrine.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Sidney Godolphin must be considered as the most eminent statesman
and politician of this county, not excepting Lord Chatham, if his
birth at Boconnoc should be deemed sufficient to make him a Cornish
man.

Advanced to the honour of Earl of Godolphin, decorated with the
Garter, and placed in high office as Lord High Treasurer, he mainly
conducted the great national affairs at home, while the Duke of
Marlborough vindicated, by splendid victories in the field, the
religious and civil liberties of the world.

            ―――― Victorque volentes
  Per populos dat jura; viamque affectat Olympo.

To Lord Godolphin we are also indebted for conducting to a successful
conclusion a measure most beneficial to this whole island, the Union
with Scotland; and the whole tenour of his administration procured for
him, with the consent of all parties, the appellation of Wise.

In an ode inscribed to the Earl of Sunderland on his receiving the
Garter, is this stanza:

  In after times, as Courts refined,
  Our patriots in the list were join’d,
  Not only Warwick stain’d with blood,
  Or Marlborough near the Danube’s flood,
  Here in their crimson crosses glow’d;
  But, on just law-givers bestow’d,
  Those emblems Cecil did invest,
  And gleam’d on Wise Godolphin’s breast.

Sidney Earl of Godolphin died in 1712, and was succeeded by his son
Francis, then called Lord Rialton, who had married Henrietta
Churchill, eldest daughter of the Duke of Marlborough.

This lady became Duchess of Marlborough on the decease of her father
in 1722, under the provision of a special Act of Parliament, but dying
in 1733 without issue, the Dukedom and property devolved on her nephew
Charles Spencer Earl of Sunderland, son of her sister Ann Churchill.

The Earldom of Godolphin expired also on the death of Francis
Godolphin in 1766; but a Barony had been conferred on him, with
remainder to the heirs of his uncle Henry Godolphin; this fell to his
first cousin Francis Lord Godolphin. On his decease in 1785 the name
and honour of Godolphin became extinct. But Mary, daughter and
eventually sole heir of Francis the second and last Earl of Godolphin,
had married Thomas Osborne, fourth Duke of Leeds, and his
great-grandson Francis Godolphin D’Arcy Osborne, Duke of Leeds,
inherits the property as heir-at-law.

The Godolphins appear never to have possessed an estate in land beyond
the limits of what might fairly belong to a private gentleman; but the
produce of tin has been very great from the period recorded by Mr.
Carew, so that the name of the place may well be derived from that
metal; subsequently, the produce of copper has exceeded that of the
tin. The whole parish of Breage is covered by mines, and the largest
and most productive, and most expensive tin mine ever known, is now
producing a greater quantity of metal than was yielded in former times
by the whole county. Whele Vor, now employing several steam-engines of
the largest size to exhaust the water, and numerous others to draw up
the ore, and afterwards to reduce it into the state of a fine powder,
is said to have used, about a century ago, the first steam-engine ever
seen in Cornwall.

Pengelly in this parish was the residence, for many generations, of
the Spernons or Sparnons. The family became extinct on the death of a
gentleman in the medical profession at Lostwithiel, and the property
was sold about fifty years ago.

For an anecdote respecting newspapers and despatches, see the notice
of Mr. Ralph Allan in St. Blazey.

  This parish contains 6456 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           8673    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1293   15    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   2534   |   2888   |   3668   |   5149.
    103 per cent. or 3 per cent. above doubled in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. R. G. Grylls, presented by the King in 1809.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This extensive parish includes nearly the whole of that granitic patch
known by the names of Tregonning and Godolphin Hills; and it also
comprises the greater part of the country lying between those hills
and those of the opposite range of granite in Wendron and Crowan,
called the Forest. Its mines, quarries, and sea cliffs afford most
interesting geological sections.

The granite of Godolphin Hill is of the common kind, containing in
several places an intermixture of shorl, and it is traversed by
numerous thick veins of quartz, which sometimes pass into compact
shorl rock. The granite of Tregonning Hill is of two kinds; one
fine-grained like free-stone, which is extensively quarried on the
western side of the hill, and used for ornamental building, under the
name of Breage stone; the other, abounding in talc, and in a state of
considerable decomposition, affording, like the similar granites of
St. Austell and St. Stephen’s, the china clay, which is here worked
for economical purposes, but not to any great extent.

The western part of the celebrated mine Whele Vor is situated in
Breage; and, as the workings approach the granite, they exhibit a
highly interesting arrangement of rocks, the granite and slate
alternating in the same manner as they have been observed to do at
Delcoath in Cambourne. The composition of these rocks, and the nature
of their connection, are very evidently seen in the heaps of fragments
piled round the shafts; but they are better and more clearly
illustrated in the cliffs near Trewaras Head.

It would occupy two much space to enter into details on this important
subject. It may, however, be noticed that both the granite and the
slate gradually pass into each other; and that they appear to differ
very little in their mineral composition. These facts seem to explain,
in a satisfactory manner, the nature of granite veins. For, if both
rocks have a similar composition, and have been produced at the same
time, the form, position, contents, and other circumstances of these
veins, are no longer perplexing.




ST. BREWARD.


HALS.

St. Breward is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the
north Advent, south Blisland, east Altar Nun, west St. Tudy. There was
not such parish or church extant in Cornwall at the time of the Norman
Conquest as Brewer; probably it was taxed under Tudy. In the
inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, in order to
the Pope’s annats, 1294, Ecclesia de Bruerd, in Decanatu de
Trig-minor-shire, was valued at 7_l._ vicar ejusdem 20_s._ In Wolsey’s
inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, 8_l._; the patronage in the
Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent Downes, the rectory or
sheaf, in ――――, and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
land-tax, 1696, by the name of Brewer, 111_l._ 12_s._ The present name
of this church is celebrated in memory of its founder, William Brewer,
(son of William Lord Brewer, Baron of Odcombe in Somerset,) who was
consecrated Bishop of Exeter, 1224, and was afterwards, by King Henry
III., sent on divers embassies to foreign princes, and to conduct
Isabel, sister of the said King Henry, to be married to Frederick the
Emperor, whom he and Peter de Rupibus, Knight, afterwards accompanied
into Palestine, and were made generals of 40,000 men against the
Turks. And after all those fatigues, as Bishop Godwin saith, he
returned home safely to his see of Exeter, and spent the remainder of
his days in building and endowing churches, adorning and enriching his
own cathedral church, and instituting within the same a dean and
twenty-four prebendaries, allowing the latter a stipend of 4_l._ per
annum, since augmented to 20_l._ (which is no more than 4_l._ in those
days was worth). He also set up a chantor, chancellor, and treasurer
within the same. To the chantor and subdean thereof he appropriated
the rectory of Rainton and Chudleigh in Devon, and the rectory then,
now a vicarage, of Egloshayle, in Cornwall. To the chancellor he
appropriated (or impropriated) the vicarage of Newlan in Cornwall, and
Stoke Gabriel in Devon, on condition that he should preach a sermon
once a week. To the canons a lecture in Divinity, or on the Decretals,
within the cathedral of Exeter, and in case the chancellor should fail
in this particular, it should be lawful for the bishop thereof for the
time being to resume the said churches so appropriated, into his own
hand, and bestow them at his pleasure; as appears from a deed between
the said bishop, dean, and chapter, 12th May, 1662, as Hooker saith.
But this covenant is exactly kept ever since by the chancellor or his
clerk, who once a week, at six o’clock morning prayers, preach a
sermon to the canons.

This Bishop Brewer appropriated this church bearing his name to the
dean and chapter of this cathedral, which he had as aforesaid erected.
He lies buried in the middle of the choir thereof, with an inscription
still legible, which, amongst others, containeth these words: Hic
jacet Willielmus Brewer, quondam hujus Ecclesiæ Cathedralis Episcopus;
fundator etiam quatuor principalium ejusdem Ecclesiæ Dignitatum. By
the four principal dignities or dignitaries of the church, I suppose,
is meant the dean, chantor, chancellor, and treasurer thereof.

The deanery of Exon was founded by William Briwere, Bishop of Exon
1225.[20]


TONKIN.

This parish of St. Breward is also called Simon Ward; and the popular
legend has changed a pious and venerable bishop into one Simon Ward, a
domestic brewer to King Arthur. I rather conjecture that on the
division of parishes it was called Brewer from “bruiers,” which in the
French tongue is “heath.”


THE EDITOR.

The principal villages in this parish are Lank Major, Lank Minor,
without doubt Lank Vrauz, and Lank Vean; perhaps lank may be lan,
varying with local pronunciation in the absence of all orthography,
when the names will signify the great and small inclosure; also
Swallock. Mr. Lysons states that the ancient manor of Hamethy, or
Hametethy, is situated in this parish, five-sixths belonging to Mr.
Mitchell of Hengar, in the adjacent parish of St. Tudy, and the other
sixth to Mr. Kekewich.

But this parish is distinguished from all others in Cornwall by the
locality of Roughtor and Brown Willy; these hills, pre-eminent from
their elevation, and from the granite crags studded over the whole
expanse of their surfaces, may be seen from an elevation crossed by
the road near Ilfracombe in the north of Devon, and from the high land
in Zennor, about ten miles from the Land’s End.

  This parish contains 8552 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as returned     £.  _s._ _d._
    to Parliament in 1815                         2561   0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                               289   2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    513   |    506   |    554   |    627;
    increase on a hundred in 30 years of 22-2/10 per cent.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. T. J. Landon, presented in 1815 by the Dean
    and Chapter of Exeter.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The greater part of this parish is situated on granite, including
within its boundaries Roughtor and Brown Willy, the highest hills in
Cornwall, the latter being 1368 feet above the level of the sea. The
composition of this granite has been already noticed under the head of
Advent: it affords few varieties, which may be owing to its offering
few opportunities for examination.

The circumstance most attractive of attention is the great sterility
of this extensive district; some few contracted spots are indeed
brought into cultivation; some parts afford summer pasturage for
cattle, and others turf for fuel; but by far the greater portion of
the whole lies entirely unproductive. And this character belongs to
the whole insulated patch of granite more than ten miles in diameter;
and the church of St. Breward is the only one to be found on this
extensive surface of perhaps from forty to fifty thousand acres; while
nine churches are to be found on the granite district of the Land’s
End, where this substratum, departing from its usual qualities, gives
fertility to the soil.

The western extremity of this parish is fertile, resting on a peculiar
kind of slate, which possesses geological interest. It may be seen at
Combe, at Penrose, and at other places near the river Camel, and
appears to be a variety of mica slate, being composed of granular
felspar, interlaminated with mica. It contains beds of dark purple
felspar rock, very similar to that which abounds in the mining
district in the western part of the county. This micaceous slate
gradually passes into a thick lamellar rock, which extensively
disintegrates and becomes argillaceous, exactly resembling the stone
quarried for building at Bodmin.


     [20] This is written in a different hand.




BRIDGERULE.


HALS.

Bridgerule is situate in the hundred of Stratton, i. e. street or
highway town. Now the part of the parish that is on the north side of
the river Tamar, hath upon the north Launcells, west Marham Church,
south Whitstone, east the Tamar river. The church stands on the
Devonshire side, in the Halisworthy hundred, so that this rule or
dominion of the Bridge extendeth itself into both counties, as to
spirituals and temporals. In the Valor Beneficiarum, it is called
Brige Rowell. Ecclesia de Bridge Rule, in Decanatu de Stratone, was
taxed to the Pope’s annats, in 1294, at v_l._ iii_s._ 8_d._ Vicar
ibidem nihil propter paupertatem. In Wolsey’s Inquisition it was taxed
at 14_l._, and the parish was rated to the 4_s._ land-tax, in 1696, at
45_l._ 3_s._

At the time of the Domesday Roll, 20 W. Conq. this district was taxed
under the name of Tacabere, which place is now the dwelling place of
Mr. Samuel Gilbert.


TONKIN.

Mr. Risdon, in his History of Devon, part ii. p. 298, gives the true
etymology of this place, in those words, “Bridge Renold, of the vulgar
Bridge Rule, anciently Brige, by which name it is simply so called
before the Norman Conqueror bestowed it upon Reginald[21] Adobed, and
hence it took the adjunct of its owner.” The original of the primitive
name is the bridge connecting the two parts across the Tamar.

The manor of Tackbere, in Domesday called Tacabere, was one of those
which the Conqueror bestowed on his half-brother the Earl of Morton.


THE EDITOR.

This manor of Tacabre, or Takkebere, which appears to have been very
extensive, is said by Mr. Lysons to have been bestowed by King Edward
the Third on the Abbey of St. Mary of Graces, which appears in
Tanner’s Notitia Monastica to have been founded by that king in the
years 1349-50, in the new church-yard of the Holy Trinity, eastward of
the Tower of London. The manor has since acquired the name of
Merrifield, probably Maryfield, from the monastery. It was for many
years the property of Gilberts, a branch from the Gilberts of Crompton
Castle, near Torbay. The only daughter of the last Mr. Gilbert, of
Tackbere, married Mr. Cotton Amy, of Botreaux Castle, who left two
daughters; Anne, who survived her sister, but died unmarried after a
long insanity; and Grace, married to Mr. Jonathan Phillipps, of
Camelford, and of Newport, near Launceston, who was subsequently
knighted in 1786, on the memorable occasion afforded by Margaret
Nicholson. This lady had several children: two daughters were alive at
the time of her decease in 1788, but they both died in twelve months
after their mother, and Tackbere has ascended through the two female
lines, and become vested in the right heirs-at-law of Mr. Samuel
Gilbert, the father of Mrs. Amy.

  The portion of this parish which is situated in Cornwall,
    measures no more than 851 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            719   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            80   1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    191   |    176   |    238   |    250;
  giving an increase of just 31 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Thos. Hockin Kingdon, B.D.

Doctor Boase has not noticed this small division of a parish. The
geology will probably be stated with that of some parish adjoining.


     [21] The Domesday surname, however, is still nearer to the
     modern orthography; being, not Reginald, but Ruald.――EDIT.




BUDOCK.


HALS.

Budock is situate in the hundred of Kerrier, and hath upon the north
Gluvias, east Falmouth, west Mawnan, south the British channel; and by
the name of Bowidoc it was taxed in Domesday Roll, a corruption of
Bud-oc, or Bud-ock, signifying a bay, cove, creek, haven, or inlet of
waters, and oak; according to the ancient natural circumstances of the
place.

In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
into the value of benefices, in order to the Pope’s annats, ecclesia
de Sancto Budoco, in decanatu de Kerrier, is rated at 6_l._ At that
time, it seems, it was not consolidated into Gluvias; though
afterwards, in Wolsey’s Inquisition, they were united, as will appear
in that place. The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, the incumbent
Collyer; the rectory or sheaf in possession of Pendarves, and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound land-tax, 1696, 122_l._ 11_s._

Against the south wall of this church stand some funeral monuments,
pertaining to the ancient and famous family of the Killigrews,
particularly that of Sir John Killigrew, Knight, that married
Wolverston, temp. Elizabeth, and some others. The barton of Arwinike,
their chief seat in former ages, being within this parish, till
Falmouth parish where it now stands was dismembered from it by Act of
Parliament 1663, near which monument is a stone fastened to the wall
of the said church, also containing the memorial of Sir Nicholas
Parker, Knight, some time Governor of Pendennis Castle, who married
the widow of Erisey, one of the coheirs of Militon of Pengerwick, and
died 1608, who was succeeded in that dignity by Sir Nicholas Hals of
Fentongollan, Knight.

The arms of Parker were, as I take it, Chequy, a fess.

Ros-meran in this parish, was of old the lands of Killigrew.

Trescobays, also Triscobays, Triscovays, in this parish, (synonymous
words, signifying treble or threefold kisses,) was the dwelling of
William Gross, gentleman, that married Erisey the widow of Charles
Vyvyan, of Merthin, Esq. mother of Sir Richard Vyvyan, Baronet, who,
upon some jealousy or discontent of his wife, drank a pint or quart of
brandy, entered his chamber, took a pistol and charged it with a brace
of bullets, and then forthwith shot himself dead, about the year 1693.

At Treon, Trone, (id est, Saxon, a tree,) for two or three descents,
was the dwelling of the Thomases, transnominated to Carnsew, by living
at Carnsew in Mabe; id est, the dry rock, where they married Tripcony,
Seyntaubyn, and ―――― finally Thomas Carnsew, gentleman, attorney-at
law, sold those land to Trewinard, and in testimony of the truth of
the said transnomination, this family still give for their arms the
same as Thomas, and not that of Carnsew; viz. in a field Argent, a
chevron between three talbots Sable. Trewinard hath since sold it to
Rundle.


TONKIN.

On the western side of this parish, behind Arwinnick, the seat of Sir
Peter Killigrew, is a large pool, like a little harbour, between two
hills, but that it hath a bar of sand and pebbles, which keepeth out
the sea, like that of the Loe near Helston. It is commonly called the
Swan Pool, for that Sir Peter Killigrew, to whom it belongs, kept
abundance of swans here.

Trewoon, or Treoon, in this parish, the downy dwelling, or
house ―――― in the downs, was the seat of the Carnsews, who had their
name from their habitation at Carnsew in Mabe, where they formerly
possessed a fine estate, which, being wasted by extravagant living,
this barton was at first mortgaged, and a little after the late
Revolution, sold by Mr. John Carnsew to Joseph Trewinnard, rector of
Mawnan.


THE EDITOR.

The manor of Penwerris, become of great value by its proximity to
Falmouth, is the property of Lord de Dunstanville, derived from his
grandmother Mary Pendarves of Roscrow. The best part of Falmouth
itself is now built on this property, and distinguished by the name of
Green Bank.

  Budock measures 3507 statute acres.
  The annual value of the Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           8618    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1832                       640    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    779   |   1514   |   1634   |   1797;
    being an increase on an hundred of 131 per cent.
  The parish feast is celebrated on the Sunday before Advent.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The extreme western part, adjoining Mabe, consists of granite of a
very crystalline variety, and excellent for building; it is exported
in great quantities from Penryn. Nearly the whole western half of the
parish is coarse; but the eastern part is well cultivated. The soil
rests on a species of hornblend slate, which furnishes deep soil by
its decomposition.

On the sea shore at Swanpool a most interesting phenomenon occurs in a
bed of felspar porphyry, (elvan course,) which runs north-east and
south-west for several hundred feet: near low water it exhibits that
appearance called by the miners a heave. The course terminates
abruptly, and begins again about twenty feet further to the south,
from whence it goes on as before the heave.

This porphyry is decomposed at the surface and to some depth, into a
fine white clay, from which bricks of a good quality are made on the
spot.




BURIAN.


HALS.

Burian is situated at the western extremity of the county, having two
adjoining parishes, Senner and St. Levan annexed; the former of which
includes the Lands’ End. In Domesday tax this district was rated by
the name of Beriand, for Berian or Bury-an; synonymous words,
signifying a cemetery or burying place for human creatures; that is to
say, that place which is now called the churchyard, which was an
inclosure, as in most other places, converted to that use before and
since the church was erected therein. This instance of a Domesday
Roll, wherein this district is named Beri-an, overthrows the story of
Camden’s conjecture, that the name thereof was derived from one St.
Buryana, an Irishwoman that was the tutelar guardian of this church,
whereas the appellation of Saint, as I have elsewhere observed, at
that time was not given to but one church in Cornwall. Besides, this
Irish saint is not to be found in the Roman legend, or calendar, nor
in Capgrave’s catalogue of English and Irish Saints.

This church was founded and endowed by King Athelstan, about the year
930, after such time as he had conquered the Scilly Islands, as also
the county of Devon; and made Cornwall tributary to his sceptre. To
which church he gave lands and tithes of a considerable value for
ever, himself becoming the first patron thereof, as his successors the
Kings of England have been ever since: for which reason it is still
called the royal rectory, or regal rectory, and the royal or regal
peculiar. Signifying thereby that this is the church or chapel
pertaining to the king, or immediately under the jurisdiction of him
as the supreme ordinary, from when there is no appeal; whereas other
peculiars, though exempt from the visitation or jurisdiction of the
diocesan bishop within whose see they stand, yet are always subject to
the provincial archbishops of Canterbury and York, or other persons.

This church or college consisted of canons augustines, or regular
priests, and three prebendaries, who enjoyed the revenues thereof in
common, but might not marry; and the lord chancellors of England of
old visited this peculiar, which extended only over the parishes of
Burian, Sennen, and St. Levan, for the king.

One of the Popes of Rome, about the time of Edward III. obtruded upon
this church, the canons and prebends thereof, a dean to be an
inspector and overseer over them: whom he nominated to be the bishop
of Exon for the time being, who for some time visited this church as
its governor, as the lord chancellor did before; which encroachment of
the Pope being observed by Edward III., as appears from the register
of the writs, folio 40 and 41; 8 Edward III. rot. 97. This usurpation
of the Pope was taken away.

[Mr. Hals here enters into long dissertations respecting secular
canons, regular canons, the state generally of the church and of the
clergy, benefices held in commendam, &c. which, not having any
particular relation to the parochial history of Cornwall, are
omitted.]

Boscawen-ros in this parish, compounded of Boscawen-ros, is a name
given and taken from the natural circumstances of the place, and
signifies in Cornish-British “a valley, notable for skeawe or scawen”
trees. And indeed this place, being naked and exposed to the sea on
the cliffs of the British Channel, anciently, as it seems, produced no
other trees than scawen, (i. e. elder,) proper to that part of the
country; neither, I think, is there any other trees at present that
grow there. From this place was transnominated an Irish gentleman that
settled here either by marriage or purchase, in the latter end of the
reign of Edward IV., who discontinued his paternal name, and styled
himself John de Boscawen, which latter name hath been the hereditary
name of his posterity ever since; who from hence transplanted their
dwellings to Tregameer in St. Colomb Major; and Trevallock in Creed or
St. Stephen’s; and from thence, by marriage with the daughter and heir
of Tregothnan by Lawrence Boscawen, gentleman, attorney-at-law, temp.
Henry VII., who died 1567, and lieth buried in the north aile of St.
Michael Penkivell Church, as is testified by a brass inscription on
his gravestone, there lately extant, upon which, on a lead escutcheon,
was engraved his paternal coat armour, viz. in a field Vert, a bull
passant Argent, armed Or; on a chief Ermine, a rose Gules; crest a
boar Argent:――out of a supposed allusion to their present name, as if
it had signified a white bull and a rose. In the reign of James I. his
posterity discontinued this bearing, and gave only for their arms,
Ermine, a rose; which, I take it, also is the hereditary coat armour
of Beverley. See St. Michael Penkivell. Since the writing hereof this
place is become the hereditary honorary title of Hugh Lord Boscawen,
Baron of Boscawen-rose, and Viscount of Falmouth.

Upon Boscawen downs, some of which was lately the lands of Mr.
Christopher Davis, stands a monument called Dance Meyns, that is to
say the dance stones; which are nineteen pyramidal stones, about six
foot high above ground, set in a round circle, distant from each other
about twelve feet, having in the centre one pitched far bigger than
the rest; a little to the north of those are two admirable great
stones in perpendicular manner, much bigger than the rest, those are
vulgarly called the Pipers. But since it is not probable that those
stones were either dancers or pipers, I take the common appellation
dance meyns, only by the dialect to be a corruption of dans meyns, id
est, men’s stones; that is to say stones set up in memory of once so
many famous men that lived in those parts, or lie interred there,
before the sixth century.[22] Mr. Davis aforesaid informed me, that,
contiguous with those dans meynes, he caused not long since divers
barrows of earth to be carried abroad in order to manure his lands, in
several of which burrows he found two or three urns or earthern pots,
sound and firm, having in them pieces of bones, and ashes.

About twenty years past, the sexton of this parish sinking a grave
four feet deep in the ground, he met with a large flat marble or other
stone, which he lifted up out of the earth, on which was cut or
engraved a long plain cross, surmounted on four grieces or steps; on
the border of this stone, round the said cross, was an inscription in
Norman French, which soundeth thus in English:――“Clarice, the wife of
Geffery de Bolleit, lies here; whosoever shall pray for her soul shall
have ten days’ pardon. Amen.”[23] There is a place still extant in
this parish called Bolait, or Bolaith, i. e. a place of slaying or
killing cows, kine, or cattle; otherwise it may be interpreted cow’s
milk, or a place notable for the same.

Trove, in this parish, is, in Cornish and Armorick, a dent, pit, a
cavern, or valley: a name doubtless taken from the natural and
artificial circumstances of the place, situate between two hills, on a
cavern; also Trewoofe, that is to say the town or dwelling of ob-yarn,
such as the sail-spinsters make, in order to be woof, or woven cross
the warp in pieces of cloth, stuff, or serges, from whence was
denominated a family of gentlemen named Trewoofe; who, out of a
mistaken etymology of their name, (as many others in Cornwall,) gave
for their arms, in a field ―――― three wolves’ heads; whereas,
try-bleith, try-bleit, is three wolves in Cornish; the heiress of
which family was married to Leveale, temp. Henry VIII. of the old
Norman race, whose posterity flourished here in good fame for several
descents, till, for want of issue male, Lewis Leveale’s daughter and
heir, by Cooke of Tregussa, carried this place, together with herself
in marriage, to Mr. Uspar or Vospar, temp. Charles I. who had issue
Arthur Vosper, his son and heir, who married Eyans, of Eyanston in
Oxfordshire, who had issue by her two daughters, married to Mr. Marke
of Woodhill and Mr. Dennis of Leskeard. This last gentleman, Mr.
Vospur, bathing himself in the river Isis in Oxfordshire, with other
young men, was there unfortunately drowned, about the year 1679. The
name Vosper or Vospur, in British-Cornish, signifies a pure or
immaculate maid or virgin. The arms of Leveale were three calves or
veals.

In the middle of this barton of Trove, on the top of a hill, is still
extant the downfalls of a castle or treble intrenchment called ――――,
in the midst of which is a hole leading to a vault under ground. How
far it extends no man now living can tell, by reason of the damps or
thick vapours that are in it; for as soon as you go an arrow flight in
it or less, your candles will go out, or extinguish of themselves, for
want of air. For what end or use this vault was made is uncertain,
though it is probable it was an arsenal or store-house for laying up
arms, ammunition, corn, and provision, for the soldiers of the castle
wherein it stands, in the wars between Charles I. and his Parliament.
Divers of the royal party, pursued in the West by the Parliament
troops under Sir Thomas Fairfax, were privately conveyed into this
vault as far as they could proceed with safety, where Mr. Leveale fed
and secured them till they found opportunity to make their escapes to
the king’s friends and party. See St. Evall.

Pentre, otherwise Pendrea, in this parish, id est, the head town, or
town at the head of some other, denominated a family of gentlemen from
thence called Pendre, who gave for their arms, Argent, on a bend Gules
and Sable, three fleurs de lis of the Field. John Pendre, the last of
this tribe, temp. Henry VI. leaving only two daughters that became his
heirs, who were married to Bonython of Carclew, and Noy. To Noy’s
share fell this tenement of Pendrea, which was the dwelling of him and
his posterity for several descents; and here was born, as I was
informed, William Noy, the Attorney-general to Charles I., who
designed to have built a notable house here but was prevented by
death, having before brought great quantities of materials to this
place in order thereto; his grandson, William Noy, Esq. sold this
place and several others to my very kind friend Christopher Davis,
Gent. now in possession thereof.

Burnewall, in this parish, id est, the walled well or well-pit of
waters, so called from some such place on the lands thereof, was also
formerly the lands of the said William Noy, who sold it to the said
Mr. Davis, who conveyed it to his nephew Henry Davis on his marriage
with Hester, daughter of Humphrey Noy, Gent. younger brother of the
said William Noy, now in possession thereof, and hath issue. The arms
of Davis are, Argent, a chevron Sable between three mullets Gules,
which also is the coat armour of Davey of Creedy in Devon.

Leah, also Lahe, id est, lawe, or leh, a place or dwelling, is the
seat of Oliver Ustick, or Usteck, Gent. (id est, Nightingale;
otherwise, Eus-teck is fair nightingale,) that married Roscrow of
Penryn.

From Als, now Alse, and Alsce, viz. lands towards or upon the
sea-coast, as this whole parish and its members are situate, was
denominated John de Als, or from Bar-Als-ton in Devon; temp. Henry I.
and King Stephen, ancestor of the De Alses, formerly of Lelant, now
Halses, see Lelant; which place was heretofore the voke lands of a
considerable manor, now dismembered and in the possession of Trevanion
and others. This family, in Edward III.’s days, wrote their surname De
Als, now Halse. See Prince’s Worthies of Devon, upon Hals.


TONKIN.

This parish is of large extent, and the land generally good, and lying
very warm on the South Sea, which, with the desire of living quiet,
has induced several gentlemen to settle themselves in this remote
corner of the kingdom, where they may liberally entertain all such as
out of curiosity come to visit the Land’s End.

Mr. Francis Paynter was brother to Doctor William Paynter, Rector of
Exeter College, Oxford, (elected in 1690, died Feb. 19, 1715, aged
eighty, was rector of Wootton in Northamptonshire, where he is
buried,――Editor;) both younger brothers to Mr. Paynter of Trelisick’s
father, who by his skill in husbandry, in which he has scarce his
fellow, not his superior in the county, and some helps of the law, has
purchased to himself a very fair younger brother’s inheritance. Though
this place lies near the sea, and very much exposed, yet has this
gentleman, by the means of furze ricks and other ingenious
contrivances, raised several fair walks of trees about it, and made it
a pleasant and profitable seat, which I mention here, that those who
live under the same inconveniences may imitate his industry. At Leigha
liveth Mr. Oliver Ustick, married to Julia the eldest of two daughters
of ―――― Roscrow of Penryn, of the family of Roscrows of Roscrow.
Leigha is part of the manor of Rosemadans, now the property of Mr.
Grosse.

Boscawanrose, in this parish, gave name and habitation to the famous
and honourable family of Boscawan, who, led away, as many other
Cornish gentlemen have been, by the similarity of sound between words
in the Kernawish tongue and others in French or in Latin, have
mistaken rose a valley, for the flower a rose; and more anciently they
are said to have borne in their arms, besides a rose, an ox, having
mistaken the word bos, which signifies a house or dwelling, for the
name of that animal.


THE EDITOR.

It seems very improbable that King Athelstan, after founding and
splendidly endowing a church to commemorate or to sanctify his
conquest of Cornwall, should bestow on it a name so very
indiscriminate as The burial-ground; more especially at a time when
missionaries from Ireland had recently converted the inhabitants to
Christianity, and had left to posterity a reputation for piety so
elevated as to invest them at once with the appellation of saints, and
to procure for them, in after times, the dedication of almost all the
churches throughout the County.

St. Burian is mentioned by Leland, Camden, Tanner, and various other
antiquaries, as a holy woman from Ireland, to whom King Athelstan
dedicated this church, and in Doctor Alban Butler’s Lives of the
Saints, &c. her festival is given on the 4th of June.

The establishment consisted of a dean and three prebendaries, who are
said by Mr. Lysons to have held from the King by the service of saying
a hundred masses and a hundred psalters for the souls of the King and
of his ancestors. It is not stated how frequently those recitations
were to take place.

Bishop Tanner, in the Notitia Monastica, states that this deanery was
seised into the king’s hands in the time of Edward III. under the
pretence that John de Mount, the third dean, was a Frenchman. In 18
Henry VI. this deanery was given to his college (King’s) in Cambridge;
and afterwards, by Edward IV. probably in the true spirit of party, to
the collegiate church of Windsor. It was, however, soon separated from
Windsor, and continues, according to the foundation of Athelstan,
exempt from all inferior jurisdiction, and consequently since Henry
VIII.’s assumption of all temporal power exercised by the Pope, there
is not any appeal from the local authorities but to the king himself;
a constitution most inexpedient, and likely to produce the most
serious inconvenience, if matters of much importance ever came for
investigation and decision before a court wholly unfitted, from its
very nature, from entertaining them; and yet empowered to declare a
judgment final to all intents and purposes, unless it is immediately
revised by the highest and most expensive ecclesiastical tribunal.

This exemption from all episcopal authority has, in times not very
remote, admitted of such abuses in the administration of divine
service, and of the spiritual care of the three parishes, as would not
otherwise have been endured. It would be worse, however, than useless
to expatiate on a system which is fortunately passed by.

I believe that no dean has resided since the final dissolution of the
college; the Royner’s hand having been there so forcibly applied as to
wrest off the whole glebe, not leaving even an habitation, nor the
smallest portion of land on which a house could be built. The nominal
deanery of St. Burian, like that of Battle and two or three more, is
not esteemed a dignity in the church: yet with cure of souls, and for
no better reason than its not being mentioned _eo nomine_ in the
canons and acts of Parliament, this living is allowed to be tenable
with all other preferments, and at all distances.

Pendrea, the birth place and property of Mr. William Noye the
attorney-general, was sold by his eldest son, Edward Noye, to Mr.
Davies of Burnuhall, and by his grandson to Mr. Tonkin, whose great
grandson, the Rev. Uriah Tonkin, possesses it at this time. At
Burnuhall there still remains a curious performance of shell-work,
said to have been made by Mr. Davies’ daughters, strongly expressive
of the political feelings then almost universal throughout Cornwall.
King Charles II. is represented flying from his enemies, and one of
them, in full pursuit, has a legend, “This is the heir! come, let us
kill him, that the inheritance may be our own!” whilst an angel
exclaims in the same manner from a cloud “Is it not written, Thou
shalt do no murder?” The material of this work is found in great
variety and beauty round the coast, and particularly at Porth Kernow,
near the Logging Rock.

The last Mr. Davies of Burnuhall married ―――― Kegwin of Newlyn; he
wasted the remains of a property which had been gradually diminishing
in the hands of his father and of his grandfather; so that about the
year 1750, Burnuhall and some other farms were sold to Admiral
Boscawen.

Boskenna is the property and residence of Mr. Francis Paynter, a very
respectable gentleman and magistrate, the great-grandson, I believe,
of the individual distinguished by Mr. Hals for his skill in
husbandry. There is a tradition of his having purchased the place of
one whose family had long possessed it, but who had ultimately become
the huntsman of a pack of hounds kept originally as his own.

Mr. Francis Paynter, uncle of the gentleman now possessed of Boskenna,
was greatly distinguished for his wit and humour. He was either the
sole or joint author of a poem made in imitation of Prior’s Alma, and
in ridicule of the then dean of Burian, called “The Consultation.” Mr.
Paynter practised his profession of the law near St. Columb. He
married Miss Pender of Penzance, and left several sons. The exercise
of wit is not always, perhaps not frequently, associated with
pecuniary gain. The Editor has heard Mr. Paynter declare that “The
Consultation” prevented his obtaining a valuable stewardship from the
family of which the dean was a member.

The Vyvyans of Trelovornow are said to have originated from Treviddror
in this parish. And Lord Chief Justice Tresilian was from Burian, in
whose descendants Pendor and Ristchurch, after the lapse of nearly
five centuries, some of his property still remains.

From about fifty to seventy years ago Boskenna attracted much
attention, and gave occasion to various conjectures over the whole
neighbourhood, in consequence of a gentleman and lady residing there
under the assumed name of Browne, and withdrawing themselves entirely
from public observation. They were conjectured to be members of some
distinguished family on the continent implicated in political
disputes; or at the least, some very eminent persons of our own
country, till at last the mystery was explained by a disclosure of
their real name and condition.

Mr. Berty Birge, having been involved in the pecuniary affairs of an
individual who subsequently became insane, found himself obliged to
retire, although it is understood that nothing discreditable to his
character occurred in the transactions. On that individual’s decease
Mr. Birge resumed his real name, and removed to Penzance, where he
passed the remainder of his life.

The church of St. Burian is among those most distinguished for size
and beauty in the west of Cornwall. It is situated on high ground,
with a lofty tower, conspicuous therefore from a very great distance.
It possessed, till within these few years, a curious rood-loft.

A station of the great trigonometrical survey was placed in 1796 very
near Burian church, and in the Philosophical Transactions for 1800,
the latitude of the tower is stated to be 50° 4′ 32.8″, and the
longitude is 5° 36′ 10.5″, or in time 22′ 24.7″ west of Greenwich.

  Burian measures 6274 statute acres.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           7288    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           350    0    0
  The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to old
    May day.
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1161   |   1188   |   1495   |   1707;
    being an increase of 47 in a hundred in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Hon. F. Stanhope.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The whole of this parish, with the exception of a small patch of slate
at Rosemodris, rests on granite. Judging from what occurs in the
eastern part of Cornwall, one might be led to expect that the land of
St. Burian must be sterile. In some elevated spots it undoubtedly is
so, but in general the parish is well cultivated and highly
productive.

This difference in the granitic soils of east and of west Cornwall,
may be, in part, explained by the gradual diminution of height towards
the west, accompanied by a corresponding improvement of the climate;
but in this part of the county more of the debris, especially of
diluvial clay, is retained on the surface, that of the more elevated
eastern ridges having been in great measure swept away.

This circumstance must not, however, be omitted. The granite of Burian
exhibits more varieties than have been yet found in the eastern
district. The slate in the cliffs at Rosemodris is a felspar rock, and
its contact with the granite is distinctly seen; where it may be
observed at the eastern extremity traversed by numerous granite veins;
and the granite near this junction abounds in shorl.


NOTE BY THE EDITOR.

Doctor Paris has remarked on the granite of this district, that it
contains full twenty-five per cent. of felspar, which he says at once
explains the rapidity of this stone’s decomposition, and the fertility
which is so very unusual in granitic countries; and that this granite
in a state of decomposition, when it is provincially called growan,
has actually been applied to some lands as a manure, and with the best
effect.

I had the pleasure of attending Doctor Withering (author of the
Arrangement of British Plants, &c.) to the Land’s End in 1793, when he
expressed much surprise at the fertility of a granitic soil, and
explained it as Doctor Paris has since done, by observing that in all
the granite he had previously seen siliceous matter abounded, and that
the very word was synonymous with sterile, but that here felspar and
fertility appeared together.

Felspar is said to contain nearly a third part of its weight of
alumine, about an eighth part of lime, and a twentieth of soda.


     [22] That there exists, however, a prevalent connection of
     these monuments with allusions to dancing, is shown in the
     Essay on Dracontia, by the Rev. J. B. Deane, F.S.A. in
     Archæologia, vol. xxv. The name of Dans Maen is generally
     given to the various stone circles in the county of
     Cornwall. Dr. Borlase remarks that there are four circles in
     the hundred of Penrith, having nineteen stones each; viz.
     Boscawen-ûn, Rosmodrevy, Tregaseal, and Boskednan, the two
     most distant being not eight miles apart. Of Boscawen-ûn
     there are views in the works of Borlase and Stukeley, as
     well as among the more accurate etchings by William Cotton,
     Esq. 4to. 1827. He has also given a view and plan of the
     dans-meyne at Bolleit in this parish; and two obeliscal
     stones at the same place are represented in Borlase, pl. 10.
     See also in pl. 14 the hanging stone in Karn Boscawen, and a
     Maen Tôl, or holed stone, both in Burian; as is the circle
     called Rosmodrevy.――EDIT.

     [23] Engraved in Gough’s Camden, vol. I. pl. 1.




CALLINGTON.


THE EDITOR.

Neither Mr. Hals nor Mr. Tonkin notice this parish. It is appended to
the parish of Southill. The name is pronounced Kelliton in the
immediate neighbourhood.

Callington is situated in the hundred of East, having Southill and
Stoke Climsland on the north; Calstock on the east; St. Mellior and
St. Dominick to south; and St. Ive to the West.

The town is said to have sent members to Parliament so early as the
reign of Henry III., when the privileges of markets and fairs were
granted; but the first authentic return was in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth.

In the time of Henry III. the manor and lordship of Callington were
vested in the family of Ferrers, by a grant from the earls of
Cornwall; the possession has passed by heiresses to several families;
and finally, through Dennis, Rolle and Walpole, to Mr. George William
Trefusis of Trefusis, in Milor; together with the barony in fee of
Clinton, created by a writ directed John de Clinton, 17 Edward I.
A.D. 1299. His grandson sold the property to Mr. Alexander Baring,
at a period when some adventitious circumstances, no longer in
existence, added materially to its value. The church and town are
handsome specimens of the gothic architecture which distinguishes the
west of England; and there exist several ancient monuments of
individuals formerly lords of the manor.

  This parish contains 2387 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4142    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                       950   17    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    819   |    938   |   1321   |   1388;
    giving an increase of 70 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The north-eastern part of this parish extends to the east of Kitt
Hill, the most elevated point of Hingston Downs, which is composed of
granite. The slate adjoining thereto resembles that which occurs in
similar situations in the parishes of St. Austell and St. Blazey; and
this district has been the scene of considerable mining speculations.
In former ages it abounded in stream tin to such an amount that the
Cornishmen of those days expressed their opinion of its value by the
distich

     Hengsten Down, well yrought
     Is worth London town, dear ybought.
                   _Carew, Lord Dunstanville’s Edition, p. 272._

As the town of Callington is approached, the slate becomes of a darker
blue, and passes into hornblend rock, which prevails in the other
parts of the parish, and in several places so much abounds in quartz
as to form barren downs. This rock, however, has not any marked
character, and it is not often exposed to view; near St. Ive it
appears to graduate into the calcareous series.




CALSTOCK.


HALS.

Calstock is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north
Stoke Clemsland, west Kellaton, south St. Dominick, east the Tamar
river.

The rectory of Calstock church seems to be extant before Domesday Tax,
since it passed then by that name, and hath never admitted of any
change of name or alteration since, and was undoubtedly founded and
endowed by the Earls of Cornwall, out of their manor of Calstock,
wherein it is situate; and the Duke of Cornwall, or the King, in that
right, are still patrons thereof. Ecclesia de Calstock, in Decanatu de
Estwellshire, was valued to the Pope’s annats, 1294, c_s._; in
Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor Beneficionum, 26_l._ 4_s._ 4_d._ The
patronage as aforesaid, the Incumbent Blackburn, and the parish rated
to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, temp. William III. 302_l._
0_s._ 2_d._

It appears from the ancient survey of the Duchy of Cornwall in the
Exchequer, and Blount’s Tenures from thence, p. 122, that the tenants
of this manor had granted them, by the Earls or Dukes thereof, its
lords, the liberty of free fishing on the Tamar river, in his verbis:
“Nativi tenentes de Calstock, in comitatu Cornubiæ, reddunt per annum
de certo redditu, vocato Berbiagium, sine barbague, ad le Hoke-day,
19_s._ 6_d._” Now barbague, barbagyu, is, in Cornish, a bearded or
barbed spear, such as is commonly used for killing salmons in the
Tamar and other rivers. [See Stoke-Clemsland.] The salmon wear, here
built over the Tamar, is, by lease from the Duke of Cornwall, in
possession of Sir John Carew, baronet, and hath formerly been set for
120_l._ per annum. [See Helston in Trigg for Barbiague. Tenants on the
Alan river there.]

Cuthill, in this place, I take it was the most ancient seat of the
knightly family of Edgecombes in Cornwall, and is still in their
possession; and here lived Sir Richard Edgecombe, knight, that
assisted Henry the Seventh against Richard the Third, who was
bountifully rewarded for his services by that prince.


TONKIN

has merely transcribed from Hals.


THE EDITOR.

Calstock, or Calstoke, has of late become a mining parish on an
extensive scale. The manor having been sold by the Duchy for the
redemption of Land Tax, has ultimately become the property of Mr. John
Williams, one of the most skilful and successful miners in Cornwall.

Cotehele is preserved by Lord Mount Edgecombe as a faithful
representative of what were the residences of country gentlemen or
barons in the ancient acceptation of that word.

“It came,” says Lysons, “into the possession of the Edgecombe family,
by the marriage of Hilaria, daughter and heir of William de Cotehele,
with William de Edgecombe, in the reign of Edward III. After this
marriage, Cotehele became for a while the chief residence of the
Edgecombe family.” Carew, speaking of this place, says, “the buildings
are ancient, large, strong, and fayre, and appurtenanced with the
necessaries of wood, water, fishing, park, and mills, with the
devotion of (in times past) a rich-furnished chapel, and with the
charity of almshouses, for certain poor people, whom the owners used
to relieve.”

The beauty of its situation, the river and ancient ponds, united with
the antiquities of the place, render Cotehele one of the most curious
and worthy of attention in the West of England; and the following
description, taken in 1830 by an architectural correspondent of the
Gentleman’s Magazine, is therefore extracted from that miscellany for
1833.

     “There is a singularity about this Mansion, which requires
     to be accounted for. It cannot claim an origin in very
     remote antiquity, the earliest parts being not older than
     the reign of Henry the Seventh; yet the narrowness of the
     windows and other openings, and the tower above the gateway,
     would lead to the idea that it was built in an early
     insecure period. This, I think, may be accounted for from
     the fact that the builder, Sir Richard Edgecombe, had
     encountered personal danger in the wars of the Roses, and
     probably erected his mansion in the early part of the reign
     of Henry the Seventh, so soon after the conclusion of the
     conflict, that he might be impressed with the fear that the
     reign of the newly enthroned monarch might not be more
     peaceable than that of his predecessors, and he adopted
     under these impressions the style which the mansion now
     displays.

     “The house is quadrangular, with a court-yard in the centre;
     and, like the generality of the mansions of antiquity, has
     the appendage of a hall and chapel. It is built of
     moor-stone in irregular courses, though some of the blocks
     are exceedingly large. The west front is not imposing, from
     the want of height, which detracts from its general
     appearance. The entrance is not in the centre, and is only
     wide enough for foot passengers; it consists of an obtuse
     pointed arch, slightly moulded with foliage on the
     spandrils, which is inclosed within another of larger
     dimensions with a weather cornice, and on the space between
     the two is a blank shield accompanied by two bold leaves.
     The windows are situated high in the wall; they are of small
     dimensions, being in fact little more than enlarged
     loopholes. The chimneys are square, having caps formed with
     coping stones. Above the entrance is a tower of a cubical
     form, with an embattled parapet. On entering the court
     through the gateway, the Hall is seen in the front, and near
     it, on the west side of the quadrangle, the lantern window
     of the Chapel.

     “The interior of the Hall is very interesting. The roof is
     timber, and arched; and on the walls hang various pieces of
     armour and weapons of considerable antiquity, with a
     complete suit of armour, which is probably not older than
     the Civil wars. In the end walls are apertures in the shape
     of a quatrefoil, which admit a view of the hall from
     adjacent apartments, and would allow the motions of persons
     assembled in it to be watched. There are some specimens of
     ancient furniture in the hall; in particular a chair having
     the date 1627. In the windows are several armorial shields
     in stained glass.

[Illustration: CHAPEL AT COTEHELE.]

     “The Chapel projects from the western side of the mansion.
     It is small and neat, and has a small bell-tower. The square
     window in the west end is unglazed; the aperture being
     secured by wide bars; but allowing any person standing on
     the outside to see the altar. At the distance of a few feet
     from the door lies an ancient font, 19 inches square by 14
     inches deep; it is formed of a block of moorstone, and
     panelled at the sides. The interior of this chapel is
     approached from the mansion by the hall, to which it
     communicates through a small room. The roof is timber,
     ribbed and panelled; and coved in the form of an obtuse
     arch. In the south window St. Anne and St. Katherine are
     represented in painted glass. The altar is oak, with upright
     panels, having quatrefoil heads. An ancient altar cloth is
     preserved in the house; it is formed of red velvet powdered
     with fleur-de-lis, and the part which was shown when it was
     laid on the altar, had a crucifix in the centre, accompanied
     by the twelve apostles in rich embroidery, and the arms of
     Edgecombe.

     “The limit of a single visit would not allow me to
     particularize the various articles of furniture contained in
     the mansion. In the drawing-room the screen to the doorway
     appears to be of the date of the building; on the door
     itself are roses in lozenges. The bedroom, called King
     Charles’s, has a fine ancient state bed, with a profusion of
     carved work about it; and a steel mirror. The dog-inns, some
     of which are probably as old as the mansion, remain in the
     fire-places. Two chairs commemorate a visit from King George
     the Third and Queen Charlotte in 1789.

     “In the grounds is another chapel, which derives its
     interest from the circumstance of its having been erected by
     Sir Richard Edgecombe in commemoration of his escape from
     his pursuers by concealment near the spot. It is much
     injured by modern alterations made in 1769, and externally
     retains little of its original features. In the interior are
     several ancient paintings, which probably formed the
     decorations of an ancient altar-piece; when entire, it
     represented the Annunciation. In the east window are St.
     George, and a female saint with a sword, in painted glass,
     and several coats of arms. There is also an ancient painting
     of the monument of the founder of the chapel, who was buried
     in the conventual church of Morlaix in Bretagne, in
     September 1489; and a carving in wood of St. Thomas a
     Becket.”

It is a curious circumstance in the history of Cornwall, that several
of the principal gentlemen from this remote county, took active parts
on either side between King Richard the Third and his antagonist Henry
the Seventh: many were present at the battle of Bosworth. Mr. Carew
relates (p. 269, Lord Dunstanville’s edition) the almost miraculous
escape of Sir Richard Edgecombe of Cotehele, when he was pursued (as I
apprehend) by Bodrigar, who, in his turn, found himself obliged to fly
after the defeat of King Richard; and his property was divided between
Edgecumbe and Trevanion, with whom a large part of it still remains.

The river from Cotehele to New Bridge exhibits a magnificence of
scenery very rarely to be found: the cliffs on the east and
north-eastern bank affording here the steep and bold scarpment, as in
all other similar situations throughout the country.

Harewood, in this parish, although in the different style of a modern
seat, almost rivals Cotehele: this spacious and elegant house was
built almost forty years ago by Mr. Foot; but the place was sold after
his decease, and it is now the property and residence of Mr. William
Salusbury Trelawney, heir of that ancient and distinguished family.
Mr. Trelawney married Miss Carpenter, of Mount Toby, near Tavistock,
and now (1833) represents the eastern division of Cornwall in
Parliament.

Sandhill is another handsome seat in this parish, occupied by Mr.
Williams, who, since his purchase of the manor, has improved the waste
lands, planted such elevated or steep portions as were unfit for
agriculture, and in every way contributed to the prosperity of the
place and of its inhabitants.

  This parish contains 5035 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5801    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1426    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1105   |   2064   |   2388   |   2328;
    being an increase of about 111 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Edward Morshead, presented by the King in
    1796.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The Geological structure of this parish is precisely similar to that
of Callington; but, as it is better developed, it will admit of a
little more detail.

The northern part consists of the granite of Hingston Down, which is
crystalline, and it is extensively quarried for economical purposes.
The quarries near the summit of Kitt Hill afford excellent
illustrations of the internal structure of the granitic mass. On this
Down, beds of fine-grained granite project here and there above the
surface, resembling that which occurs as Elvan courses in the adjacent
slate. The latter rock consists of a basis of granular felspar,
spotted and spangled with a shining mineral like mica. This slate, as
well as the granite, have been long explored for tin and copper. Shorl
and mica generally abound in the lodes; and the former mineral is
often so intimately combined with the quartz, as to form a
dark-coloured compact shorl rock. Southward the slate becomes more
blue, and is fissile into extended slabs. Near the village of Calstock
it is soft and lamellar, having evidently graduated into the
calcareous series. At Cotehele, near the landing place, a beautiful
oved-coloured calcareous schist is quarried, which is said to prove a
good material for lining kilns and ovens: it has a shining talcose
appearance, resembling that of Trenalt, near Pallephant, in Alternon.

Nearly opposite to the Rectory, built by Bishop Blackbourn, and
pleasantly situated on the river, may be seen the debouch of a canal
from Tavistock, with an inclined plane, descending into the Tamar.
This canal, in one part of its line, passes through a hill at the
depth of seventy fathoms.




CAMBORNE.


HALS.

Camborne is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the east
Redruth, north Illugan, west Gwynier, south Crowan. For its modern
name, Camborne, which was not extant at the time of the Norman
Conquest, signifies a crooked or arched burne, or well.

This parish is said to derive its name from a holy well situated
within it, to which great numbers of persons resorte from a high
opinion of its great medical virtues, in addition to its sanctity.

Ecclesia de Camborne, in Decanatu de Penwid, 1294, was rated to the
Pope’s annats viii_l._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor
Beneficiorum, £39. 16_s._ 9_d._ The patronage in Basset, the incumbent
Newcombe; the parish rated to the 4_s._ per £1. Tax, 1696, £203.
16_s._

Pendarves in this parish, I am informed, transnominated a family of
gentlemen from Tresona, i. e. the charm town, in St. Enoder, to
Pendarves, temp. Eliz. William Pendarves, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall
30th Cha. II. 1680, married Adiston, daughter of Edmund Prideaux, Esq.
but died without issue; whereby his estate descended to his second
brother’s son; and he dying without issue, it descended to his third
brother’s son, viz. Sir William Pendarves, knight, now in possession
thereof, who married Godolphin, the widow of Hoblyn of Nanswidon. His
father, Thomas Pendarves, clerk, rector of St. Colomb Major, and St.
Mawgun in Pider, married Hoblyn of Nanswiddon; his grandfather,
Arundell of Menadarva; his great-grandfather Humphrys; and giveth for
his arms, in a field Sable, a falcon Argent displayed, between three
mullets Or.

Menadarva, in this parish, is the dwelling of William Arundell, Esq.
descended from the Arundells of Trerice, to whose ancestor, temp.
Charles I. it was given by the last will and testament of John
Arundell, of Trerice, Esq. (commonly called John of Tilbury, for that
with Queen Elizabeth, at that place, he was an officer under her in
the standing army posted in that place in expectation of and to oppose
the Spanish Armada 1588), in those words amongst other――“Item, I give
to my naturall son, John Arundell, my mannor and barton of Menadarva
in Camburne, and to his heirs lawfully begotten for ever.”

The last gentleman of this family dying without issue male, his
sisters for a time, married to Tresahar and others, became possessed
of this lordship; but it happened that a brother of theirs also, who
was a merchant factor in Spain, who married an innkeeper’s widow
there, in Malaga or Seville, of English extraction, was said to be
dead without issue, but it seems before his death had issue by her an
infant son, which was bred up in Spain till he came of age, without
knowledge of his relations aforesaid; who, being brought into England
with his mother, temp. Will. III. delivered ejectments upon the barton
and manor of Menadarva, and the occupants thereof, as heir-at-law to
Arundell, and brought down a trial upon the same at Lanceston, in this
county; where upon the issue it appeared, upon the oaths of Mr.
Delliff and other Spanish merchants of London, that the said heir was
the legitimate son of Mr. Arundell aforesaid in Spain, and born under
coverture or marriage; he obtained a verdict and judgment thereon for
the same, and is now in possession thereof. He married Tremanheer of
Penzance, and hath issue. The arms of this family are the same as
those of the Arundells of Trerice, with due distinction.[24]

Roswarne, in this parish, gave to its owner the name of De Roswarne,
one of which tribe sold those lands, temp. James I. to Ezekiel Grosse,
gent. attorney-at-law, who made it his dwelling, and in this place got
a great estate by the inferior practice of the law; but much more,[25]
as tradition saith, by means of a spirit or apparition that haunted
him in this place till he spake to it (for it is notable that sort of
things called apparitions, are such proud gentry that they never speak
first), whereupon it discovered to him where much treasure lay hid in
this mansion, which, according to the (honest) ghost’s direction he
found, to his great enriching; after which this phantasm or spectrum
become so troublesome and direful to him day and night, that it forced
him to forsake this place (as rich, it seems, as this devil could make
him) and to quit his claim thereto by giving or selling it to his
clerk John Call; whose son, John Call, gent. sold it again to Robert
Hooker, gent. attorney-at-law, now in possession thereof. The arms of
Call were, in a field three trumpets, in allusion to the name in
English; but in Cornish British, call, cal, signifies any hard,
flinty, or obdurate matter or thing, and hirgorne is a trumpet.

Crane, adjoining Roswarne, gave name to its possessor Cit-crane, who
gave bustards or cranes for his arms; for as Crana, Krana, is as grus
in Latin, so it is a crane in English; garan and cryhyr is in the
Welsh. One of which gentlemen sold this tenement also to Gross, who
conveyed it to Call, as Call hath to Hooker aforesaid.

Treswithan, or Trease-withan, in this parish, compounded of
Tres-with-an, was of old the seat of the De Brayes, gentlemen
heretofore of great antiquity, good note, and considerable revenues in
those parts; though in the time of Charles I. their estate was much
impaired, so that the last gentleman of this family dying much
indebted, and no heir appearing, occasioned a memorable lawsuit
between Sir Francis Basset, knight, lord of the manor of Tyhiddy, of
which those lands of Treswithan were held, and the creditors of Mr.
Braye, then in possession of the premises: when in fine, upon the
issue at law at Lanceston, the jury gave it in escheat, for want of
issue, to Sir Francis Basset, in right of his manor aforesaid, the
verdict passing against the creditors; whereby the posterity of Sir
Francis are possessed of it to this day.


TONKIN

has merely copied from Mr. Hals.


THE EDITOR.

Camborne has risen more rapidly into wealth and importance than any
other parish in Cornwall. The church tower is so large and well-built,
and it possesses with a market so many appendages of a regular town,
that the prefix church may well be omitted.

Pendarves was given by Mrs. Percevall, surviving sister of Sir William
Pendarves, to Mr. John Stackhouse, second son of Doctor William
Stackhouse, Rector of St. Anne, who married Miss Williams, heiress of
that branch of the Williamses of Probus, which had settled at Trehane.
Mr. John Stackhouse married Miss Acton, with whom he acquired a very
large property in Shropshire: his son, Mr. Edward William Wynne
Pendarves is now the proprietor. Pendarves has become a very handsome
seat in consequence of the successive improvements made by the late
Mr. Stackhouse and himself. He has adopted the name of Pendarves in
the place of Stackhouse, and added Wynne in gratitude of a large
addition made to his fortunes by the late Reverend Luttrell Wynne,
LL.D.

Mr. Pendarves has followed the examples of his two immediate
predecessors, by marrying a considerable heiress, Miss Triste, from
Devonshire. He has been twice elected member for the county, and now
(1833) represents the western division of Cornwall.

Menadarva was purchased by the late Mr. Basset, and belongs to his
son, Lord Dunstanville.

Rosewarne was the residence of Mr. William Harris, who greatly
increased his fortune by skill and success in mining. He served the
office of sheriff in 1773. His only daughter and heiress is married to
Mr. Winchcombe Hartley, a gentleman of Berkshire.

Crane, with several adjoining farms, became the property of Mr. John
Oliver Willyams, of Carnanton, in right of his mother, and the whole,
on his demise, was purchased by Lord Dunstanville.

I cannot close my short additions to Camborne without noticing Mr.
Richard Trevithick. No one, with the exception of Mr. Watt, has
probably contributed in so great a degree to the improvement of
steam-engines, the most important and the most philosophical of all
mechanical inventions. His enterprise has also equalled the abstract
powers of his mind, and for several years he laboured in South America
to give the mines of that great continent the advantage of European
machinery; but civil wars, and the instability of Governments,
defeated his best endeavours, so as to render them, up to the present
time, unavailing either to those mines or to himself.

  Camborne contains 5933 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
   returned to Parliament in 1815          11,783    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                        2,649   16    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   4811   |   4714   |   6219   |   7699;
    giving an increase of 60 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The eastern and south-western sides of this parish are situate on
granite, the greater part consisting of high and barren hills,
including Carnbrea and Carnkie. This rock is large-grained, and not
very prone to disintegrate; it is occasionally traversed by beds of
felspar porphyry.

On the boundaries of this granite, and in the adjacent slate, are
numerous tin and copper-mines, the most interesting of which are
Delcoath and Cock’s Kitchen; the latter extends into the parish of
Illogan, but is a continuation of the Camborne lodes. Delcoath has
been for many years the deepest mine in Cornwall. It stands at the
surface, about fifty fathoms (300 feet) above the level of the sea,
and the deepest shaft is about a hundred and eighty fathoms (1080
feet) below the sea level, making on the whole a depth from the
surface of nearly 1400 feet.

These mines exhibit the curious geological phenomena of alternating
granite and slate; that is, in sinking a perpendicular shaft, the
miner passes repeatedly out of one of these rocks into the other.
Various theoretical opinions have been entertained on this subject:
some geologists supposing that the layers are no more than irregular
protuberances from the main mass of the rock; whilst others consider
them as large veins dipping towards and communicating with the granite
at a great depth. But it is ascertained that these granite layers are
sometimes detached or insulated masses, whilst at other times they
form large veins or courses, which have regular bearings to a
considerable distance, and are then called elvans; to form, however, a
correct idea of the features of these phenomena, we must become
acquainted, not with the appearance only, but with the nature and
composition of these two rocks.

Granite and slate are usually considered, from their exterior
character, as very dissimilar, whereas in this situation their real
composition is nearly alike.

The granite immediately in contact with the slate, consists of compact
felspar, containing particles or crystals of felspar, quartz, and
mica, in variable proportions, but the whole generally increasing
towards the centre of the mass. So that the granite is changed into a
felspar rock or porphyry rock, scarcely ever resembling a well
characterised granite; while the slate in contact has received the
various names of greywacke, greenstone, clayslate, and killas; but it
appears to be a rock _sui generis_, consisting almost entirely of
compact felspar, coloured purple or blue by its intimate union with a
dark-coloured micaceous mineral, sometimes seen distinct on the
surface of the slate, and from which it appears to derive its lamellar
structure. The bases of these two rocks are therefore the same, and at
the point of contact it is often difficult to draw a line between
them; for the slate passes into white compact felspar by the gradual
disappearance of its colouring mineral; and this granite rock, by the
more and more additions of felspar, quartz, and mica, reassumes its
usual character.

On this view of the subject, it is easy to comprehend why the granite
and the slate alternate and mutually pass into each other; and an
explanation may also be given of the complicated phenomena of granite
veins in slate, when it is assumed that both rocks are not only of
contemporaneous origin, but likewise similar in their mineral
composition.

Between this mining district and a line drawn east and west across the
parish, a little north of the church town, the land is in most places
very good; but north of this line, at the extremity of the parish,
where it abuts on the sea, the ground is almost entirely uncultivated,
affording nothing more than a slight pasturage for sheep. At Godrevy
Point there is laid open an interesting section of diluvial deposits:
one of the beds, composed of shelly sand and pebbles, is consolidated
with sandstone and conglomerate.


     [24] See Symons of Halt in Botus Fleming.

     [25] Here the word “fire-side” is interlined; and at ‡ the
     words “good now” in the same hand with the paragraph within
     brackets.




CARDINHAM.


HALS.

Cardinham is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north
Blisland, Temple, and part of Altarnun; south, Bradock and Warleggan;
west, Bodmin. For the name, it is compounded of those particles,
car-din-ham, id est, the rock-man’s-home or habitation; also
car-dyn-an, i. e. the rock man, or a man that dwells upon, or has his
residence amongst rocks, or in a rocky country, with which sort of
inanimate creatures the north part of this parish aboundeth. It takes
its denomination from the manor and barton of old Cardinham; as from
thence did its lord and owner Robert de Cardinan, temp. Richard I.,
the same gentleman mentioned in Mr. Carew’s “Survey of Cornwall,” that
by the tenure of knight-service held in those parts seventy-one
knight’s fees; which undoubtedly then was the greatest estate
pertaining to any private man in this province. He was not only the
founder and endower of the Alien Priory of St. Andrew at Tywardreth,
(of which more in that place,) but also of this rectory church. By the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of
benefices in Cornwall, as aforesaid, 1294, Ecclesia de Cardinan in
Decanatu de Westwellshire, was rated 6_l._ 8_s._ 4_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, 24_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._, by the
name of the Rectory of Cardenham, synonymous with Cardinham. The
patronage in the Lord Dynham’s heir, Arundell, and others; the
incumbent, Waddon; this parish was taxed to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax, 1696, temp. William III., 161_l._ 8_s._

And here it must be observed, that there was no such parish or church
extant at the time of the Norman conquest as Cardinham; for in the
Domesday Rate, 1087, 20 William I., this division passed then under
the districts of Cabulian, Dovenot, and Glin, (see the Domesday
Catalogue); but after the building and endowing of this church, Glin
was converted into Cardinham parish, and Cabulian into Warliggon;
under which name and title they have hitherto passed, as members
thereof. I find it much controverted amongst antiquaries and
historians, whether the Dynhams, that afterwards became possessed of
this manor and barton, were the descendants of this Robert de
Cardinan, or not; some averring one thing and some another; but
certain I am they were possessed thereof as his heirs and assigns; but
whether denominated from thence, or the local places of Dynham in St.
Menvor, or Dinham-bridge in St. Kew, I know not. Nevertheless,
contrary to both those conjectures, Mr. Camden tells us that those
Dinhams were a French tribe that came into England with William the
Conqueror; particularly one Oliver de Dinant, one of whose sons, viz.
Galfrid de Dinham, temp. Henry II. was a great augmenter of the Abbey
of Hartland; and changed the secular priests founded there by Githa,
wife of Earl Godwin, into Black Canons Augustine. See Monasticon
Anglicanum, in Devon.

One Oliver de Dinant, or Dinham, was by writ of summons called to
Parliament as a Baron, 24 Edward I. who had issue Josce, who had issue
John, who had issue John, who had issue John, who had issue John; who
were all knighted; which last John had issue, by Sir Richard Arche’s
heir, John Dinham, of Old Cardenham, Esq., sheriff of Devon, 39 Henry
VI., 1460, who then resided at his barton of Nutwell, in Woodberry
parish, eight miles from Exeter, who at that time made use of his
authority in promoting the safety of the Duke of York’s friends, viz.
the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwick, and others, then attainted
of treason by Act of Parliament, who, in order to the preservation of
their lives, fled into Devonshire, where they were concealed by the
said John Dinham at Nutwell aforesaid, till he had opportunities from
Exmouth to convey them to Guernsey, from whence they were transported
to Calais, which place they secured for the Duke of York. But as soon
as King Henry and the Parliament understood thereof, immediately the
Duke of Somerset was dispatched with a commission to be governor of
that place; who no sooner approached the harbour of Calais with his
ships, but those fugitive lords ordered the train of artillery at
Rysbank (there) immediately to be fired upon the Duke of Somerset and
his companions, as they were coming on shore, which so obstructed
their design that they were forced, with some damage and loss, to
return to their ships, weigh anchor, spread sails, and bear off for
the English coast, and dropped anchor safely at Sandwich in Kent; from
whence King Henry and Queen Margaret had some notice from the Duke of
Somerset of the affront offered his Majesty and him at Calais,
whereupon the King ordered his navy royal, as soon as possible, to be
in readiness to attend and assist him, in order to reduce Calais to
his obedience.

But, alas! maugre those contrivance, the said John Dynham, before the
King’s navy could be provided and got together, out of affection to
the Duke of York, the Earl of March and his confederates, like a
daring, valiant, courageous, and invincible hero, as he was, with a
small company of armed men, boarded the Earl of Somerset’s ships in
the harbour of Sandwich, and therein took the Lord Rivers, designed
for his admiral against Calais, and by a strong hand carried him and
all his ships thither; and then, with the same ships, conveyed the
Earl of March and his friends from Calais to the Duke of York his
father, then fled into Ireland.

After the restoration of the House of York to the crown, in the person
of Edward IV. we find this John Dynham was knighted. In the 6th Edward
IV. he was by writ summoned to Parliament as a Baron thereof, by the
name of John Dinham, Baron Dinham, of Cardinham. In the 9th Edward IV.
he obtained a grant of the custody of the forest of Dartmoor, the
manor and borough of Lidford, and the manor of South Teign in Devon,
during his life, under the yearly rent of 100 marks, and 6_s._ 8_d._;
and soon after he got a grant of the office of steward of the honours,
castles, manors, and boroughs of Plympton, Oakhampton, Tiverton,
Sampford Courtney, and some others, and was made Knight of the Garter;
and in the first year of Henry VII., 1485, he was by letters patent
created Baron Dinham, of Cardinham; afterwards he was made Lord High
Treasurer of England, which office he held fifteen years, and died 17
Henry VII. aged seventy-two years. He left issue Charles Dinham, Esq.
his son and heir, sheriff of Devon, 16 Edward IV., 1476, that married
Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Lord Fitzwalter, who died without
issue; by reason whereof his four sisters became his heirs, and were
married, Jane, to Baron Zouch, of Totness; Joan, to Lord Arundell, of
Lanherne, knight; Margaret, to Nicholas Baron Carew, of Molesford, in
Berkshire; and Elizabeth, to Foulk Bourchier, of Tavistock, Lord
Fitzwarren. The arms of Dinham were, in a field Gules, three fusils in
fess Argent, within a border Ermine; but Nicholas Upton, in his
manuscript of heraldry, 1440, written before the invention of
printing, tells us, Monsieur Oliver de Dinham port de Goules un fess
engrelle de Ermine, un bordure endentee Argent.

The Lady Elizabeth Dinham, widow of the Lord Fitzwarren aforesaid,
after his death, was married to Thomas Shapcott, of Elton, in
Huntingdonshire, Esq., where, at her own proper cost and charge, she
erected a private chapel to the honour of Almighty God, of that
curious and costly workmanship, both in walls, roof, and window, that
it is worthy the admiration of all beholders, and parallel to, if not
superior, to any other church or chapel of its bigness in England. See
Camden in Huntingdonshire.

Nicholas Baron Carew aforesaid, together with his lady, were buried in
Westminster Abbey, amongst the kings and queens of England, as appears
from a grey marble tomb-stone, with a brass inscription round it,
containing, as I remember, these words.

Orate pro animabus Nicolai Baronis quondam de Carew, et Dominæ
Margaretæ uxoris ejus, filiae Johannis Domini Dinham, Militis; qui
quidem Nicholaus obiit sexto die mensis Decembris, anno Dom. 1470; et
predicta Domina Margareta obiit die mensis Decembris, anno 1471. Of
this famous family Mr. Carew, in his “Survey of Cornwall,” hath only
these words: “formerly at Cardinham lived the Lord Dinham.”

Glin, Glynn, in this parish, is a name taken and given from the
ancient natural circumstances of the place, where lakes, pools, and
rivers of water abound, and groves of trees, or copps, flourish and
grow; derived from the Japhetical Greek λιμνη, [limnee] lacus; under
which name, and devyock, or deynock district, part of the now parish
of Cardinham, was taxed 20 William I., 1087. From which place was
denominated an ancient family of gentlemen surnamed De Glynn, who for
many generations flourished there in worshipful degree, till about the
time of Henry VII., when the sole daughter and heir of this family was
married to Carmynow of Resprin, or Polmaugan, whose heir being married
to Courtney, brought this barton of Glynn into that family; by some of
whose posterity it was sold to a younger branch of this family of
Glynn, who thereby was restated therein, and so became possessed
thereof; from whom was lineally descended Nicholas Glynn, Esq. Member
of Parliament for Bodmin, temp. Charles II., who married one of the
coheirs of Dennis, of Orleigh, in Devon, as did Sir Thomas Hamson,
Knt., of Buckinghamshire, the other; who had issue Denny Glynn, Esq.
that married two wives, Foow of Tiverton, and Hoblyn of Bodman; who
had issue William Glynn, Esq., that married Prideaux of Padstow, and
giveth for his arms, in a field Argent, a chevron between three
salmon-spears Sable; alluding to their custom, privilege, or right of
hunting or fishing for salmons in the Fowey river, passing through
this barton or lordship of Glynn towards the sea. Mr. Carew, in his
Survey of Cornwall, tells us this place is called Glynford, by reason
of a bridge or pass over the Fowey River there; for ford in British
signifies a street, road, pass, or highway over waters; but the
authority of Domesday Roll aforesaid, which calls it Glin, plainly
shows that this latter appellation, ford, was added to this word Glynn
after the bridge aforesaid was erected, and not otherwise to be
applied. Nicholas Glynn, of Glyn-ford, Esq. was sheriff of Cornwall 18
James I.

Devynock, as aforesaid, was another district now in this parish, taxed
in Domesday Roll, now in possession of ―――― Hann, Gent.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not any thing of the least curiosity that differs from
Hals. He ends indeed by saying, that “nothing can be more ridiculous
than Mr. Hals’s derivation of the name of this parish.”


THE EDITOR.

It is much to be wished that some one learned in the Celtic language,
perhaps a native of Britany, would investigate the derivations of all
the names of places, of hills, and of rivers, after visiting their
localities.

Car, in composition, is probably the same as cairn or kairn a rock,
and din is a fortress; but these do not seem likely to take up the
Saxon termination ham, an house or dwelling.

Glynn has not, in all probability, any connection with the Saxon words
gline or glen. A word of very similar sound in one of the Celtic
dialects denominates a spear, and this agrees with the family arms,
which are Argent, the heads of three fishing-spears or tridents, with
their points downwards, two and one, Sable. A new house was built at
Glynn by Mr. Edmund John Glynn, son of Serjeant Glynn, distinguished
in the political dissensions of Mr. Wilkes. The house was accidentally
consumed by fire before the whole interior had been completed. The
walls, however, were not much injured, and the building will probably
be restored. It is now the property of the Right Hon. Gen. Sir Hussey
Vivian.

Serjeant Glynn succeeded to his elder brother’s son, a young man said
to be possessed of considerable abilities and even learning, but of
such singular and eccentric habits, that he remained for years without
speaking a single word, communicating his thoughts by writing. A
verdict of lunacy was at last obtained against him at the Cornwall
Assizes, but much to the general dissatisfaction of the country, as
interested motives were readily imputable to the uncle; and his mother
felt so strongly on the subject, that being heiress of an ancient
family, Nicholls of Trewane in St. Kew, she devised nearly the whole
of her possessions, in honour of her son’s name, to Mr. Glynn of
Heliton; probably of the same stock, but very distantly related.

  This parish measures 7750 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3029    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           429   17    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    552   |    662   |    775   |    728;
    an increase of 32 per cent. or nearly one-third in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

A continuation of the granite of Blisland and St. Breward forms the
north-eastern corner of this parish. A belt then succeeds, which
appears to be of the same kind as the micaceous slate of St. Breward
already described; it may be traced along the side of the Leskeard
road in a disintegrated state. On leaving this road and proceeding
towards the church, the rock becomes more argillaceous, as round
Bodmin, and the land improves in quality. The western and southern
parts of the parish consist of barren downs, reposing on rocks which
abound in quartz.




ST. CLEER.


HALS.

St. Cleer is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north,
Altarnun; south, Liskeard; east, St. Tew; west, St. Neot. The modern
name of this parish was not extant at the time of the Norman Conquest,
but probably then passed in the Domesday tax under the titles of
Trelven, Niveton, or Trethac. At the time of the Pope’s inquisition
into the value of Cornish benefices, in order to his Annats, 1294,
Ecclesia de Sancto Claro, in Decanatu de Westwellshire, was charged
ten marks; Vicar ejusdem 40_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and
Valor Beneficiorum, 19_l._ 16_s._ 8_d._ and the parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 241_l._ 17_s._

The name of this parish is taken from the church, and the church’s
name from the titular guardianess thereof, to whom the same is
dedicated, viz. St. Clare or Cleer; whose name is derived from the
Latin word claro, i. e. clear, bright, shining, transparent; and she
herself was born of an honourable lineage at the city of Assisum in
Italy.

[Mr. Hals here gives a long history of St. Clare, much more in detail
than is suited to a parochial history.

It may be sufficient to add, she was the daughter of Phavorino Sciffo,
a noble knight, and of Hortulana, his most virtuous wife, and born in
the year 1193. St. Francis was then alive and at the height of his
fame. St. Dominic and St. Francis, as is well known, instituted the
two great orders of begging monks or friars. Those who entered into
any of the previously existing monastic establishments, underwent what
was termed a civil death, renounced all individual property, bestowing
what was at their own disposal in any way most agreeable to
themselves, and suffering what was inalienable to descend to their
heirs. Hence has originated the expression natural life, as opposed to
civil life, still used in legal proceedings. But St. Dominic and St.
Francis, not content with this individual poverty, extended it to
their orders; so that with the exception of a dwelling, some
furniture, and necessary raiment, their friars were to live, as the
cynics had done of old, upon the accidental charity of victuals given
in kind and from day to day; for a broad and impassable boundary was
drawn between receiving bread from the donor’s hand, and a piece of
metal for which that bread might be procured; in the same manner as
any portion of the increase arising from flocks or herds might
lawfully be given; whilst anathemas were thundered against him who
accepted the least return for valuable commodity, in exchange for
which similar flocks or herds could easily and freely be procured.

As impassioned harangues were obviously the most efficient agents for
eliciting or extorting these daily alms, they were incessantly
employed; so that the mendicants soon acquired the distinctive
appellation of preaching friars; and the whole institution being
suited to the genius, the spirit, and the prejudices of the rude age
in which it arose, the Dominicans and Franciscans acquired and
maintained, during some centuries, almost the temporal sovereignty of
Europe; till their dissentions, the scandalous immorality growing out
of their vagrant lives, and the diffusion of knowledge, dissolved the
charm.

This contagion readily extended itself to females, so that, with some
indispensible modifications, societies soon arose of women bound by
the same rule of individual and collective poverty. St. Clare appears
to have been the first female disciple of St. Francis, or at least the
first raised by him to eminence and power, acquisitions far more
captivating to the human mind, than wealth with all its passive
luxuries and enjoyments.

St. Clare had the gratification of eloping from her parents to receive
the veil and the tonsure from the hands of St. Francis, who placed her
at first in a monastery of Benedictine Nuns; but the young saint soon
found herself in the situation of an abbess, with her mother and two
sisters members of the community, submitted to her sway. From this
station she advanced to be the founder of an order, having numerous
houses established under her supreme authority, exercised according to
rules dictated by St. Francis; and the poor Clares constitute a
principal branch of the female monastic establishments existing in all
Catholic countries up to the present times.

Pope Innocent IV. made a journey on purpose to visit Clare, not long
before her death in 1253, and again to assist at her funeral. His
successor, Pope Alexander IV. two years afterwards, inscribed her name
in the celestial canon. Mr. Hals then proceeds to particulars.]

In this parish is yet to be seen a famous chapel Well, dedicated to
St. Clare, a work of great skill, labour, and cost, though now much
decayed, which formerly pertained to some nunnery of those sort of
religious women extant here or at Leskeard. (See Truro and Kenwyn, for
Clares.) From this parish was denominated an ancient family of
gentlemen, surnamed de St. Cleare, from whence are descended the St.
Clears of Tudwell, in Devon, who, suitable to their name, give for
their arms, in a field Azure the sun in its glory shining or
transparent; of which tribe was that Robertus de Sancto Claro, qui
tenet decem libratas terræ, in hundredo de Mertock, in comit.
Somerset, de domine rege in capite, per servicium inveniendi unum
servientem armatum cum uno equo in exercitu domini regis in Wallia per
xl. dies sumptibus suis propriis. (Pleas of the Crown in Scaccario, 8
Edward I.)

In this parish is Tre-worg-y, the mansion of John Conock, Esq., that
married Burgoigne; his father Heale and Courtney; and giveth for his
arms, Argent, a fess dancette between three spread eagles Gules.

The name Conock or Connock signifies rich, prosperous, thriving,
successful, of which name and family those in Cornwall are descended
from the Conocks of Wiltshire, and the first propagator of this tribe
in those parts was one Mr. Conock, who in the time of Queen Elizabeth
came to Leskeard town a tanner, and in that occupation got much
riches, and laid the foundation of his estate, as Mr. Thomas River, of
Liskeard, informed me.

Tre-mabe, in this parish, id est, the son’s town, viz. a place in
former ages by some father given as the dwelling to his son, was
formerly the lands of Samuel Langford, Gent. that married Cary of
Clovelly.

Tre-wor-oc, also Tre-wor-ock, the town on a lake, was formerly the
lands of Trubody, who sold the same to Jackman, now in possession
thereof. In the church on seats or pews, pertaining to those Trubodys,
I have seen this inscription, Nati honoris; in what sense to be
construed is mystery to me, since I have not understood that any of
this tribe was either a son nobly born, or inherited to any kind of
honour, dignity, or promotion.

At Pennant in this parish, id est, the head of the valley, or the
valley head, in the open downs by the high road or street-way,
formerly stood a large flat moor-stone, about eight feet long, in
perpendicular manner, described by Mr. Carew and Mr. Camden, wherein
is still to be seen on the one side thereof this inscription, in Roman
Saxon letters, then in use when it was set up, containing these words:
doniert rogauit pro anima.

[Instead of the long and uninteresting account given by Mr. Hals of
this monument, I will take the liberty of substituting an extract from
Mr. Bond’s Topographical and Historical Sketches of the Boroughs of
East and West Looe, printed by J. Nichols and Son, Parliament Street,
in 1823, which will be found of a very different description.]

     “Not far from Dosmery Pool may be seen a curious heap of
     rocks, called Wring Cheese or Cheese Wring; and, at a short
     distance therefrom, an artificial curiosity called the
     Hurlers, and another called the Other-half-stone.

     “Camden, in his Britannia, speaking of St. Neot’s parish,
     says, ‘Near unto this, as I have heard, within the parish of
     St. Cleer, there are to be seen, in a place called Pennant,
     that is, the head of the vale, two monuments of stone; of
     which the one in the upper part is wrought hollow, in manner
     of a chair; the other, named Other-halfe-stone, hath an
     inscription of barbarous characters, now in a manner worn
     out,’ which he thinks should be read thus: DONIERT ROGAVIT
     PRO ANIMA. As for this Doniert, Camden thinks he was that
     prince of Cornwall whom the chroniclers name Dungerth, and
     record that he was drowned in the year of our salvation 872.
     Camden also says, ‘Hard by there is a number of good big
     rockes heaped up together; and under them one stone of a
     lesser size, fashioned naturally in form of a cheese, so as
     it seemeth to be pressed like a cheese; whereupon it is
     named Wring Cheese. Many other stones besides, in some sort
     four-square, are to be seen upon the plain adjoining; of
     which seven or eight are pitched upright of equal distances
     asunder. The neighbouring inhabitants term them Hurlers, as
     being by a devout and godly error persuaded, they had been
     men sometime transformed into stones, for profaning the
     Lord’s day with hurling the ball. Others would have it to be
     a trophy (as it were) or a monument in memorial of some
     battle. And some think verily they were set as mere stones
     or landmarks; as having read in those authors that wrote on
     limits, that stones were gathered together of both parties,
     and the same erected for bounders. In this coast the river
     Loo maketh way and runneth into the sea, and in his very
     mouth giveth name to two little towns joined with a bridge
     together.’

     “On the 6th August, 1802, I went with a party of friends to
     see these natural and artificial curiosities, mentioned by
     Camden. I first got the party to Red-gate,[26] in St. Cleer
     parish, about four miles from Liskeard, in order to find out
     Doniert or Dungerth’s monument, which I understood was
     somewhere near to it. I made inquiry at the house at
     Red-gate after this monument, but could get no account of it
     for some time, though I questioned in a variety of ways; at
     last, however, we got information where it was situated. It
     is about a quarter of a mile off from Red-gate, eastward, in
     a field next the high road. We got into this field, and
     seeing an erect stone went towards it, and found it to be
     the monument we sought. One moorstone stands erect, and the
     other with the inscription on it, lies in a pit close by.
     The figures of these stones in Borlase’s History are most
     like them of any I have seen.[27] I made out and copied the
     inscription very perfectly, by rubbing a soft stone which
     left its mark in the letters.

                  +---------+
                  |  DONI   |
                  | ERT: RO |
                  |  GAUIT  |
                  | PRO AN  |
                  |  IMA    |
                  +---------+

     “This stone by recollection is about two feet wide at top,
     and about five or six feet in length. And the other stone,
     which still stands erect, and ornamented with cross lines,
     &c. is about the same in height.

     “The west front is quite plain; the top has the remains of a
     kind of mortice, left hand corner broken off. The east front
     is dotted over, but has no letters.

     “I find in Hals, that the pit in which the stone with the
     inscription lies, was formed in the latter end of the reign
     of Charles II. in consequence of his, Hals’s, going there at
     that period with some gentlemen, to view, as he says, the,
     at that time thought barbarous, inscription; for some
     tinners in the contiguous country, taking notice of these
     gentlemen visiting this place, apprehended they came there
     in quest of some hidden treasure; whereupon, as Hals says,
     some of them wiser than the rest, lay their heads together,
     and resolved in council to be before-hand, and accordingly
     went with pickaxes and shovels, and opened the earth round
     about the monument, to the depth of about six feet; when
     they discovered a spacious vault walled about, and arched
     over with stones, having on the sides thereof two stone
     seats, not unlike those in churches for auricular
     confession. The sight of all which struck them with
     consternation, or a kind of horror, that they incontinently
     gave over search, and with the utmost hurry and dread,
     throwing earth and turf to fill up the pit they made, they
     departed, having neither of them the courage to enter or
     even to inspect into the further circumstances of the place;
     which account Hals says, he had from the mouths of some of
     the very fellows themselves. Some short while after, the
     loose earth, by reason of some heavy rains which fell, sunk
     away into the vault, which occasioning also a sort of
     terræ-motus and concession of the earth adjoining, the said
     monument was at length so undermined thereby, that it fell
     to the ground, where it still remains. Would some gentlemen
     of ability and curiosity, says Hals, and so say I, be at the
     charge of again opening and cleansing this under-ground
     chapel, or whatever else it may be denominated, it might
     probably afford matter of pleasing amusement, if not grand
     speculation to the learned searchers into matters of
     antiquity.

     “This monument formerly went by the name of ‘the other half
     stone.’ Some translate the inscription, ‘Pray for the soul
     of Dungerth,’ others ‘Doniert asked for his soul;’ and there
     seems to be great controversy for what purpose this monument
     was erected. High stones might originally, in the early ages
     of Christianity, have been erected near roads in desolate
     situations, and at short distances from each other, to
     direct travellers in their journies; and crosses might have
     been placed on them as a memento for thanksgiving, when the
     traveller had effected this part of his journey in safety.
     Now if the inscription on the above monument is meant for
     ‘Pray for the soul of Dungerth,’ may we not suppose that it
     was meant as a request to those who should happen to be
     praying for themselves, to offer up a prayer also for
     Dungerth, who probably caused that monument to be erected,
     or who was buried near the same, perhaps in the chapel
     before mentioned to have been discovered by the tinners. Or
     if the inscription is to be read, ‘Doniert asked for his
     soul,’ which seems the proper translation; may we not
     suppose that Doniert (who by all accounts was a very pious
     prince) erected this stone, and prayed or asked for mercy
     thereat. Perhaps originally these stones might have been
     called Ave stones, from the Latin word ‘Ave,’ all hail! God
     speed you; God save you, &c. a very appropriate expression
     in a desolate situation to a wanderer or traveller. And the
     reference to another Ave stone might signify the one which
     is a little to the eastward of it, bearing a cross, and by
     its appearance formerly a legend underneath. This word Ave
     (pronounced in the same manner it is in Ave-Mary-Lane,
     London) might be corrupted into Half; so that Ave stone and
     Half stone might mean one and the same thing. And in
     Cornwall the F is very frequently pronounced as a V, and the
     V as an F, at this present time.[28] If this does not meet
     approbation, I will add another conjecture. As the circle of
     stones called the Hurlers, are at a short distance from this
     monument and the cross before-mentioned, might not the
     monument and the cross be called the ‘one heave stone,’ and
     the other, ‘the other or outer heave stone,’ places from
     whence the ball during the game of hurling was thrown. The
     traditionary story of the stones called the hurlers, being
     once men turned into stone for profaning the Sabbath, will
     give some slight sanction to this conjecture; and in
     addition, even at this time the high-cross is vulgarly
     believed to have been the man who ran off with the ball.

     “With respect to the stones called the Hurlers being once
     men, I will say with Hals, ‘Did but the ball which these
     Hurlers used when flesh and blood, appear directly over them
     immoveably pendant in the air, one might be apt to credit
     some little of the tale;’ but as this is not the case, I
     must add my belief of their being erected by the Druids for
     some purpose or other, probably a court of justice; long
     subsequent to which erection, however, they may have served
     as the goal for hurl players. And indeed a finer spot for
     such a game could not be fixed on perhaps any where. But I
     believe the Hurlers took their names from some other source
     than that of the game of hurling the ball being used there.

     “After sufficiently viewing Dungerth’s monument, we directed
     our course towards Cheese-wring, and soon came to the
     Hurlers, but first we rode up to the High Cross before
     mentioned, which at a distance looked somewhat like a man.
     Under its cross it has an oblong square, as if the border of
     an inscription, but at present there is not the least
     vestige of a letter on it. Soon after we came to the
     Hurlers, which we found to be moorstones of about five or
     six feet high, forming two circles one without the other
     (not as represented in Hals’ Parochial History, but like
     that in Borlase), the circle nearest Cheese-wring less than
     that of the other. Some of the stones are fallen down, and
     remain where they fell, and others have probably been
     carried off for gate posts and other purposes. The areas of
     the circles are not level, there being many pits in them, as
     if the earth had sunk over large graves. I confess I was not
     much struck with the appearance of these famous stones, not
     having faith to believe they once were men. Near this place
     we fell in with a man going to Cheese-wring, and were glad
     to follow him as a guide. Among other questions, I asked
     him, as we passed along, whether he could tell me the name
     of the tenement on which Dungerth’s monument was; he
     answered Pennant. I also asked him whether he knew where the
     source of the Looe river was; he said in a field next below
     Dungerth’s monument. I was sorry to hear this, as we could
     not conveniently return to see it, but I learned from him it
     was a mere spring of water uninclosed.

     “When we reached Cheese-wring, we discovered a man and woman
     on the top of the mount (on the declivity of which
     Cheese-wring stands), who, we afterwards found, were cutting
     turfs for fuel. Our guide first led us to the house of the
     late Daniel Gumb (a stone-cutter), cut by him out of a solid
     rock of granite (the rocks all around this place are
     granite, or moorstone as commonly called in Cornwall, and of
     the finest quality). This artificial cavern may be about
     twelve feet deep and not quite so broad; the roof consists
     of one flat stone of many tons weight, supported by the
     natural rock on one side, and by pillars of small stones on
     the other. How Gumb formed this last support is not easily
     conceived. We entered with hesitation lest the covering
     should be our grave-stone. On the right-hand side of the
     door is ‘D. Gumb,’ with a date engraved 1735 (or 3). On the
     upper part of the covering stone, channels are cut to carry
     off the rain, or probably to cause it to fall into a bucket
     for his use; there is also engraved on it some geometrical
     device formed by Gumb, as our guide told us, who also said
     that Gumb was accounted a pretty sensible man. I have no
     hesitation in saying he must have been a pretty eccentric
     character to have fixed on this place for his habitation;
     but here he dwelt for several years with his wife and
     children, several of whom were born and died here. His
     calling was that of a stone-cutter, and he fixed himself on
     a spot where materials could be met with to employ a
     thousand men for a thousand years.

     “After quitting this house, we ascended a few paces to the
     pile of rocks called Cheese-wring, the resemblance of which
     is well expressed by the print in Borlase’s Nat. Hist. We
     were all struck with astonishment at this wonderful work of
     nature; we surveyed it over and over again, went round it
     several times, and viewed it from every part. It is about
     thirty-two feet high. The uppermost stone I have no doubt
     has Druidical basons formed in it. One of them shows itself
     by the edge of the stone having fallen away. After spending
     some time in viewing this tremendously awful pile of rocks,
     we ascended to the summit of the mount on the side of which
     it stands. This summit is surrounded by an artificial
     rampart of loose stones, not piled up; possibly they might
     have formed a wall, or have been carried there for building
     one; for if they were placed as they now are with an
     intention so to remain, they could not have been very
     defensive to this mount. Possibly the name of Cheese-wring
     may be derived from this ring of stones, and not from the
     vulgar idea of the Cheese-wring rocks being like a
     cheese-press.

     “The area within the rampart may be about half an acre of
     ground, and has rocks scattered all over it; but in some
     places verdure even in this rude region makes its
     appearance. We found a man and a woman within the area
     cutting turfs between the rocks for fuel. Among other
     questions, I asked the man to whom the spot belonged; his
     answer was, ‘he believed to nobody.’

     “Several curious piles of rocks, some forming cromlechs, and
     others of various forms and positions, are here also to be
     seen, and several of them have Druidical basons on them. The
     rocks having these basons are the most lofty or most
     remarkable for shape or situation. On some rocks there are
     two or three basons; and where there are more basons than
     one, they generally communicate by a channel. The basons
     here are of different sizes, though all of them are of the
     same shape, which is circular. Some of them are about a foot
     and a half in diameter, and six or eight inches deep; others
     not so large or deep. Never having seen any Druidical basons
     before, and having had my doubts till this time, whether
     they might not be natural productions caused by rain,
     lightning, &c. I was led to examine other rocks, whether
     they had (though equally exposed to the weather) similar
     formations, but could not find a bason on any rock that was
     not singular either for its shape or situation. I therefore
     concluded that these basons were the work of art, and not of
     nature; and I think they were not intended for the purpose
     of receiving the rain for common uses, for if so, why were
     they not made on rocks of easy access? It is possible,
     however, that rain being held in a natural hollow of a rock,
     may decompose that part of the rock on which it rests, and
     being whirled about by the wind from time to time, may form
     these basons which we attribute to art; and if this is the
     case, they must continue increasing in size and depth. Have
     such basons ever been seen but on granite rocks? if not,
     probably water dissolves the feltspar and disunites the
     quartz and mica; and the winds driving round the water with
     particles of quartz at the bottom of the bason, must
     consequently fret away the rock and enlarge the bason. A
     rock of white marble lies on the sea-beach near Looe,
     completely covered with hollows like what are termed
     Druidical basons; these hollows in this rock I have no doubt
     have been formed by the sea; it lies near an insulated high
     rock under Sanders Lane, and is every tide covered with the
     sea, and is very frequently covered with sand. A person
     fancying the basons on this rock of marble to be an
     artificial work, might also fancy that it once was placed on
     top of the elevated rock near it; the contrast of the white
     marble on top of the elevated rock, which is of a very dark
     colour, would give a singular appearance. When this high
     rock is shown to strangers, they are generally told, with a
     serious face, that when it hears a cock crowing at Hay
     (which is a farm just above it) it turns round three times!


     “SHARPY TORRY.

     “After leaving the area before-mentioned, we mounted our
     horses, and went towards another very considerable rocky
     eminence, about half a mile north-east; the road to which
     over the Down is full of rocks and stones, so as to prevent
     a horse from going other than step and step at times. On our
     way we passed a small circle of stones, the remains I rather
     think of an ancient Barrow, whose earth had been washed away
     by the rains. We shortly after passed another pretty large
     circle of stones, just about the diameter to appearance of
     the lesser circle of the Hurlers; at length we arrived at
     the pile of rocks, called by our guide Sharpy-torry
     (Sharp-torr, from its conical shape). We alighted from our
     horses and ascended. On the north or north-west side of it
     there appears a hollow, more like a large chimney than any
     other thing I can compare it to; the outside of which seems
     to have given way, and the steep hill below is strewed with
     an immense quantity of rocks and large stones, as if carried
     down or poured out from this hollow. Whether this was caused
     by the operation of fire or water bursting from this hollow
     or crater, if I may use the expression, I will not take upon
     me to say; but that one or other of these agents burst from
     this mount appears to be extremely probable, for the rocks
     and stones seem exactly as if they had been tumbled or
     thrown out of this crater by a current of some kind. We
     could not, however, discover lava; therefore it is probable
     water might have burst out, unless the lava has been
     decomposed. The views from this place are truly sublime. The
     spot is nearly the centre of the broadest part of the
     county; from it we saw both seas, north and south, and
     consequently the intervening land; and I believe it is the
     only eminence (except perhaps Brownwilly) in the eastern
     part of Cornwall, from whence both seas may be seen. We also
     saw in the North Sea a very high land, which we concluded
     must be Lundy Island; but the horizon to the north being
     rather hazy, I will not take upon me to say positively that
     it was that island, though it is probable to have been so.
     The prospect was equally extensive east and west, and as I
     took a pocket spying-glass with me, we viewed therewith the
     vast extent we commanded. We discovered Launceston Castle
     with the naked eye; through the glass it became very
     visible. We were much struck with the beautiful and
     highly-cultivated lands to the east of us, terminated in
     part by the high land of Dartmoor. To the westward, nothing
     was to be seen but a vast continuance of moor land, without
     a hedge, without a tree, for a stretch of many miles. The
     cultivated land commenced just below our feet to the
     eastward, and the uncultivated from where we stood westward;
     the contrast on turning from west to east, or _vice versâ_,
     was astonishing. Our station seemed to be amidst the wreck
     of mountains of granite, rocks piled on rocks were strewed
     around in awful grandeur. The extreme point of our western
     view, dimmed by distance, showed us that elevated rock
     called Roach Rock, and we also saw Dosmerry Pool about four
     or five miles off; our south view commanded Plymouth Sound,
     and a long extent of coast and sea; the northward in one
     part was terminated by the sea. The views brought to my mind
     the beautiful lines in Ovid:

         “Tum freta diffundi, rapidisque tumescere ventis
          Jussit, et ambitæ circumdare littora terræ.
          Addidit et fontes, immensaque stagna lacusque.
          Jussit et extendi campos, subsidere valles,
          Fronde tegi silvas, lapidosos surgere montes.”

         “Then he ordered the seas to poured abroad, and to swell
          with furious winds, and to draw a shore quite round the
          inclosed earth. He likewise added springs, and immense
          pools and lakes. He ordered likewise plains to be
          extended, and valleys to sink; the woods to be covered
          with green leaves, and the rocky mountains to rise.”

     “From this elevated spot (Sharp Tor) Hingston Hill appeared
     considerably beneath us. After spending some time on Sharp
     Tor, we reluctantly descended and went towards another range
     of rocks, called Killmarth Hill (which signifies the Holy
     Hill or Land, or perhaps Holy Grove), about three-quarters
     of a mile off. This range of rocks looks from Sharp Tor,
     like an immense wall of artificial masonry, with here and
     there turrets ascending, and it brought to my mind Sir
     George Staunton’s account of the Chinese wall. When we
     arrived at its base, we alighted from our horses, and
     ascended. This natural wall-looking range is composed of
     granite rocks of, I should suppose some of them, a thousand
     tons weight. We traversed along the ridge, with some
     difficulty, towards the first turret, and from that to the
     next and so on, but the highest, which at a distance looked
     somewhat like Wringcheese, was yet to be explored; at length
     we arrived at it, and found it, if possible, more curious
     than Cheese-wring itself. It consists of immense rocks piled
     one on the other, to the height of twenty or thirty feet,
     and it leans so much, that a perpendicular dropped from its
     top would, I may venture to say, reach the bottom fifteen or
     more feet from its base; and from where we stood on the
     ridge, its support at the base appeared so slight as if a
     man could shove the whole mass over the precipice. Some of
     the uppermost stones of this pile are, I should think, from
     fifteen to twenty feet over, and the base of the whole
     fabric appeared so slight, that I imagined the handle of my
     whip would have exceeded its thickness. Upon descending to
     take another view of this astonishing structure, we found
     that the rocks were considerably thicker on one side than
     the other; so that the thick parts formed a counterpoise to
     the overhanging parts; but this not being apparent from the
     spot on which we first stood, was the cause of our great
     astonishment. However, though our astonishment was somewhat
     lessened, yet much remained at this stupendous pile. This is
     the most western turret.

     “From this place one of the party and myself, the others not
     chusing to accompany us, went to explore the easternmost
     turret. Upon our arrival at its base we found much
     difficulty in ascending it; the rocks jutted out, one over
     the other, in such a manner that, had we slipped but a few
     inches, we must have dropped over a considerable precipice.
     I arrived first at the base, and attempted to ascend, but
     fear pulled me back. Upon my friend’s arrival we thought we
     would exert ourselves to get up, as we conjectured there
     might be a Druidical basin at top. My friend got up the
     first rock by creeping at full length under the overhanging
     rock; and I was under the necessity of several times
     desiring him, in the most energetic manner, to keep as close
     in as possible; for if the body had gone a few inches
     farther out, it must have slid over the sloping rock which
     overhung the precipice. It took him a few minutes to drag
     himself in in this manner. In this creeping state he thought
     he should have broken his watch to pieces, as he was
     obliged, as before stated, to crawl at full length, there
     being no possibility; on account of the overhanging rock, of
     going on hands and knees. Upon trying to get out his watch,
     I earnestly entreated him to desist, for fear of losing his
     centre of gravity; for on the left hand was the precipice,
     and raising his right side ever so little might have been
     attended with most serious consequences. He took my advice,
     and by another exertion got far enough in to raise himself
     on his hands and knees, and then on his legs. I then
     followed him in the same manner. We then examined the rocks
     above us, in order to observe the best mode of ascending
     them. I first made the ascent, and in the uppermost rock
     discovered the largest Druidical basin we had met with, and
     observed it had a lip or channel facing the south. The
     horrid precipices on each side prevented my getting on the
     top of this rock, as I felt a slight vertigo. I then got
     down on a lower rock, and my friend ascended the uppermost
     one, and not finding himself dizzy, got into the basin
     itself (where I hope he will never go again), and waved his
     hat to our companions below. I desired him to measure the
     circumference of this basin, which he did with his whip, and
     found it to be about three feet and a half in diameter. We
     did not take its depth, but I think it must have been about
     a foot; it was of a circular form. The next thing to be
     considered was, how we should get down again; which at last,
     however, we effected nearly in the same manner (only
     reversing our movements) as we got up; and I believe nothing
     will ever induce me to pay a second visit to the top of this
     rock.

     “We had a very fine day for our excursion; the sun being
     clouded, it was not over warm; and there was but little
     wind: had there been more wind, we should not have been able
     to ascend some of the places we did, particularly the last.
     The air was somewhat hazy over the North and South seas,
     which was the only thing we had to regret.

     “A finer situation for Druidical[29] residence, rites, and
     ceremonies, I think, could not be fixed on anywhere; every
     thing around is awfully magnificent; probably in ancient
     days these masses of rocks were surrounded with trees. Our
     guide indeed informed us that on digging the soil trunks of
     large trees have been there discovered; and Kil-mar,
     Kill-mark, Kil-marth signify, in Cornish, the Great, the
     Horse, or the Wonderful Grove.”

Since writing the above, I have been again to see these curiosities
(but did not visit the top of the easternmost turret), and went by the
way of St. Cleer Churchtown, near which is a curious old well, with a
moorstone cross by it, worth seeing; the stone itself is in form of a
cross, and it has a cross in relief cut on its cross. About a mile
from St. Cleer Church (on the way to Cheese Wring) stands a most
magnificent


CROMLECH,

on a barrow in a field near the high road, on the tenement called
Trethevye. A friend who was with me took a rough measurement of the
upper or covering stone, and calculated it to be about five tons
weight. The stones which form this Cromlech are supposed to have been
brought some miles from where they stand, as there are none of the
same kind near it. That this is a work of art there cannot be a doubt.
One can hardly, however, suppose it possible that such immense stones
could have been brought from a distance, and erected in the manner
they are. What machinery was used baffles all conjecture. The upper or
covering stone has a hole in it; for what purpose I have no idea,
unless to support a flag-pole. One of the party remarked it might have
been made for a chain to drag it by; but I rather thought it too near
the edge for that purpose. Mr. Britton, in his “Beauties of England
and Wales,” has given a vignette of this Cromlech, which is well
executed, and like the original. Speaking of this Cromlech, Mr. B.
says, he believes it has not been described by any writer,[30] though
it is more curious and of greater magnitude than that of Mona, or any
other he was acquainted with. He says “it standeth about one mile and
a half east of St. Cleer, on an eminence commanding an extensive tract
of country, particularly to the east, south, and south-west; and is
provincially denominated Trevethey Stone. On the north the high ground
of the Moors exalts its swelling outline above it. It is all of
granite, and consists of six upright stones, and one large slab
covering them in an inclined position. This impost measures sixteen
feet in Length and ten broad, and is at a medium about fourteen inches
thick. It rests on five of the uprights only; and at its other end is
perforated by a small circular hole. No tradition exists as to the
time of its erection; but its name at once designates it being a work
of the Britons, and sepulchral; the term Trevedi (Trevethi)
signifying, in the British language, the place of the Graves.”

King Doniert is said to have been the father of St. Ursula, rendered
famous by her unfortunate expedition from Cornwall to the coast of
Flanders, but still more famous by the beautiful picture of her
embarkation, painted by Claude de Lorraine, where the Saint,
accompanied by her eleven thousand virgins, are descending to their
ships in a port, decorated with buildings the most superb, and
surrounded by a distant landscape, imagined and arranged in the
highest style of that celebrated master.

Those ladies, although an exaggeration from eleven to eleven thousand
is suspected by some writers, were to have married a Roman emperor and
his principal officers; but being attacked on their landing by Pagan
Saxons, they defended themselves with a courage worthy of Cornwall,
until all were slain with arms in their hands. Yet one hardly sees why
these heroic females were honoured among the saints. Their deaths as
martyrs are referred to the 20th of October 383, and their tomb is
still shown at Cologne, where a monastery has been built to their
memory.


THE EDITOR.

Not far from King Doniert’s stone monument is another perpendicular
moor-stone, on which is still apparent the figure of a cross; and on
another, not far distant, is a cross shaped like a T.

Without doubt I think this our King Doniert lived and died in his town
and castle of Leskeard, where it was not lawful to bury the bodies of
dead men till the year 700. It is moreover to be noted, with regard to
the inscription on his monument of stone, that about this time it was
customary to pray for departed souls.

Not very distant from the said monument, in the open downs, are to be
seen a great number of moor-stones, some artificially squared, and
placed in a perpendicular manner about three feet high. These are
commonly called the Hurlers: a Druidical monument having been changed,
by the fraud and artifice of the priests, into a supposed monument of
God’s vengeance against persons for not attending on their masses.

  St. Cleer measures 9118 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5448    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           833    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   774    |   780    |   985    |   982.
    being an increase of about 27 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

About a mile north of the church the granite hills make their
appearance, and run across the parish in a curved line. The only
variety which this rock presents are coarse and fine grained masses,
and a kind of fluor, near Carraton Hill, containing hornblende.
Immediately south of the granite, on the side of a barren moor, masses
of compact and quartz ore felspar rock protrude, indicating the same
formation as at Trewist in Alternun. Near the church hornblende slate
prevails, which is said to contain veins of actynolite and asbestos. A
little further south, on the ridge of a barren down, massive
hornblende rock projects in tiers; and loose blocks of the same stone
lie scattered over the side of the hill, and in the adjacent valley.

The whole of the southern part of the parish is composed of varieties
of this same rock, several of which are well displayed in the vicinity
of Rosecradock.


     [26] Probably this place took its name not from a gate
     painted red being there placed, as is generally imagined,
     but from its being situated just above Fowey river; Rhie-gat
     signifies River’s course. The Fowey river at this place is
     not above half a mile from the source of Looe river.

     [27] The following account of these stones is copied from
     Mr. Polwhele’s Cornwall, vol. ii. p. 195.

     “In the parish of St. Clere, about 200 paces to the eastward
     of Redgate, are two monumental stones which seem parts of
     two different crosses. They have no such relation to each
     other as to warrant the conclusion that they ever
     contributed to form one monument. One is inscribed; the
     other, without an inscription, called ‘the other half
     stone,’ seems to have been the shaft of a cross, and
     originally stood upright, but has latterly been thrown down,
     from an idle curiosity to ascertain whether any concealed
     treasures were beneath its base. On one of its sides are
     some ornamental asterisks, but no letters of any kind. Its
     present length is about eight feet; yet it seems to have
     been once longer, as the upper part is broken, and displays
     part of a mortice. The inscribed stone, nearly square,
     appears to have been a plinth of a monumental cross, having
     the words ‘Doniert rogavit pro anima’ inscribed upon it, in
     similar characters to those used about the ninth century.
     Doniert is supposed to mean Dungerth, who was king of
     Cornwall, and accidentally drowned about the year 872. Of
     the meaning and intention of this monument, see Borlase, pp.
     361, 362.”

     [28] I take some credit to myself for this conjecture as to
     the original meaning of “the other half stone.” And I have,
     long since writing this, accidentally discovered what
     strongly confirms my opinion. The authors of the Beauties of
     England and Wales, speaking of inscribed stones at
     Ebchester, in Durham, say, there is one having the single
     word “Have” for Ave on it. This stone is supposed by Horsley
     to be sepulchral. Have Melitina Sanctissima. The custom of
     thus saluting, as it were, the dead, or taking their last
     farewell of them, is very well known, and it may seem almost
     needless to produce any instances of it. Thus Æneas bids
     eternal adieu to Pallas:

              Salve æternum mihi, maxime Palla,
            Æternumque vale.――Æneid, XI. 97.

     Thus also a passage in Catullus,――Ave atque vale.

     [29]  DRUID, DRUIDES, OR DRUIDæ.――Some derive this word from
     the Hebrew Derussim, or Drussim; which they translate
     Contemplatores. Pliny, Salmasius, Vignierius, and others,
     derive the name from δρυς, an oak, on account of their
     inhabiting, or at least frequenting and teaching in forests,
     or because they sacrificed under the oak. Menage derives the
     word from the old British “Drus,” which signifies “Dæmon” or
     “Magician;” Borel, from the old British “Dru” or “Deru;”
     whence he takes δρυς to be derived. Goropius Becanus, lib.
     i. takes “Druis” to be an old Celtic or German word, formed
     from “trowis” or “truis,” signifying a “Doctor of the Truth
     and Faith.” Father Peyron, in his book of the Original of
     the Celtic Language, will have both Greek and Latin to come
     from Celtic; and if so, the Greek word δρυς must come from
     the Celtic “deru.” The groves where they worshipped were
     called Llwyn; thence, probably, is derived the word “Llan,”
     signifying now, in Welch, a church. These groves were
     inclosures of spreading oak, ever surrounding their sacred
     places; and in these words, “1st. Gorseddan,” or Hillocks,
     where they sat, and from whence they pronounced their
     decrees, and delivered their orations to the people; “2nd.
     Carnedde,” or Heaps of Stones, on which they had a peculiar
     mode of worship; “3rd. Cromlech,” or Altars, on which they
     performed the solemnities of sacrifice.

     There were several orders of them:――1st. Druids; the chief
     of these was a sort of Pontifex Maximus, or High Priest;
     these had the care and direction of matters respecting
     religion; 2nd. Bards; who were an inferior order to the
     Druids, and whose business it was to celebrate the praises
     of their heroes, in songs composed and sung to their harps;
     3rd. Eubates; who applied themselves chiefly to the study of
     Philosophy, and the contemplation of the wonderful works of
     Nature.

     There were Women as well as Men Druids; for it was a female
     Druid who foretold to Dioclesian, when a private soldier,
     that he would be Emperor of Rome. They taught physics, or
     natural philosophy; were versed in astronomy and the
     computation of time; were skilled in arithmetic and
     mechanics; and appear to have been the grand source from
     whence the ages in which they lived derived all the
     knowledge which they possessed.

     Among the numerous places sacred to Druidical worship many
     hieroglyphical characters have been discovered, which
     doubtless were intended for something relative to their
     opinions of the Deity to whom they paid their adoration.
     But, in addition to this, they taught their pupils a number
     of verses, which were only a sort of memorials or annals in
     use amongst them. Some persons remained twenty years under
     their instruction, which they did not deem it lawful to
     commit to writing. They used indeed the Greek alphabet, but
     not the language, as appears by a note, chap. xiii. lib. VI.
     of Cæsar’s Commentaries de Bell. Gall. This custom,
     according to Julius Cæsar, seems to have been adopted for
     two reasons: first, not to expose their doctrines to the
     common people; and, secondly, lest their scholars, trusting
     to letters, should be less anxious to remember their
     precepts, because such assistance commonly diminishes
     application and weakens the memory.

     The original manner of writing amongst the ancient Britons
     was by cutting the letters with a knife upon sticks, which
     were commonly squared, and sometimes formed with three
     sides. Their religious ceremonies were but few, and similar
     to those of the ancient Hebrews. The unity of the Supreme
     Being was the foundation of their religion; and Origen, in
     his Commentaries of Ezekiel, inquiring into the reasons of
     the rapid progress of Christianity in Britain, says, “this
     island has long been predisposed to it by the doctrine of
     the Druids, which had ever taught the unity of God the
     Creator.” (_Extracted from the Monthly Magazine and Literary
     Panorama for November 1819._)

     [30] This author is mistaken. Norden not only speaks of it
     as follows, but has given a tolerably good plate of it. He
     says, “Trethevic, called in Latin Casa Gigantis, a little
     house raysed of mightie stones, standing on a little hill
     within a field, the form hereunder expressed. This monument
     standeth in the parish of St. Cleer. The cover being all one
     stone is from A to B 16 foote in length; the breadth from C
     to D is 10 foote; the thickness from G to H is 2 foote. E is
     an artificial hole 8 inches diameter, made thorowe the roofe
     very rounde, which served, as it seemeth, to put out a
     staffe, whereof the house itself was not capable. F was the
     door or entrance.”




ST. CLEATHER.


HALS.

St. Cleather is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the
north, Trenegles; east, Egles-kerry and Laneast; south, part of
Altarnun; west, Davidstowe. For the name of St. Cleather, it refers to
the vicar of the church, and in Cornish, signifies a sacred, or holy
fencer or gladiator; a person that exercises a spiritual sword for
offence or defence in a holy manner; and as in this place by the holy
fencer is to be understood the vicar, so by his sword is signified την
μαχαιραν του πνευματος ὅ ’στι ῥῆμα Θεου, gladium spiritus, quod est
verbum Dei, i. e. the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester aforesaid,
1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Clede, or Cledredi, in Decanatu de Lesnewith,
was valued to its first fruits 6_l._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, and
Valor Beneficiorum, 6_l._ 11_s._ 0½_d._; the incumbent, Harris; and
the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound land-tax, 1696, 71_l._ 4_s._
8_d._ Quere, whether St. Clede, or Clete, mentioned in that
Inquisition aforesaid, relate not to St. Clete, or Cletus, Bishop of
Rome and martyr, as the tutelar guardian and patron of this church?
whose history in short is thus: He was born at Rome, of an old family
of gentlemen or noblemen, in the reign of Tiberius; whose father’s
name was Emelianus, a Christian, that placed his son Clete a disciple
under St. Peter; after which he made him and Linnus coadjutors in the
ministry. To Linnus St. Peter gave the charge of affairs within Rome,
to Cletus the charge of the churches abroad; and those two holy men
had both the succession of the Bishopric of Rome, after St. Peter’s
death, (Clement through humility declining that office, who in justice
should have had it,) till the time that Domitian, the son of
Vespasian, enjoyed the empire, who, degenerating from the morality of
his father and brother Titus, raised the second persecution against
the Christians; at which time, amongst many others, St. Cletus Bishop
of Rome received the crown of martyrdom, after he had held the
Bishopric twelve years and seven months and two days, 26th April, anno
Dom. 91, tempore Domitian. He lies buried by the body of St. Peter at
Rome, and is one of the saints mentioned in the Canon of the Mass, as
also in St. Paul’s Epistle to Timothy. He is said, by order of St.
Peter, to have divided the City of Rome into twenty-five districts or
parishes, and to have set up a priest to rule and govern in spiritual
matters over such Christians as were within the same, and attended
their predicaments; whose successors afterwards in those churches were
called cardinals.

See Peransand for the family of Cleathers.

Bas-ill, in this parish, or Bas-yll, in former ages (at best being but
a poor corn country) has been for many ages the seat of the worshipful
family of the Trevillians [Trevelyan]; the present possessor, Peter
Trevillian, Esq. that married Borlace, his father Arundell.

His ancestor was John Trevillian, Esq. of Nettlecomb in Somerset, who
was sheriff of Somerset and Dorset 17 Henry VII.; his grandson John
Trevillian, Esq. was sheriff of Cornwall 38 Henry VIII. The arms of
which gentlemen are in a field Gules, a demy horse Argent, issuing out
of the waves of the sea Azure, grounded upon a tradition that one of
their ancestors, at the supposed general inundation or concussion into
the sea, of a tract of land called Lyon-ness, extending from St.
Sennan to the Scilly Islands, saved himself by sitting on the back of
a white horse, whilst he swam from thence through the sea to the
insular continent of Cornwall, where he came safe to land; but when I
consider that Solinus, who lived 1500 years past, tells us that the
Cassiterides, by which he means the Scilly Islands (or the tin
islands), in his days were separated from the coast of the Danmonii,
by a rough sea of two or three hours’ sail (as it still appears to
be), and that hereditary coat armours and surnames in Britain are
little above five hundred years old in Britain or Cornwall, there is
small credit to be given to this tradition.

In this parish, or part of Davidstowe, is Foye-fenton, the original
fountain of the Foys River; which well, in old records, is also called
West Fenton, i. e. the west well, to distinguish it from Mark well in
Lanick, otherwise east well; from which places the two cantreds
(hundreds) of Eastwellshire and Westwellshire are denominated. And to
this purpose it is evident, from Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 41,
that in 3 Henry IV. Reginald de Ferrar held in East Fenton and West
Fenton, several knights’ fees of land of the honour of Tremeton, which
is now East and West Hundreds. (See also St. Stephen’s by Saltash, of
those tenures in 1360.)


TONKIN.

In this parish stands Basil, a word sometimes taken for a herb or
vegetable, sometimes for a vein in the human body, sometimes for the
basilisk or cockatrice, &c.; but here I take it to signify after the
Greek, a basilica or stately building; and although at present this
mansion will not answer the etymology in the extreme latitude or
longitude thereof, yet in probability it formerly did, at least
comparatively so in respect to other houses in the neighbourhood.

This place is the mansion of the ancient, famous, and knightly family
of Trevillyans; the present possessor of Basil is Peter Trevillyan,
who married a daughter of Mr. Nicholas Borlase of Treludderin. From
this Cornish family are descended the Trevillyans of Nettlecomb in
Somersetshire.

Although this parish is commonly called and written St. Cleather, yet
the right name is St. Eledred, and so it is written in the Taxatio
Beneficiorum; which St. Eledred I take to be Ethelred King of the
Mercians, who, after he had held the crown for thirty years, and
governed with great reputation, and especially with much regard to
religion, which (as William of Malmesbury observes) was more to this
prince’s inclination than arms, resigned the kingdom to his kinsman
Kendred, became a monk, and died soon after in the monastery of
Bordeney in Lincolnshire.

There was, however, another St. Ethelred, King of the West Saxons, who
is said by Mr. Browne Willis, in his Notitia Parliamentaria, to be
buried at Wimborne Minster in Dorsetshire, with the following
inscription:

     In hoc loco quiescit corpus Sancti Ethelredi Regis
     West-Saxonum martyris, qui A.D. 872, 23 die Aprilis, per
     manus Danorum Paganorum occubuit.

Perhaps this latter is the true patron.


THE EDITOR.

Bishop Tanner, in the Notitia Monastica, says of Bordeney Abbey,

     “Here was a public monastery before the year 697, to which
     Ethelred King of Mercia was a great benefactor, if not the
     original founder; who upon the resignation of his crown
     retired hither, and became first a monk, and afterwards
     abbat of this house till his death. It is said to have had
     three hundred monks, but was destroyed by the Danes A.D.
     870.”

The branch or stock of the Trevelyans settled at Basil is now extinct.
A Sir John Trevelyan, Knight, of that place, is said to have greatly
reduced his fortunes by various law-suits. An anecdote is anciently
related of him in the neighbourhood, that having failed in making an
appearance to some civil suit, a process issued to the sheriff for
attaching his person, who went to Basil accompanied by several
horsemen, and riding into the court-yard made proclamation of his
authority, and called on the defendant to surrender; but he, on the
contrary, threatened the sheriff if he did not depart, with letting
loose his spearmen upon him, and then overturned some hives of bees,
which effectually routed the whole troop.

Basil now belongs to the family of Mr. Robert Fanshawe, an Out
Commissioner of the Navy Board resident at Plymouth, who made the
purchase from Mr. Tremayne of Sydenham.

  This parish contains 3242 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1998    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           112    0    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   134    |   165    |   175    |   171;
    giving an increase of 27½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. J. P. Carpenter, instituted 1823.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The western moiety of this parish runs much further south than the
eastern, stretching in an irregular form into the granite near
Roughton and Brown Walley.

The rocks adjoining this granitic portion are compost and schistose
felspar, as at Alternun, and in a similar position. These are
succeeded in the vicinity of the church by a peculiar calcareous rock,
consisting almost entirely of hornblend and calcareous spar. The
northern part makes part of a downs, extending almost to Launceston,
and abounding in manganese.




ST. CLEMENT’S.

HALS.


St. Clement’s is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the
north St. Herme and St. Allen; on the west Kenwyn; east the creek of
Trevilian River; south and west Truro River, or arm of the sea.

In Domesday Roll, 20 Wm. I. A.D. 1087, it was taxed under the Great
Earl of Cornwall’s manor (now Duchy) of Mor-is or Mor-es, id est, the
manor or parish of the sea, or a manor situated on the sea, according
to the natural circumstances of the place. And I doubt not that before
the Norman Conquest this church or chapel was extant; since, at the
time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
(1294), it was valued to the first fruits vi_l._, vicar ejusdem
xiii_s._ iiii_d._, by no other name than Ecclesia de Mores, which was
endowed or founded undoubtedly by the Lords of the Manor of Mores,
that is the Earl of Cornwall, whose successors, the Dukes, still
possess the lands, and are patrons of the church. In Wolsey’s
Inquisition 1525, and Valor Beneficiorum, this church is called
Clemens, and valued to first fruits £9.

In this church town is the well-known place of Conor, Condura, id est,
the King or Prince’s Water (viz. Cornwall), whose royalty is still
over the same, and whose lands cover comparatively the whole parish;
from which place in all probability was denominated Cundor or Condor,
in Latin Condorus, i. e. Condura, Earl of Cornwall at the time of the
Norman Conquest, who perhaps lived, or was born here. And moreover,
the inhabitants of this church town and its neighbourhood will tell
you, by tradition from age to age, that here once dwelt a great lord
and lady called Condura.

This Condurus, as our historians tell us, in 1016 submitted to the
Conqueror’s jurisdiction, paid homage for his earldom, and made an
oath of his fealty to him; but this report doth not look like a true
one, for most certain it is, in the 3rd year of the Conqueror’s reign,
he was deprived of his earldom, the same being given to the
Conqueror’s half-brother, Robert Earl of Morton in Normandy, whose son
William for a long time succeeded him in that dignity after his death.
Is it not, therefore, more probable that this Earl Condurus
confederated with his countrymen at Exeter, in that insurrection of
the people against the Conqueror in the 3rd year of his reign, and for
that reason was deprived of his earldom? Be it as it was, certain it
is he married and had issue Cad-dock (id est, bear or carry-war), his
son and heir, whom some authors call Condor the Second, who is by them
taken for and celebrated as Earl of Cornwall.

But what part of the lands or estate thereof he enjoyed (whilst Robert
and William, Earls of Morton aforesaid, his contemporaries, for thirty
years were alive, and doubtless possessed thereof, as well as his
title and dignity) hath not yet appeared to me. His chief dwelling and
place of residence was at Jutsworth, near Saltash and Trematon, where
he married and had issue one only daughter named Agnes, as some say,
others Beatrix, who was married to Reginald Fitz-Harry, base son of
King Henry I., by his concubine Anne Corbett, in whose right he was
made Earl of Cornwall, after William Earl of Cornwall aforesaid had
forfeited the same, by attainder of treason against the Conqueror and
his sons, and was deprived thereof.

This Earl Caddock, or Condor the 2nd, departed this life 1120, and
lies buried in the chancel of St. Stephen’s Church, by Saltash, and
gave for his arms, in a field Sable, 15 bezants palewise, 4, 4, 4, 2,
1. (See St. Stephen’s.)

Lambesso, Lambedo, Lambessa, in this parish, parcel of the Duchy manor
of Moris aforesaid, where heretofore was kept the prison, or place of
durance and correction, for the prisoners and offenders thereof; which
barton for several generations was the dwelling-place of the family
surnamed King, duchy tenants, till my kind friend Henry King, gent.
temp. Charles II., for want of issue, by his last will and testament
settled the same upon John Foote, gent. attorney-at-law, now in
possession thereof; who married Avery, daughter-in-law to Mr. King, by
his wife, the widow of Avery, and daughter of Lampeer, as I take it.

Query, whether Oliver King, Chaplain in ordinary to King Henry VII.,
Dean of Winchester, Register of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one
of the principal Secretaries of State to that King, created Bishop of
Exeter the 9th of February 1492, and from thence translated to Wells
1499, and died 1505, (since Isaac, in his Memorials of Exeter, saith
he was a Cornish man), were not of this family? who gave for his arms,
in a field Argent, on a chevron Sable, three escallops of the First.

Mr. Foote, as I said, married Avery, and was descended from the Footes
of Tregony; and giveth for his arms, Vert, a chevron between three
pigeons or doves Argent. His son Henry Foote, attorney-at-law, married
Gregor of Cornelly, and is, at the writing hereof, in possession of
Lambesso.[31]

Pen-are, alias Pen-ar, in this parish, parcel of the Duchy manor of
Moris aforesaid, was heretofore the dwelling of my kind friend James
Lance, Esq. a Commissioner of the Peace and Surveyor of the Duchy of
Lancaster during the Interregnum, or usurpation of Cromwell. He
married ―――― Blackston of London.

This gentleman sold this barton to Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan, Esq.
who settled it in marriage with his daughter Bridget, on Hugh
Fortescue, of Filley, in Devon, Esq. now in possession thereof.

Since writing the above, Mr. Fortescue departed with those lands to
Grenvill Hals, of Truro, gent., who dying without issue, and his
unthrift elder brother, James Hals of Merthyr succeeding as his heir
to those lands, he hath sold the same to one Mr. Cregoe, for about
twelve hundred pounds.[32]

Tre-simple, in this parish, was the lands of I have forgot whom, who
sold it to Henry Vincent, gent. attorney-at-law, descended, as Mr.
Foote informed me, from the Vincents of St. Allen, who married Kendall
of Pelyn; his father, Lampen; and gave for his arms, in a field three
cinquefoils.

By Kendall he had issue Walter Vincent, Esq. barrister-at-law, who
married ―――― Nosworthy, and a daughter named Jane, married to Harris,
of Park; after by his second wife, daughter of Richard Lance, gent. he
had issue Peter Vincent, to whom he gave this Tresimple, who sold it
to his brother Walter Vincent aforesaid, and Shadrack Vincent; Edward
Vincent, killed by a fall from his horse 1700; and Mary, married to
Joseph Halsey, clerk, some time rector of St. Michael, Penkwell.

Park, in this parish (id est, a field, or a park for beasts), is the
dwelling of Covin, gent.

Pol-wheele, or Polwhele, in this parish (id est, the head or top), is
situate at the top of a hill; from whence was denominated an ancient
family of gentlemen surnamed Polwhele, who gave for their arms as
underneath: in a field Sable, a saltire engrailed Ermine; and from
that time discontinued the arms of Trewoolla (viz. three owls), the
Cornish motto of which Polwhele’s arms was, Karenza whelas Karenza, id
est, Love or affection seeks, searches, begets, or works love. The
present possessor, John Polwhele, esq. barrister-at-law, who married
Redinge, of Northamptonshire, his father Baskewill of Dorset, his
grandfather one of the daughters of Judge Glanvill in Devon, his
great-great-grandfather one of the coheirs of Ten-Creek of Treworgan,
which place afterwards he made his dwelling.

Lastly, let the reader observe, that if the true name of this church
be St. Clement’s, then its tutelar guardian and patron, to whom it was
dedicated, was St. Clement, Pope and martyr of Rome; whose name is
derived from Clemens, mild, meek, merciful, gracious. He was born in
the region of Calimontana in Italy; his father’s name Faustine. He was
contemporary with St. Paul, and was his coadjutor or assistant in
preaching the Gospel, as is testified by himself in his epistle to
Timothy, wherein he saith, “Help those persons that labour with me in
the Gospel, whose names are written in the Book of Life.” He appointed
that in the seven regions of Rome should be the notaries, to write the
deeds and martyrdoms of the Christians, and commanded that such as
were baptized and had learnt the principles of the Christian religion,
should receive the sacrament of confirmation, and as some write, he
made the Canon of the Apostles and the Apostolic Constitutions now
extant. Finally, for preaching the Gospel of Christ in derogation of
the Roman religion, he was by command of the Emperor Trajan, with a
rope about his neck, and an anchor fastened thereto, cast into the
main sea and drowned, uttering those last words, “Eternal Father,
receive my soul!” after he had been Pope of Rome nine years, two
months, and ten days, the 23rd of November Anno Dom. 102. He gave
orders twice in December, and ordered fifteen bishops, ten priests,
and twenty-one deacons, as Baronius saith.


TONKIN.

The Polwheles of this place are of great antiquity. They flourished
before the Conquest, at which time they were so eminent that Drew de
Polwhele was chamberlain to the Conqueror’s queen; and the late John
Polwhele, Esq. had not long since in his possession, a grant from her
to the said Drew of several lands in this county, which deed he having
sent to a gentleman to peruse, he could never get it back again. From
the time of this Drew or Drogo de Polwhele, the family have lived with
much esteem in this their habitation, till the latter part of Queen
Elizabeth’s reign, when Degory Polwhele, on his marriage with
Catherine the eldest daughter and coheir of Robert Trencreek, Esq.
removed to her seat of Treworgan in St. Erme, where the family resided
till the sale of that place to Mr. Collins, when they returned to
their old dwelling.

The present possessor, Richard Polwhele, Esq. was sheriff of Cornwall
9 George I. 1723.

The family suffered greatly in the civil wars.

Penhellick was once a considerable seat, although now it is divided
into several premises, in one of which lately resided Mr. Robert
Polwhele, younger brother to John Polwhele, Esq. and in another
Captain Thomas Gregor, of Truro.

Trewhythenick formerly belonged to a family of the same name, who gave
for their arms, Argent, a chevron within a border engrailed Sable.
This manor came afterwards to the Chamonds.

Park also belonged to a family of the same name.

Lambesso belonged to the Tredenhams, but for some time past to the
Footes.


THE EDITOR.

Polwhele has descended from the gentleman who served the office of
sheriff in 1723, to his grandson, the Rev. Richard Polwhele, author of
a history of Cornwall, and so distinguished by his works in every
department of literature; by his early poetical effusions, when

     “He lisp’d in numbers for the numbers came;”

by those of his maturer age; by sermons equally sound in learning and
in diction, and persuasive by their eloquence; that no Cornishman of
the present day can presume to place himself, I will not say in
competition, but in the same class of literary excellence with Mr.
Polwhele.

At Penhellick, about seventy years ago, the Rev. John Collins, rector
of Redruth, built a house for his own residence after removing to the
village; he is reported to have selected this spot in consequence of
several persons residing in it having attained great ages. On his
decease, the house and lands were sold to a Colonel Macarmicke,
originally a wine merchant at Truro, who much enlarged the house, and
endeavoured to affix some fanciful new name on the place. The property
has since passed through various hands, and the house has generally
been unoccupied.

  This parish contains 3156 statute acres.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           7027    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                      1100    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, |  in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1342   |    1692   |   2306   |   2885;
    giving an increase of 115 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks are not much exposed in this parish.

In the southern part they consist of glossy slates, which break into
thick lameller leaves, and they appear to belong to the calcareous
series.


     [31] Their son Henry married Jane, the only daughter of
     Jacob Jackson, of Truro; and their son and heir, John Foote,
     married a daughter of Sir Edward Goodere, member for the
     county of Hereford, and sister of the unfortunate Sir John
     Dineley Goodere, and Captain Goodere. Their son was the
     celebrated Samuel Foote, called in his time the English
     Aristophanes.

     [32] Admiral Carthew Reynolds built a good house here in the
     latter part of the last century. He was considered to be an
     excellent officer and a skilful seaman; yet he lost his life
     when a ninety-gun ship, under his command, was first injured
     by some other vessel, and then driven on the flat sands near
     the entrance of the Baltic in the winter 1811-12.




COLAN, OR LITTLE COLAN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pider, and hath upon the north, Maugan;
east, St. Colomb Major; south, St. Enedor; west, Lower St. Columb.

It is so called from the barton of Little Colon or Golon, contiguous
with the church, on part of which ground perhaps the same was founded,
and endowed with part of the lands thereof. At the time of the Norman
Conquest this district passed in tax under the names of Carneton, or
Ryalton; and the church being built and endowed by Walter Brounscomb,
Bishop of Exeter, 1250, it was by him appropriated to the canons
Augustine of his college of Glasnith, by him founded. For that we read
in the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of benefices for the Pope’s Annats in Cornwall, 1294, Ecclesia
Sancti Colani, appropriata Canonicis de Penryn, 4_l._; Vicar ejusdem
6_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum,
6_l._ 14_s._ 8_d._; the patronage in the Bishop of Exeter for the time
being; the sheaf or rectory in possession of Vyvyan; the incumbent,
Bagwell; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696,
63_l._ 16_s._

From this barton of Colon was denominated an old family of gentlemen,
from thence surnamed De Colon; of which family Roger de Colon was
seised of a knight’s fee of land 25th Edward III., which he held by
the tenure of knight-service. Carew’s Survey Corn. p. 52. Roger Colon,
grandson of the said Roger, having issue only two daughters, Jane and
Margaret, the which Jane was married to John Blewet, a younger branch
of the Blewets of Holcomb Rogus in Devon, who afterwards was made
sheriff of Cornwall the 26th Henry VI. (when Richard Yeard, Esq. was
sheriff of Devon); which Jane’s estate was no small advance of the
wealth of his house, from whom all the Blewets of Cornwall are since
descended, some of whom have erected a monument in this church in
memory of those De Colons; and several of them have made Colon a font
name in their family to this day, of which I may not in justice forget
my late kind friend Major Colon Blewet, a valiant commander under King
Charles I. against the Parliament army, who married Elizabeth daughter
of Sir William Wrey, Knight, but died without issue; whose brother
Robert, that married Arundell, a base son, succeeded to this his
estate, who had issue another Robert that married Wood, as I remember,
and sold the moiety of this barton of Colon to Robert Hoblyn, of
Nanswiddon, clerk, rector of Ludgnan, now in possession thereof; the
arms of Blewet were, Or, a chevron between three eagles Vert. The
Hampshire Blewets, as Camden saith, gave Or, an eagle displayed with
two necks and heads Gules.

Coswarth, also Cosowarth, synonymous words, the far off, or remote
wood, which place, as Mr. Carew tells us, at the time of the Norman
Conquest, transnominated the French family or name of Escudifer, i. e.
shield-bearer or Esquire, to that of Coswarth; in which place those
gentlemen flourished in great wealth and tranquillity, till John
Cosowarth, Esq. lord of this place, tempore Henry VIII. having issue,
by Williams, one only daughter named Katherine, married first to Allen
Hill, and afterwards to Arundell of Trerice, suffered the greatest
part of his lands and estate to go with his daughter’s children, and
then entailed this manor and barton of Coswarth on the heirs male of
his family, by virtue of which settlement his uncle, John Cosowarth,
succeeded to those lands, who had issue by Sir William Lock’s
daughter, Thomas Cosowarth, Esq. that married Seyntaubyn, sheriff of
Cornwall 26th Elizabeth, who by her had issue John and Dorothy; and
Dorothy was married to Kendall. After the death of John, Edward
Cosowarth his uncle succeeded to this inheritance of Cosowarth, and
married Arundell of Trerice, who had issue by her Samuel Cosowarth,
Esq. afterwards knighted by Charles I. He married Heale of Fleet, and
had issue Edward, Samuel, and John, that died before their father;
Robert and Nicholas succeeded to this estate successively, but died
both without issue. The which Robert, upon some distasteful words
given him by his cousin John Coswarth, one of the heirs male in
remainder, did by fine and proclamation bar the estate tail, and made
it fee simple in himself and his heirs. So that after his decease his
brother Nicholas succeeded to the estate, who by an accidental fall
from his horse (coming home from St. Colomb, as was reported, somewhat
intoxicated with liquor), instantly died, without issue; after whose
decease Bridget Cosowarth, his only sister, daughter of Sir Samuel
aforesaid, succeeded to his inheritance, who married Henry Minors of
St. Enedor, her cousin-german, by whom she had issue one only daughter
named Anne, who was married to Captain Francis Vivian of Truan, by
whom he had issue one only daughter named Mary, since become wife and
lady of Sir Richard Vyvyan, of Trelowarren, Bart. now in possession of
Coswarth and Vivian’s estates.

The arms of Cosowarth are, Argent, on a chevron between three falcons’
wings Azure, five Bezants.

This place I suppose is that manor of land in the Domesday roll taxed
by the name of Chor, also Chore, and now vulgarly called
Cud-chore, or Cud-jore, viz. the wood-play, interlude, show, or
diversion; pageants, sights, pastimes, to delight the people. Now
choariou in Cornish, hoariou in the Armorican tongue, is as ludi in
Latin, and ludo and ludus. And further memorable it is that Sir Samuel
Coswarth of this place frequently styled himself Sir Samuel Cudjore
for Cudchoariou, for such was the name of the place before the woods
about were destroyed. Then it assumed the name of Cosowarth, i. e. the
further-off wood, when the woods on the south-west part of it were
destroyed.

Tonkin has not any thing of the least importance different from Mr.
Hals.


THE EDITOR.

  This parish contains 1481 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1685    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            94   14     0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    191   |    221   |    259   |    261;
    giving an increase of nearly 37 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geological structure in this parish is not very evident; but where
the rocks are exposed they very much resemble some varieties of the
calcareous series.




ST. COLOMB MAJOR.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pyder, and hath upon the north side
Little Pedyrick, St. Ewyn, and St. Issey; on the east, St. Wenn and
Roach; west, Maugan; south, St. Enedor, Little Collun, and St. Dennis.
At the time of the Norman Conquest the name of this parish or church
was not extant, for then it was taxed under the names of Tollscat or
Todscad, now the duchy manor of Tollskidy, (that is to say, the shady
hole, or pit,) Bodeworgy, and Chiliworgy, places still well known in
those parts. At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, 1294, into the value of Cornish church revenues,
Ecclesia de Sancte Colombe Majoris in Decanatu de Pedre was taxed
18_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, and Valor Beneficiorum,
it was valued at 53_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._; the patronage in Arundell of
Lanherne, the incumbent Bishop, Pendarves, Collyar, and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 306_l._ 9_s._ 4_d._

This church of St. Colomb was erected about the twelfth century of
Christianity; the north and south ailes by the lords of Trenoweth, and
Tresuran’s lands, but who the same were is now past ability of finding
out, though Tresuran’s lands, ever since, are charged with the payment
of 13_s._ 4_d._ per annum towards repair of the south aile aforesaid.
This church consists of three roofs, and the south-east chancel
thereof was built for a peculiar chapel for the Arundells of
Trembleth, or Lanherne, who endowed this church, and have ever since
been patrons thereof; and in testimony thereof, here is yet extant on
one of their gravestones a brass inscription containing words to this
purpose, “Here lieth the body of Renphry Arundell, Knight, patron of
this church and founder of this chapel, who departed this life
the ―――― Anno Dom. 1340.”[33] His lady, as I remember, was Sir
William Lamburn’s heir.

The tutelar patron or guardian of this church is St. Colomb, to whom
the same was dedicated, an Irish gentleman by birth; though, contrary
to this opinion, at the bottom of Camden’s Britannia, in Cornwall, we
are told that this church bears the name of, and is dedicated to one
Sancta Colomba, a holy woman who lived in those parts, and that her
life was written in the Cornish tongue, and in possession of one Mr.
Roscarrock, though now there is no such person or book extant that I
can hear of. Only, let it be remembered that I found it written in the
Sieur D. T.’s French book of the Saints, as also in Surrius’ and
Bosquet’s books, and Baronius (out of them), that there lived at
Senns, in Gallia, now France, in the time of the fifth persecution by
the emperor Aurelian, anno Dom. 276, a holy Christian Virgin named
Colomba, of such exquisite beauty that one of his sons fell
passionately in love with her; but because he could not obtain his
lustful desire of her, offered her marriage, but he being an idolater
she refused his embraces. Whereupon she was much persecuted by
Aurelian and cast into prison; where she suffered much hardship, and
was comparatively starved to death in that place; so that in great
misery she expired there, and was buryed at Senns. At whose grave many
supernatural facts, or miracles, being said to be done, she obtained
the reputation of a saint and martyr, anno Dom. 300.

The feast of the dedication of this church is in November, near Sancta
Colomba Virginis et Martyris day; and the fair depends upon it.

As for the south aile of this church before-mentioned, it was called
Jesus Chapel, and therein was founded Trinity chantry; towards
building or endowment whereof the Lords of Resurrans tied these lands
for ever to pay to the same 13_s._ 4_d._ per annum, with power of
distress. At the dissolution of this chantry 1 Edward VI. John Chaplin
was chief chanter, or sole priest thereof, and seised of the said
rent, as his predecessors had been long before; and King Edward being
so possessed, by virtue of an Act of Parliament, sold the same, with
other things, to Sir Hugh Pomeroy, Knight, and Thos. Pomeroy, Esq. his
brother; who the 4th Edward VI. sold it to William Saplyn; and ――――
Saplyn, in the 1st and 2nd of Philip and Mary, sold it to John Glyn,
Esq., John Ganergan, William Prye, John Manifield, Richard Carter,
Henry Rouse, John Vivian, and Richard Hancanon, who were trustees for
the parish of Sancta Colomba. After which conveyances the Lord of
Resurrans refused to pay the said rent. Whereupon the parish
distrained those lands, and the owner thereof replevined the goods so
taken, which occasioned the parish bringing an action in replevin
against the replevers thereof; and for plea, by way of avowry, did
allege that those goods they ought to take, for that one John chaplain
of Trinity chantry was seised of the said rent in fee, as his
predecessors time out of mind had been before, in right of the said
chantry, from which it passed to King Edward the Sixth, and the
purchasers under him as aforesaid. Whereupon the issue passed for the
plaintiff, or parish, against the Lord of Resurrans. (See St. Michael
Penkivell, St. Mary Wike; also for Chantry, see St. Cuthbert for
prayer for the dead.)

In the year 1676, the greatest part of this church of St. Colomb was
casually blown up with gunpowder by three youths of the town, scholars
therein, who, in the absence of their master and the rest of their
companions, ignorantly set fire to a barrel of gunpowder, the parish
stores, laid up in the stone stairs and walls of the rood-loft, which
occasioned the destruction of it and themselves together; for the
glass-window, roofs, timber, stones, and pillars, thereby made a
direful concussion together, especially those shot from the walls of
the moorstone stairs aforesaid, to the total defacing the church and
many pews thereof.

In this tragical concussion several accidents were strange and
unaccountable. As, first, that one Nicholas Jane, a hellyar, was on a
ladder mending the healing, or stones on the roof of the church, when
it happened, whereby he himself and the ladder under him were blown up
also; but both fell to the ground without hurt. Secondly, the church
bible and common-prayer book, with their leaves open, in the rector’s
pew, scarce two feet from the rood-loft stairs, where the powder took
fire and broke out, were neither singed, moved, nor so much as any
dust about them, though many thousand stones were cast about the
church. Thirdly, there was at least a ton weight of lime and stone
cast upon the communion table, which was old and slight, having but
one foot or pedestal to stand upon, and yet the same was not broken
nor hurt. Fourthly, the pulpit was in like manner preserved from the
fury and rage of the fire and stones, when the very walls and pillars
near it were shattered to pieces. Let divines and philosophers give a
reason for these things, if there was not a supernatural cause or
Providence for it!

By this sad accident this church of St. Colomb received damage to the
value of about 350_l._; yet was, by the liberal contributions of its
inhabitants, in nine months time built and repaired as it now stands,
and what was wanting in subscriptions to make up that sum, was raised
by a small parish rate on the lands thereof. The chief subscribers,
Sir John Saint Aubyn, of Trekininge, Baronet, 20_l._; his
grandmother-in-law, the widow of Peter Jenkin, Esq. 20_l._; John
Vivian, Esq. of Truan, 20_l._; his three sons, Thomas, John, and
Francis Vivian, 15_l._; Robert Hoblyn, Esq. 10_l._; Edward, his son,
5_l._; Captain Ralph Keate, 5_l._; the writer of this volume 5_l._;
John Day, Gent. 5_l._; Peter Day, Gent. 5_l._; Honour Carter, widow,
10_l._; John Bligh, Gent. 5_l._; Peter Pollard, senior, 10_l._; John
Beauford, rector, 20_l._, with several others.

And, as if the fiery element had a particular power over this church,
it is further memorable that several times before a stone pinnacle of
the tower thereof was cast down with thunder and lightning, and had as
often been built up again to no purpose, till at length the workmen
were advised, upon their last operation, to inscribe in the stone
thereof, “God bless and preserve this work;” since which time it hath
stood invincible for about sixty years. But, alas! notwithstanding
this pinnacle hath been thus exempted from the raging of the fiery
element, yet its next neighbour, the lofty spire or steeple on the
said tower, a strong and well-built structure, bound or cramped
together with iron and cast lead through the moor-stones thereof, (so
that, comparatively, according to man’s judgment, it might last till
the final consummation of all things,) yet so it happened on a
Thursday in July 1690, that about one of the clock in the afternoon,
when the people were at their traffic in the market place contiguous
with the churchyard, the said spire or steeple was torn and shattered
to pieces with a flash of lightning, and totally thrown to the ground,
and the iron bars therein wreathed and wrested asunder as threads, to
the great terror and astonishment of the beholders. It was further
observable when this concussion happened, only divers flashes of
lightning appeared, but no sound or crack of thunder was heard; from
whence I infer that when the voice of thunder is heard, the fiery
matter in the middle region, perhaps not three miles above our heads,
hath spent its force and strength. This spire also was soon after
re-edified by the inhabitants of this parish, though much short of its
former height and bigness, as it now stands.

Again, contiguous with this church-yard was formerly extant a college
of Black Monks or Canons Augustine, consisting of three fellows, for
instructing youth in the liberal arts and sciences; which college,
when or by whom erected and endowed I know not. However, I take it to
be one of those three colleges in this province named in Speed and
Dugdale’s Monasticon, whose revenues they do not express, (nor the
places where they were extant,) but tell us that they were dedicated
to the blessed Virgin Mary, the lady of angels, and were black monks
of the Augustines.

In this college, temp. Henry VI., was bred up John Arundell, a younger
son of Renfry Arundell, of Lanherne, Esq. sheriff of Cornwall 3 Edward
IV. where he had the first taste of the liberal arts and sciences, and
was afterwards placed at Exon College in Oxford, where he stayed till
he took his degree of Master of Arts, and then was presented by his
father to John Booth, Bishop of Exeter, to be consecrated priest, and
to have collation, institution, and induct, into his rectory of St.
Colomb. Which being accordingly performed, and he resided upon this
rectory glebe lands for some time, which gave him opportunity to build
the old parsonage house still extant thereon, and moat the same round
with rivers and fish-ponds, as Sir John Arundell, Knight, informed me
afterwards. In the year 1496, he had by Henry VII. bestowed upon him
the bishopric of Lichfield and Coventry, then void upon the
translation of William Smith to Lincoln, (the successor of John Hals,)
in which see he remained till the year 1501, and then, upon the death
or translation of Richard Redman, Bishop of Exeter, he was removed to
that diocese by Henry VII. then possessed of great revenues, but died
at London, 1504, and was buried at St. Clement’s Danes Church.

Before this church of St. Colomb was erected, within the borders of
its now parish were extant four free chapels, wherein God was
worshipped in former ages, viz. at Tregoos (i. e. the wood towne),
Tre-sithan-y (the weekly town, the town frequented on the Sabbath);
Ruth-es (i. e. the multitude is); and Lan-hengye (i. e. the church or
temple of sentence, judgment, or deliberating cases). The old
cemeteries of which are now all converted to orchards and gardens, or
arable ground.

The town of St. Colomb, by the mediation of its lords, the Arundells
of Lanherne, is privileged with a weekly market on Thursdays, wherein
all things necessary for the life of man are vended at a moderate
rate; as also with fairs on Thursday after Midlent Sunday, and on
Thursday after Allhallows.

This place was heretofore for a long time notorious for the vice of
excessive topling or toping, not only to the damage of many of the
inhabitants’ healths and wealth, but also to the loss of too many
lives; I mean in the time of Charles II. when the practice of
quaffing, toasting, or healthing, debauch and immorality, overspread
the land in general.

In this parish stands Castell-an-Dinas. It consists of about six acres
of ground, within three circles or intrenchments, upon the top of a
pyramidal hill, composed or built of turf and unwrought stones, after
the British manner, without lime or mortar, comparatively a hedge;
each of those circles or ramparts rising about eight foot above each
other towards the centre of the castle, consisting of about an acre
and a half of land, in the midst whereof appear the ruins of some old
dilapidated houses; near which is a flat vallum, pit, or tank, wherein
rain or cloud-water, that falls down from the middle regions, abides
more or less in quantity as it falls one half of the year; which, I
suppose, heretofore supplied the soldiers’ occasions, as no fountain,
spring, or river water is within a thousand paces thereof. There were
two gates or portals leading to this fort, the one on the east, the
other on the west side thereof, which, on a stony causeway now covered
with grass, conducts you up and down the hill towards Tre-kyning, that
is to say the king’s, prince, or ruler’s town. Moreover, contiguous
with this castle are tenements of land or fields, named Tre-saddarne,
that is to say god Saturn’s town, a place where the god Saturn was
worshipped by the soldiers, who probably had their temple or chapel
here before Christianity.

Near this castle, by the highway, stands the Coyt, a stony tumulus so
called, of which sort there are many in Wales and Wiltshire, as is
mentioned in the Additions to Camden’s Britannia in those places,
commonly called the Devil’s Coyts. It consists of four long stones of
great bigness, perpendicularly pitched in the earth contiguous with
each other, leaving only a small vacancy downwards, but meeting
together at the top; over all which is laid a flat stone of prodigious
bulk and magnitude, bending towards the east in way of adoration, (as
Mr. Lhuyd concludes of all those Coyts elsewhere,) as the person
therein under it interred did, when in the land of the living; but
how, or by what art this prodigious flat stone should be placed on the
top of the others, amazeth the wisest mathematicians, engineers, or
architects, to tell or conjecture. Colt, in Belgic-British, is a cave,
vault, or cott-house, of which coyt might possibly be a corruption.

Not far from this coyt, at the edge of the Goss-moor, there is a large
stone, wherein is deeply imprinted a mark, as if it were the impress
of four horseshoes, and to this day called King Arthur’s Stone; yea,
tradition tells us they were made by King Arthur’s horse’s feet, when
he resided at Castle Denis, and hunted in the Goss Moor. But this
stone is now overturned by some seekers for money.

On another part of this parish, near Retallock Barrow (that is to say,
Retallock Grave), is a notable tumulus, wherein some human creature of
that place was interred before the 16th century. Retalloch signifies
exceeding or too much buckler or target, not far from which is still
extant, in the open downs, nine perpendicular stones, called the Nine
Maids, in Cornish Naw-voz, alias the nine sisters, in Cornish
Naw-whoors, which very name informs us that they were sepulchral
stones, erected in memory either of nine natural or spiritual sisters
of some religious house, and not so many maids turned into stones for
dancing on the Sabbath Day, as the country people will tell you. Those
stones are set in order by a line, as is such another monument also
called the Nine Maids in Gwendron, by the highway, about twety-five
feet distance from each other; or it is rather in Stithian’s parish.

Truan, Truin, Truyn, Trevan, Trewyn, are all synonymous words,
signifying a nose, nook, or beak of any matter or thing; here to be
construed as a nose, nook, or beak of land, extant or notable amongst
others; which place and Trenouth, for four descents, hath been the
dwelling of the gentle family of the Vivians, who have flourished here
in worshipful degree.

The present possessor of this place is my very kind friend John
Vivian, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall about 20 Charles II. and one of His
Majesty’s Justices of the Peace, a gentleman famous for his
hospitality and charity. He married three wives; the first, Jane,
daughter of Sir John Trelawny, Bart., but had no issue by her that
lived; his second was Mary, daughter of John Glanvill, of Killyvor,
Esq., in Devon, by whom he had issue Thomas, John, Francis, Anne, and
Jane; his last wife was Specott, the relict of ―――― Nicholls, by whom
he had no issue. His father married two wives, ―――― Buller and ――――
Cavall; his grandfather married ―――― Lure; his great-grandfather one
of Tresaster’s heirs, as I am informed.

Thomas Vivian, Esq., eldest son of the aforesaid John, married ――――
Blathwayte, sister to William Blathwayte, Esq. Secretary at War to
King James the Second and William the Third, but had no issue by her.
His second wife was the daughter of ―――― Dodson, Esq. but died without
issue by her. His second brother, John Vivian, Esq. barrister-at-law,
married also two wives: the first Anne, daughter of Matthew Hals, of
Efford, Esq., but she also died without issue; on whose death her
father-in-law made this epitaph fixed on her hearse, 1682:

     Who underneath this mournful sable lies,
     But one that did all worldly pomp despise?
     It’s not adorned with painted pageantry,
     To blazon forth her great antiquity;
     Nor were’t more necessary to be done,
     Than lighting candles in the mid-day sun;
     Her shining virtues did so far exceed,
     That of this lesser lustre there’s no need.
     These praise her in the gates; these speak on earth,
     Her higher extract and her heavenly birth.
     And now she’s parted hence, but to go home;
     For where she born was, thither must she come.
     Could cares, or tears, or prayers have her repriev’d,
     She had, to our great comfort, longer lived.
     Farewell, then, dearest Saint, till thou and I
     Do meet in bliss, to live eternally.                  J. V.

His second wife was Mary, daughter of Joseph Sawle, of Penrice, Esq.
by whom he hath issue John, Mary, and Thomas.

Francis Vivian, Esq. third son of the aforesaid John, married Anne,
daughter of Henry Mynon, gent., sole heir to her mother Bridget, the
only surviving child of Sir Samuel Coswarth, Knight (see Colan), by
whom he had issue one only daughter named Mary, now wife of Sir
Richard Vivian, Baronet. Ann Vivian married Simon Leach, gent. some
time her father’s clerk; Jane married James Beaufort, clerk.

The arms of those Vivians are the same as was borne and given by Prior
Thomas Vivian, of Bodmin, with some small difference. (See Bodmin.)

In the town of St. Colomb, for three or four descents, lived the
gentle family of the Carters (originally descended from the Carters of
Staffordshire), where by trade and merchandise they got a great
estate, and married with Vivian, Arundell of Solverne, and Moyle of
Bake; and lastly, Richard Carter, Esq., a Justice of the Peace, and
Member of Parliament for Mitchell, married Elizabeth King, alias
Lucas, alias Shepard, of the City of London, spinster, a woman
destitute of fame and fortune, whereby he was led into such excess of
riot and expence of monies that he was forced to sell all his lands,
and reduced himself to about 50_l._ per annum during life. Part of his
lands were sold to his younger brother, John Carter, who married ――――
Lawry, whose three daughters and heirs were married to William Silly,
Esq., Giles Risdon, of Badleigh, Esq., and Thomas Hoblyn, gent.
attorney-at-law, now in possession thereof. The arms of Carter were,
In a field Argent, two lions combatant Sable, armed and langued Gules.

Trevethick, in this parish, alias Trevidick, i. e. the rustic or
farmer’s town, for several descents had been the dwelling of the
gentle family of the Arundells, a younger branch of Lanherne stock,
particularly Thomas Arundell, who married the daughter of Sir Giles
Montpesson, Knight, by whom he had issue Thomas Arundell, Esq. that
died without issue, but not without wasting a great part of his
estate.

Trekyning aforesaid was for two descents the seat of the Jenkyns,
descended from James Jenkyn, gent., attorney-at-law, temp. James I.
who (from a mean origin, his father being a miller), by the inferior
practice of the law, got a very great estate, and married ―――― Carter,
the relict of ―――― Brabyn, and had issue Peter Jenkyn, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall temp. Charles I.

Nans-widdon, Nanc-widd-an, i. e. the valley of trees, or the tree
valley, in this parish, for four descents has been the dwelling of the
gentle family of the Hoblyns, of Leskeard or Treburge, in St. Pinoch,
as I am informed. The present possessor, Robert Hoblyn, Esq., married
―――― Carew of Penwarne; his father ―――― Apeley; his grandfather ――――;
and giveth for his arms, Argent, a fess Gules, between two flanches
Ermine. By Carew Mr. Hoblyn had issue, viz. Edward Hoblyn, Esq. his
son and heir, who married Avant’s heir, and left issue only a
daughter, married to ―――― Bickford, Esq.; Richard Hoblyn, bred a
merchant factor at Smyrna, that married ―――― Striblehill, but died
without issue; Robert Hoblyn, clerk, rector of Ludgvan, and a
commissioner of the pence and land taxes, that married the heir of
Burgess of Truro, and left issue only Francis Hoblyn, Esq., that
married Godolphin, and died leaving issue only a son named Robert,
heir; Thomas Hoblyn, attorney-at-law, that married one of Carter’s
heirs, and left issue by her John Hoblyn, of Kenwyn, Carew Hoblyn,
clerk, and other children, and three daughters; Anne, married to
Bishop, rector of St. Colomb Major; Grace, married to Pendarves,
rector of Maugan; Mary, married to William Cock, attorney-at-law, of
Helston. From this house are descended the Hoblyns of St. Enedor,
Bodmin, Egleshayle, Helland, and Gurran.

Bode-worgye, now Bos-worgy (on part of the lands whereof are yet
extant the ruins and downfalls of an old chapel or cemetery extant
before the Norman Conquest), formerly the voke lands of a man taxed in
Domesday Roll, 20 William I. 1087, for four or five descents was the
seat of the genteel family of Keates, and was till lately in the
possession of my very kind friend Capt. Ralph Keate, who died without
marriage or issue, and therefore settled this Bosworgy, and other
lands, upon Sir Jonathan Keate, Bart. of the Hoo, in Hertfordshire,
patent 478, 12 Chas. II. whose father married the only dau. and heir
of W. Hoo, of Hoo, Esq. Sheriff of Hertfordshire 5 Charles I., a
younger branch of the Baron Hoo of that place, whose heir was married
to the Earl of Huntingdon temp. Henry VIII., and in testimony thereof
gave the same arms as those barons, viz. Quarterly, Argent and Sable.
Those Keates within the memory of man, as they branched downwards,
married with Bear, Hals, Avery, and others, and gave for their arms,
Argent, three cats Sable. Keate, Ceate, in British, is fallacy, cheat,
or delusion.

Gauer-y-gan, in this parish, id est, the goat’s downs, gave name and
original to the genteel family of the Gauerigans, who for several
generations lived here in good reputation, till the middle of Queen
Elizabeth’s reign, at which time the last two daughters and heirs of
this family were married to Godolphin and Trefusis, whose heirs are
now in possession of their estate. Which family gave for their arms,
in allusion to their names, in a field Vert, a goat passant Argent, as
I am informed; the form of which is still extant in their pew or seat,
the foremost in one of the middle rows of seats in this church.

At Tre-sugg-an (id est, the town on the Saggor Bog), in this parish,
is the dwelling of Peter Day, gentleman, that married ―――― Brabyn. He
left issue only two daughters, that became his heirs, married to
Richard Williams, of Trewithan, Esq., and John Williams, of Carmanton,
Esq.

Trekyninge Vean, i. e. Trekininge the Less or Lesser, is the dwelling
of Joseph Hankey, gent., attorney-at-law, who, by his care and skill
in that profession, hath got himself considerable wealth and
reputation in those parts. He married two wives, Matthews of
Tresangar, and Buroughs of Ward Bridge; but hath issue by neither. His
father married Hoblyn of St. Stephen’s.

Upon Bodeworgy lands aforesaid, or contiguous with it as aforesaid,
are still extant the ruins of an old chapel, wherein God heretofore
was worshipped, before St. Colomb church was erected, called
Bes-palf-an.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has here copied Hals with very little alteration, except by
way of abridgment.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals has a very long dissertation on the claims of another person,
a male St. Colomb, to be accounted patron saint of this parish.

It is well known that Cornwall received the Christian faith from
various individuals who came from Munster, in Ireland, where the
learning and the religion of these times certainly flourished: all
those persons were held in veneration by their converts, and were
distinguished by them as saints. These missionaries were, moreover, so
numerous in all parts that Ireland was called the Land of Saints. St.
Colomb may possibly be one of those missionaries; but the subject is
of little importance, and I am unwilling to bestow the elegant
appellation of the Holy Dove, on any other than a female saint.

Nanswhyden, unquestionably the White Vale, is mentioned by Mr. Hals as
belonging to the Hoblyns. Mr. Robert Hoblyn, of Nanswhyden, who died
in 1756, was a very distinguished person. He was generally a man of
letters; but, what is rarely to be found in a country gentleman, he
excelled in the recondite learning of the East. He built a magnificent
house at Manswhyden, and established there a library so extensive, and
so rich in manuscripts, as to be valued at thirty thousand pounds.

This gentleman received a great addition to his fortune from a most
productive copper mine, called Herland, or the Mane Mine, in the
parish of Gwineat, and he married a daughter of Mr. Coster, an
Alderman of Bristol, at that period the most extensive smelter of
copper ores. In consequence of this connection, and his deserved
reputation, Mr. Hoblyn was chosen one of the representatives of
Bristol.

The house was entirely consumed by an accidental fire in 1803. The
property has descended to his collateral relation, the Reverend Robert
Hoblyn, who inherits also a large portion of his classic taste.

Castle-An-Dinas[34] is situated on one of the highest hills in the
hundred of Penwith, commanding an extensive view over the western
extremity of Cornwall, from St. Ives to the Land’s End. Borlase gives
the following description of its remains: “Castle-An-Dinas consisted
of two stone walls, one within the other in a circular form,
surrounding the area of the hill. The ruins are now fallen on each
side the walls, and show the work to have been of great height and
thickness. There was also a third, or outer wall, built more than
halfway round. Within the walls are many little inclosures of a
circular form, about seven yards diameter, with little walls round
them of two or three feet high, they appear to have been so many huts
for the shelter of the garrison. The diameter of the whole fort from
east to west is four hundred feet, and the principal ditch sixty feet.
Towards the south, the sides of the hill are marked by two large green
paths, about ten feet wide. Near the middle of the area is a well,
almost choked up with its own ruins, and at a little distance a narrow
pit, its sides walled round, probably for water also, now filled up.”

It is to be regretted that Borlase did not publish a plan to
illustrate his description of this Castle, as it has been much
dilapidated since his time. A tower was built on the site of the outer
wall about forty years ago, by Mr. Rogers, of Penrose; and subsequent
reparations have not contributed towards a restotation of the old
walls. Nor are there any perceptible remains of the inclosures.

  This parish measures 12,045 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         10,581    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                         1186    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1816   |   2070   |   2493   |   2790;
    giving somewhat more than an increase of 53½ per cent. in thirty
      years.
  Parish Feast, the nearest Sunday to the 17th of November.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

A small portion of the southern part of this parish, adjoining to St.
Dennis, rests on granite, the surface of which abounds in projecting
masses of shorl rock. Leaving this granite district about the Indian
Queens, on the Great Truro Road, a tin mine, called the Fat Work,
presents itself, and displays some interesting phenomena. The basis of
the rock is a compact felspar, sometimes almost colourless, at other
times dark blue and glossy; but more commonly both these kinds are
blended together in stripes or spots like agates. This rock next the
lode is much decomposed, the blue parts being changed into a light
pink; which shows that the colouring mineral is not hornblend. It is
probably shorl, a substance abounding in the quartz veins by which the
rock is traversed. The lode of this mine is very curious. It consists
of a large massive rock, fifteen fathoms in width, throughout which
shorl, and irregular veins of tin ore, are dispersed. The matrix
consists of a dark-coloured basis, interspersed by innumerable angular
and fragment-like portions of rock.

Near the Indian Queens a manganese mine was formerly worked, and the
adjacent moors abound in stream works.

A fine blue fissile slate occurs around the town of St. Colomb, and
continues for some distance northwards. Near Trewan it is found to
contain beds of compact rocks (not unlike those of the Mount Bay),
which inclose veins of actynolite. Still proceeding northward, quartz
so much prevails, as to occasion sterility in the land, displayed in
open downs like those of Roach, to which they adjoin.

Castle-An-Dinas is composed of a siliceous variety of the rock found
at Fat Work mine; and it appears to be one of the sources from whence
must have been derived the pebbles and striped shorl rock scattered
over Tregoss Moor.


     [33] There is, or was, this inscription also:

          D’s John Arundell, Mill. CCCC. verus Patronus hujus
          Ecclesiæ, qui hanc Capellam fecit.

     [34] Extracted from an “Account of certain Hill Castles,
     near the Land’s End in Cornwall,” by William Cotton, Esq.
     F.S.A. printed in the Archæologia, vol. XXII. where a plan
     and section of Castle-An-Dinas will be found, taken with
     greater care than that in Lysons’s Cornwall. In the
     Gentleman’s Magazine, LXXII. p. 393, are engravings of two
     stone weights found within the inner circle of this
     fortress. The weight of one was seventeen pounds and a half;
     and that of the other three pounds one ounce.




ST. COLUMB MINOR


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pedyr, and hath upon the north the Irish
sea and St. Mawgan; east, Little Colan; west, Crantock; south,
Newland. For the name see St. Columb Major. This church’s revenues
being wholly impropriated, or appropriated to the prior of Bodmin
before the Inquisitions of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester,
1294, or Wolsey’s afterwards, is not named therein; the prior by
ancient composition paying the vicar or curate here only six pounds
per annum; by which bargain he was a great gainer, at least 250_l._
per annum, and I take it the present patron and impropriator, Mr.
Buller, paya the curate not above 25_l._ per annum. This parish was
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 207_l._ 9_s._

This church, according to its bigness, is the finest, best-kept,
pewed, or seated, that I know of in Cornwall; the rood-loft, (yet
standing, though without a rood on it,) a most curious and costly
piece of workmanship, carved and painted with gold, silver, vermillion
and bice, is the masterpiece of art in those parts of that kind. The
pews or seats are uniform, all made of blackt oak; and to prove
their antiquity, there is yet extant an inscription on one of them,
containing these words: “These seats were built by the poor’s stock in
the year 1525.”

At Tre-loye in this parish (the flowing or abounding town) is still
extant a famous chapel, dedicated to St. Pedyr, perhaps of public use
before this church of St. Colomb was erected.

This district in Domesday Roll passed under the name and jurisdiction
of the great lordship and manor of Ryalton, heretofore pertaining to
the prior of Bodmin, which lands are held of the Bishop of Exeter’s
manor of Penryn, and pay yearly 10_l._ high rent to the same; from
whence I gather that formerly both pertained to the bishopric of
Cornwall, afterwards converted into Kirton and Exeter; and that
afterwards, by compact between the said bishop and prior of Bodmin, it
was dismembered from that bishopric, and restored to that priory, as
parcel of the ancient bishop of Bodmin’s revenues, of which that
priory consisted, and was endowed with at its first foundation by the
bequests of the ancient earls of Cornwall.

For the name of Rial-ton or Ryal-ton (if it consists of those
particles), it signifies the royal, kingly, or princely town, as
pertaining heretofore to the king of England or earls of Cornwall; and
suitable to this etymology it claimeth the jurisdiction and royalty
over the whole hundred of Pider. So that whosoever is now farmer
thereof, is by custom its head bailiff, as the prior of St. Pedyr at
Bodmin was; from whose font-name the same is still denominated Pider
(id est, Peter, as formerly said), the which farmer or bailiff is
steward of the Court Baron of the said hundred or decima, and also of
the Court Leet held within the jurisdiction or precincts of the manor
aforesaid, and his substitutes constantly attend the service of both.
To remove an action-at-law depending in the Court Leet of this manor,
the writ must thus be directed: Senescallo et Ballivo manerii nostri
de Rialton in comitatu de Cornubiæ salutem. To remove an action out of
hundred court, whereof as I said the farmer of this manor is lord, the
writ must be thus directed: “Senescallo et Ballivo hundredi et
libertatis de Peder, in comitatu Cornubiæ, salutem.”

When the priory of St. Peder at Bodmin was dissolved, 26 Henry VIII.
and those lands vested in the crown, one John Mundy, barrister-at-law,
(son of John Mundy, sheriff of London 6 Henry VIII. afterwards Sir
John Mundy, Knight, Lord Mayor of London 14 Henry VIII.) was sent down
from London to be seneschal or steward of this manor of Ryalton and
hundred of Pider. In which capacity he demeaned himself so well, temp.
Elizabeth, that when the set-off of the last prior for ninety-nine
years expired, and Mr. Mundy’s son succeeded in the same office as his
father, was in this place, at such time as James I. by statute
prohibited the granting of church lands at lease for longer than
twenty-one years under the old rent, Mr. Mundy took a lease thereof
from the Crown for that term, viz. of 60_l._ per annum, and his
posterity renewing or retaking the same as those leases expired,
thereby this estate, worth about 1000_l._ per annum, continued in this
family till some time after the restoration of Charles the Second,
when Sir Francis Godolphin, Knight, by favour of that King, took a
reversion or new set thereof, before Mr. Mundy’s expired, on condition
of doubling the rent from 60_l._ to 120_l._ per annum, so that Sir
William Godolphin, Bart. is now in possession thereof; and the Right
Hon. Sidney Lord Godolphin was created Baron Godolphin of Ryalton, 33
Charles II. whereby this family of Mundy are comparatively undone,
notwithstanding they were stout Cavaliers and opposers of Cromwell and
the Parliament army to their utmost power and strength. Well therefore
doth the royal Psalmist advise all men not to put their trust in
princes, nor in the sons of men, in whom is no help.

The arms of Mundy are, in a field, three lozenges, on a chief three
eagle’s legs erased.

The mansion-house at Ryalton wherein Mr. Mundy dwelt, was much
beautified and augmented by prior Thomas Vivian, to which belongs a
strong prison and dungeon for putting debtors in durance. Query,
whether this barton of Ryalton payeth tithes to the impropriator? All
priories, monasteries, religious houses, &c. above the yearly value of
200_l._ per annum, being exempted from it by the statute 31 Henry
VIII. chiefly because the same were given for and applied to
charitable uses and the maintenance of the poor; and verily, if the
name Ryalton be compounded of those syllables ry-all-ton, it signifies
give or bestow all town, or a town that gave or bestowed all its
revenues to the poor, and pious uses. And that the reader may know in
what manner poor men were sent to such religious houses to be fed and
maintained during life, as penitentiaries or otherwise, by their
superiors, or such as had power to visit the same, I will set down an
instance or example, out of Fox’s Acts and Monuments, page 53, temp.
Henry VIII. contained in a letter from John Langland, Bishop of
Lincoln, 1524, to the Abbot of Ensham, viz. “My loving brother, I
recommend me hearty unto you, and whereas I have according to law sent
this bearer T. R. to perpetual penance within your monastery of
Ensham, there to live as a penitent and not otherwise; I pray you
nevertheless, and according to the law command you, to receive him,
and see you order him there according to his injunctions, which he
will show you if you require the same. As for his lodging, he will
bring it with him, and his meat and drink he must have as you give of
your alms; and if he can so order himself by his labour within your
house in your business, whereby he may deserve meat and drink, so may
you order him as you see convenient to his deserts, so that he pass
not the precinct of your monastery. And thus, fare you heartily well.
From my place, &c.” This injunction of penance was, 1. To fast every
Friday during life, taking no other sustenance than bread and ale
after it; and every even of Corpus Christi’s day to fast during life,
and after fasting to take no other sustenance than bread and water
that day, unless prevented by sickness; also in part to say our lady’s
Psalter every Sunday during life; he is marked in the cheek, as other
penetentiaries, with the letter P. (See Egleshayle and Penuans in
Creed.)

At Towan in this parish, is that well-known place called Newquay, a
pretty safe road and anchorage place for such ships as trade in St.
George’s Channel, and also a convenient place for a fishing trade,
were the inhabitants disposed to adventure therein.

At Hendra, also Hendre, in this parish, synonymous words, old, ancient
town, is the dwelling of John Tonkyn, Gent. that married Keen of
Roach; his father the heir of Cock, by whom he had this place; his
grandfather Tregian, originally descended from the Tonkyns of St.
Agnes.

Trevedick, also Trevithick, words of one signification, id est, rustic
or farmers’ town, is the dwelling of Nicholas Polamonter, Gent. (so
called from Polla-monter in Newland.)


TONKIN

has not, again, any thing of the least importance different from Mr.
Hals.


THE EDITOR.

Rialton is the object of highest importance in this parish. Its
antiquities are not much known; but when Mr. Sidney Godolphin was
created Earl of Godolphin, his son, who had married Henrietta
Churchill, eldest daughter of the Duke of Marlborough, assumed the
appellation of Lord Rialton, and Lady Rialton was one of the ladies of
the bedchamber to Queen Anne.

A small print is given of the south entrance gate still remaining, in
C. S. Gilbert’s History of Cornwall, vol. ii. p. 673.

The property belonged to the late Mr. Thomas Rawlings of Padstow,
having probably been acquired when lands were sold by the duchy to
redeem the land-tax, but it was alienated on his decease.

New Quay, mentioned by Mr. Hals as a pretty safe road and anchorage
for vessels, and also as a convenient place for establishing a
fishery, is become a successful station for sea nets. In Lord
Dunstanville’s edition of Carew, p. 357, it is stated, “The place was
called New Quay, because in former times the neighbours attempted to
supply the defects of nature by art, in making there a quay for the
road of shipping, which conceit they still retain, although want of
means in themselves or in the plan have left the effect in nubibus.
The quay has now been many years constructed, but I apprehend it is
not capable of receiving any other than small vessels.”

  This parish measures 4759 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6238    0    0
  The Poor Rate in 1831                       783    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    999   |   1126   |   1297   |   1406;
    giving an increase of about 40¾ per cent. in 30 years.
  The parish feast, like that of St. Columb Major, is on the Sunday
    nearest to the 17th of November.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

On the eastern side adjoining to the Downs, the rocks are quartzose,
but the greater part of this parish is composed of slates belonging to
the calcareous series, which extend to the sea shore. At Tremper
Bridge, and in the islands lying at the entrances of St. Columb Porth,
beds of black limestone occur, associated with talc, schist, and blue
slates.

The most interesting feature, however, of this parish is the
testaceous sandstone at New Quay, and on the shores of Fistral Bay.
The land adjacent to the sea at those places is covered with sand,
which above high-water mark is lapidified, as is also a bed of pebbles
on which the sand sometimes rests. For the particulars of this
phenomenon the first and the fourth volumes of the Cornwall Geological
Transactions may be consulted.




CONSTANTINE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerrier, and hath upon the north, part of
Stithians; west, Gwendron; south, Hayleford channel and Mawnan; east,
Mabe and Budock. It is also commonly Cus-ten-ton, i. e. wood-stone
town, a place heretofore notable for woods and stones, and I take it
an unpleasant strag of moor-stones and rocks are still visible upon a
great part of the lands here. Perhaps it is the Crostedeton mentioned
in the Domesday Roll. Otherwise it was taxed under Trewardevi or
Penwarne. The name Constantine is derived from the Latin Constantia.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
Ecclesia de Sancto Constantino, was valued to first fruits 10_l._
Vicar ejusdem 40_l._ in Decanatu de Kerryer. In Wolsey’s Inquisition,
1521, Constantine Vic. was taxed to first fruits 19_l._ 8_s._ 10½_d._
The patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent Perry;
the rectory in Robert Quarme of Creed; and the parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 168_l._ 16_s._ 8_d._ by the old name
of Constenton. The titular guardian of this church, St. Constantine,
Emperor of Rome, was the first emperor in the world that professed
Christianity. He was the son of Constantius Chlorus Emperor of Rome;
first an officer of war under the Emperor Aurelian, against Coill or
Coillus, King or Duke of Colchester in Britain, (called by some
writers Caer-Collyn, Caer-Col-lyn, i. e. the city or castle on the
neck of the lake, or bosom of waters, it being situate on the
confluence of the Medway river), which Coil, having refused to pay the
tribute due to the Senate of Rome, caused that province to revolt; but
Constantius forced him into a submission, when soon after he died; and
Constantius is said to have married his only daughter and heir Helen,
by whom he had all her father’s lands and territories, Anno Dom. 289.
By her he had issue Constantine, who followed the wars in his father’s
time against Maxentius; and lying on his bed, before a battle, a dream
or vision appeared to him in shape of an angel, holding in his hand a
shining red cross, and calling to him with a loud voice “Constantine!
Εν τουτῳ νικα, _in hoc signo vinces_, i. e. under this sign or banner
thou shalt have victory.” Whereupon he commanded a red cross to be
pourtrayed in all his banners, called the labanum, and soon after gave
battle to Maxentius at Pont Milvium, in Italy, where his [the
latter’s] army was routed, and himself drowned in that river. The
success of which battle so wrought upon Constantine that he forthwith
turned Christian, and was baptized by Pope Silvester, Bishop of Rome.

In this parish, at Tre-warde-vi, as taxed in Domesday Roll, (i. e. the
shining or flying guard town, or the indignation, or wrath guard
town,) is the dwelling of John Trewren, Esq. i. e. the wren’s town,
who married Vyvyan of Trelowarren; his father Rice; and giveth for his
arms, Azure, three Besants. The present possessor ―――― Trewren, Esq. that
married Prisk of Helston.

In this parish is the dwelling of Edward Chapman, Gent. that married
Bligh of Botadon.

This gentleman received from God’s holy angels a wonderful
preservation in the beginning of the reign of William III. when
returning from Redruth towards his own house about seven miles
distant, with his servant, late at night, and both much intoxicated
with liquor, (as himself told me,) nevertheless having so much sense
left as to consider that they were to pass through several tin mines
or shafts near the highway, on the south-east side of Redruth town,
alighted both from their horses, and led them in their hands after
them. The servant went somewhat before his master, the better to keep
the right road in those places, which occasioned Mr. Chapman’s turning
aside somewhat out of the way, whereby in the dark he suddenly fell
into a tin mine above twenty fathom deep, at whose fall into this
precipice his horse started back and escaped; in this pit or hole Mr.
Chapman fell directly down fifteen fathoms without let or
intermission, where meeting a cross drift (above six fathom of water
under it), he in his campaign coat, sword, and boots, was miraculously
stopped, where coming to himself, he was not much sensible of any hurt
or bruises he had received, through the terror and horror of his fall;
when, considering in what condition he was, he resolved to make the
best expedient he could to prevent his falling further down, (where,
by the dropping or reesing of stones and earth moved by his fall, he
understood there was much water under,) so he rested his back against
one side of the mine, and his feet against the other, athwart the
hole, and in order to fix his hands on some solid thing, drew his
sword out of its sheath and thrust the blade thereof as far as he
could into the opposite part of the shaft, and so in great pain and
terror rested himself.

The suddenness of this accident, and the horse’s escaping in the dark
as aforesaid, was the reason why Mr. Chapman’s servant, who went
before him, did not so soon find him wanting as otherwise he might,
which as soon as he did, he went back the road way in quest of him,
calling him aloud by his name; but receiving no answer, nor being able
to find the horse, he concluded his master had rode home to his house
some other way, whereupon, giving up all further search after him, he
hastened home to Constantine, expecting to have met him there; but,
contrary to his expectations, found he was not returned. Whereupon his
servants, early next morning, went forth to inquire after him, and
suspecting (as it happened) he might be fallen into some tin-shafts
about Redruth, hastened thither, where, before they arrived, some
tinners had taken into custody his horse (with bridle and saddle on)
which they found grazing on the Wastrell Downs. Whereupon, consulting
together about this tragical mishap, it was resolved forthwith that
some of those tinners, for reward, should search the most dangerous
shafts in order to find his body either living or dead; accordingly
they employed themselves that day till about four o’clock in the
afternoon without any discovery of him. Finally, one person returned
to his company, and told them that at a considerable distance he heard
a kind of human voice under ground; to which place they repaired, and
making loud cries to the hole of the shaft, he forthwith answered them
that he was there alive, and prayed their assistance in order to
deliver him from that tremendous place; whereupon, immediately they
set on tackle-ropes and windlass on the old shaft, so that a tinner
descended to the place where he rested, and having candle-light with
him bound him fast in a rope, and so drew him safely to land, where,
to their great admiration and joy, it appeared he had neither broke
any bone, or was much bruised by the fall; verifying together the
attribute of Divine Omnipotence that nothing is impossible with
God,――and that old English proverb, that drunkards seldom take hurt;
for, as the tinners said, if he had fallen but two or three feet
lower, he must inevitably have been drowned in the water. But maugre
all those adverse accidents, after about seventeen hours stay in the
pit aforesaid, he miraculously escaped death and lived many years
after, and would recount this history with as much pleasure as men do
the ballads of Chevy Chase or Rosamond Clifford.

In this parish is the dwelling of James Trefusis, Gent. that married
Worth; his father Penarth, originally descended from Trefusis of
Trefusis in Mylor, as I am informed.

Moreover, it must be remembered in this place, of St. Constantine,
that he was the first prince that ever endowed Christian churches
beyond the seas with standing rents, lands, and revenues, and also
gave to the church the tenth part of all lands and goods he possessed
himself, whereupon the clergy claimed tithes therein by a law. And
such officers or publicans as gathered it were called Decumani, (as
Appian saith); for before that time tithes were only taken by the
Senate of Rome and Emperor for the supply of the legions and armies in
time of war, and not otherwise. Afterwards, Constantine made a law
that all princes under his dominion should give the tenth part of
their revenues towards the maintenance of churches and temples, as
himself had done.

From this law and example Ethelwulf, the second sole Saxon monarch in
England, Anno Dom. 838, in the year 855 (as Ingulphus, Abbat of
Croyland, in his history of Britain, 1066, informs us), by royal
charter confirmed the tithes of all his lands on the church in those
words: “Decimam partem terræ meæ,” &c.; and this was done (gratuito
consensu) by consent of his princes and prelates. This donation
afterwards was confirmed by King Ethelred. “Nemo auferat à Deo quod ad
Deum pertinet, et præcessores nostri concesserunt,” &c. Afterward King
Athelstan made a law, Anno Dom. 926, that every man should pay tithes
out of all the goods he possessed, as Jacob did; which Edmund Ironside
confirmed under penalty of being accursed, 1016. Afterwards King
Edward the Confessor, 1046, ordained more expressly that all tithes
should be justly paid to the elder or mother churches, viz. de garba,
grege equarum, pullis, vaccis, vitulis, caseo, lacte, vellis,
porcellis, apibus, bosco, prato, aquis, molendinis, parcis, vivariis,
piscariis, virgultis, hortis, negotionibus, et omnibus rebus, quas
dederit Dominus, &c.; which decree or statute was afterwards ratified
by William the Conqueror and his successors. (See more of Tithes under
Keye.)


TONKIN.

Tonkin adds nothing to Mr. Hals in respect to this parish except the
following short account of the manor of Merthyr or Merther. Mr. Tonkin
cites from Carew, (p. 128 of Lord Dunstanville’s edition,) “Rogerus de
Carminou ten. 20 part. feo. milit. extra 10 part. illius 20 in
Wynnenton, Merthyr, et Tameron.” This Sir Roger de Carminow, for he
was a knight, left this manor inter alia to his eldest son and heir
Sir Thomas Carminow, of Carminow, Knight, who, leaving only three
daughters his heirs, this manor fell to the share of Philippa, the
wife of John Treworthen.


THE EDITOR.

Merther is now the property of Sir Richard Vyvyan, and has been for a
considerable time in his family.

The family of Trewren of Trewardreva, is now I believe extinct; the
name is usually pronounced Trew-ren, and certainly has not the
etymology which Mr. Hals imputes to it.

Carwithenick in this parish was the seat of Mr. Chapman, preserved
almost by a miracle according to Mr. Hals’s account, received from
himself, when he fell into a shaft, see page 238. It now belongs to
Mr. Hill.

Chapels are said to have been erected formerly  at Benalleck and
Buderkvam.

  This parish measures 6883 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6503    0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                          712    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1229   |   1327   |   1671   |   2004;
    giving an increase of 63 per cent. in 30 years.
  Parish feast, the nearest Sunday to the 9th of March.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Edward Rogers, presented by the Dean and
    Chapter of Exeter in 1817.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The church is situated on the borders of the granite, which extends to
the extreme northern part of the parish, and is for the most part of
that common kind which is shipped at Penryn for the London market.
Proceeding southward from the church town this granite is bounded by a
belt of rocks belonging to the porphyritic series, such as the felspar
and hornblend rocks; but in the vicinity of the Helford river these
are succeeded by the calcareous series.




CORNELLY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north, Probus;
east, Tregony; south, the Vale River; west, Lamorran and Merther. For
the modern name of this place, Cornell-y or Kornell-y, it signifies
the angle, nook, canton, quarter, or corner; and, suitable to its
name, it is a dismembered district from Probus parish; a remote canton
or corner of land in respect thereof, but as to spirituals
consolidated, and goes in presentation with it as a daughter church.
The patronage is in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent Baudree
(Duddowe).

This parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 72_l._ 4_s._
The rectory or sheaf in possession of Hawkins and Huddy. In the
Domesday tax, 20 William I., 1087, this parish was taxed under the
name and jurisdiction of Pen-pell, that is the far off or remote top
or head. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, this
church is called Gro-goth.

Tre-den-ike in this parish, (i. e. the man town, creek, or cove of
waters,) also Tre-warth-en-ike, (i. e. the farther town of, in, or
upon the cove, creek, lake, or bosom of waters,) is the dwelling of my
very kind friend John Gregor, Esq. who married Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir Walter Moyle, Knight; his father, Francis Gregor, Esq. married one
of the coheirs of Prideaux of Gunlyn, sheriff of Cornwall 19 Charles
II.; his grandfather, Jane, daughter of Nosworthy, of Truro. And he
giveth for his arms, Or, a chevron Gules, between three partridges
Proper, out of a supposed allusion to their name in Cornish, wherein
Grugyer and Gyrgirk is a partridge.


TONKIN.

I take the word Cornelly to be a corruption of the Cornish Caren Gli,
that is love of God.

In this parish is Trewithenike, compounded of Tre-with en-ike. The
dwelling-tree, or a rivulet, (query, tree?――ED.) which was in Queen
Mary’s days the lands of William Weyte, Gent. as appears from an old
deed in my custody, who was also lord of divers other tenements in
those parts, as also of Fentongimps in St. Pyran Sabolo. He had a
brother that lived at Lestwithiel, and was mayor of the town in the
time of Henry VIII. whose daughter and heir was married to Kendall of
Treworgye or Pelris, whose inheritance was no small augmentation to
the paternal estate of that family. The arms of Wayte, Argent, a
chevron between three salmons erect Azure. This barton is now the
property of John Gregor, Esq. who has lately built a fine new house
here. He married Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir Walter Moyle of Boke.
His father, Francis Gregor, was sheriff of Cornwall 19 Charles II. (21
Charles II. A.D. 1669.―― ED.) He married one of the heiresses of
Prideaux, of Gurlyn in St. Erth.

It is said by some that St. Cornelius the Centurian is patron of this
parish; if so, the name Cornelly is probably from him. Nearly the
whole of this parish is included within the manor of Grogith or
Crogith.


THE EDITOR.

Francis Gregor, son and heir of John Gregor and Elizabeth Moyle,
married a daughter of William Harris of Pickwell in Devonshire; and
their son Francis Gregor, born in 1728, left two sons, Francis Gregor,
sheriff of Cornwall in 1788, and member for the county from 1790 to
1806, and the Rev. William Gregor. Mr. Francis Gregor first married
the eldest daughter of Mr. William Masterman, of Restormal, who had
married a Cornish lady, and made a large fortune by the practice of
the law, as a solicitor in London, and afterwards represented Bodmin
in Parliament. Mr. Gregor married secondly Miss Urchuarth from
Scotland, but died in 1815 without any family; and his brother, the
Rev. William Gregor, survived but a few years, leaving an only
daughter, who died at the age of three or four-and-twenty, and with
her the name of Gregor became extinct.

But Mr. Masterman had a second daughter, married to Mr. Francis
Glanville Catchfrench, who also left an only daughter. To this lady
Miss Gregor gave the whole of her property, with an injunction to take
her name. Miss Granville is married and has several children, having
made Trewarthenick her residence, and improved the fine new house
mentioned by Mr. Tonkin into one of the largest and most decorated
mansions to be seen in Cornwall.

  This parish contains 1047 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1704    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            88    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    137   |    151   |    168   |    170;
    giving an increase of 24 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Near Tregony Bridge, a fine-grained, glossy, and very fissile blue
slate is exposed in a quarry, which appears to be the prevailing rock
of this small parish. This slate probably contains beds of massive
lamellar rocks, as the same kind of slate does in the adjoining
parishes, but they are not in this particular district visible on the
surface. All these rocks belong to the calcareous series.




CRANTOCK.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pedyr, and hath upon the north the Irish
sea; on the west, St. Cuthbert; south, Newland; east, St. Columb
Minor. As for this compound name, it is plain British; Cran-tock,
Cran-dock, id est, a place that heretofore bore or carried beech
trees. But others will have the name to be derived from its pretended
titular guardian, one St. Carantochus, a British disciple of St.
Colomb’s, of whom I must plead _non sum informatus_; otherwise than
that Carantodhius in old British, Scots, and Irish, is love,
affection, tenderness. Cran-teck is fair beech trees.

More sure I am that this district, at the time of the Domesday Roll,
was taxed under the name of Ryalton or Cargoll; and in the Inquisition
of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, into the value of
church livings in Cornwall, Ecclesia Sancti Carentini in Decanatu de
Pidre is thus rated, the vicar 40_s._ and the nine prebends, then
extant in this collegiate church, were thus taxed, viz. John de
Woolrington, 53_s._ 4_d._; John de Cattelyn, 30_s._; Nicholas Strange,
30_s._; John de Ingham, 40_s._; Ralph de Trethinick, 53_s._ 4_d._;
David de Monton, 40_s._; William de Patefond, 40_s._; John Lovell,
30_s._; John de Glasney, 6_s._ 8_d._; in all 19_l._ 3_s._ 4_d._ From
whence I gather this collegiate church had great revenues then
belonging to it, since it is higher rated to the Pope’s annats than
any other church then in Cornwall. However, before Richard II.’s time
it was wholly impropriated or appropriated to its founder and endower,
the Prior of St. Pedyr at Bodmin; the vicar subsisting only by a small
salary of 6_l._ and oblations and obventions; for which reason it is
not mentioned in Wolsey’s inquisition, or Valor Beneficiorum.

Which collegiate church being dissolved by the statute 26 Henry VIII.
and the revenues vested in the crown, the impropriator Mr. Buller is
patron and rector of the vicarage church now extant; the incumbent
Warne, who comparatively subsists upon his bounty; and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 73_l._ 16_s._

By reason of the great quantities of sea-sand blown up from the
Gannell creek by the wind (tempore Edward VI. as Holinshed saith), the
place where the college stood is now scarce discernible; only a
consecrated arched well of water bears the name of St. Ambrose’s Well,
contiguous therewith.

Speed and Dugdale, in their Monasticon Anglicanum, tell us that at its
dissolution, 26 Henry VIII. it consisted only of four prebends, whose
revenues were valued only at 89_l._ 15_s._ from whence it appears five
prebendary’s rents were dismembered from it before that time; and
since its suppression the lands of those four prebends have passed
from the crown to Louis, from Louis to Goldingham, from Goldingham to
Lutterell, now in possession thereof.

The vicarage church of Crantock is commonly called lan-guna, or
lan-gona, that is to say the hay temple or church; and is, suitable to
its name, situate in a large hay meadow of very rich land, containing
about three acres, where, by ancient custom the vicar’s cattle
depasture over the dead bodies interred therein.

Tre-ganell, or Tre-gonell, in this parish, that is to say, the canal
or channel town, situate upon a creek of the north sea, gave name and
original to an old family of gentlemen surnamed Tregonell or
Treganell, whose three daughters and heirs, tempore James I. were
married to Bauden, Pallamonter, and Penpoll, who gave for their arms,
in a field Argent, three Ogresses between two cottices in fess Sable,
as many Cornish daws Proper.

John Tregonell, or Treganell,――of his posterity (now transnominated to
Tregonwell), was a younger brother of this house, tempore Henry VII.
who had his first education in this college of Crantock at a cheap
rate, (as any may be had at Aberdeen or Glasgow in Scotland,) from
whence he went to Oxford, and proceeded so far in book-erudition as to
take his degree of Doctor of the Civil and Canon Law, and acquired
such perfection and fame therein, that he was chosen proctor for Henry
VIII. in that costly divorce betwixt him and Queen Catherine of Spain;
by whom he was also knighted, and for his labour and pains therein had
a pension of 40_l._ per annum settled upon him during his life; and
afterwards, upon the resignation of that annuity, and the payment of a
thousand pounds, he had by that king settled upon him and his heirs
the site and demesne of Midleton, a mitred abbey in Dorset, of great
value, which his posterity enjoy to this day, himself being buried in
Midleton church 1540. He had issue John, afterwards knighted, sheriff
of Dorset, 1 Philip and Mary; who married ――――, and had issue John
Tregonell, Esq. sheriff of Dorset 2 James I., who also married ――――,
and had issue John Tregonell, Esq. sheriff of that county 15 James I.,
when Francis Vyvyan, Esq. was sheriff of Cornwall.

Tre-ago, also Tre-agho, synonymous words, in this parish, that is to
say, the fishing spear or barbed iron for stabbing fish, used it seems
heretofore in the gannell or channell haven contiguous therewith, by
the owners of this little barton and manor, and from thence
denominated; tri-ago is in Latin-Cornish a threefold action, or acting
or making; tre-ago, the town of action. From this place was also
denominated its lord, of an ancient family of gentlemen surnamed De
Tre-ago, who at his own proper cost and charge built the south aile in
the now vicarage church of Crantock, and appropriated the same to his
family or heirs and assigns for ever, by charging those lands with the
repair and maintenance thereof (for ever) as at this day they do,
without being chargeable to the parish of Crantock. The sole daughter
and heir of those Treagos, as I am informed, was married to Mynors,
tempore Edward IV. who made it the seat of his family; as afterwards,
tempore Elizabeth, the issue male of Mynors failing, his only daughter
and heir was married to Tregian, and Tregian’s posterity, by ill
conduct, wasted this barton and manor of Treago, and sold the same for
the payment of bills of cost to John Cooke, Gent. attorney-at-law,
tempore James I.; and in like manner Thomas Cooke, Esq. within fifty
years after the death of his father or grandfather, sold this place
and most of his other lands to Hugh Boscawen of Tregothnan, Esq. now
in possession thereof, viz. temp. Charles II.

This place was heretofore privileged with the jurisdiction of a court
leet, and a strong prison for keeping prisoners for debt in durance,
though now I take it to be destitute of both. The arms of Mynors were,
Sable, an eagle displayed Or, on a chief Azure, bordered Argent, a
chevron between two crescents above and a rose beneath Or. This last
bearing on the chief, and marshalled within the escutcheon was, as
tradition saith, the coat armour of Treago; and such sort of
marshalling divers coats Nicholas Upton doth approve of, especially
where a man hath large possessions by his mother, and but a small
patrimony from his father; as perhaps the case was thus with Mynors.

In this parish is the port, haven, or creek, called the gonell or
ganell, that is to say the canal or channel of the Tremporth river,
leading into the sea, wherein much fish and fowl is caught; and many
times ships frequent this place for trade and safety, the sea here
winding up itself between the lands about a mile in the country. It
also, at full sea, affordeth entrance and anchorage for ships of the
greatest burthen, if conducted by a pilot that understands the course
of the ganell or channel; at the head of which, as a ligament
fastening the parishes of Lower St. Colomb and Crantock together, is a
county bridge, called Trem-porth; that is to say, the tying,
fastening, terrifying, or making afraid gate, cove, or entrance, so
aptly named perhaps from the rapid confluence of this channel or river
in winter season, before the bridge was built, where it meets the salt
waters, and the softness of the clay and sea-moore marsh there on
which the bridge is situate.

I find William Smith, Esq. of Crantock in Cornwall, (which I take to
be of this place,) was created a baronet by Charles I., 27 December
1642, patent 418. I suppose the son of that Smith of Exon, that
married one of the coheirs of Vyell of Trevorder. He had issue Sir
James Smith, Baronet, (but where they lived in this parish I know
not,) whose arms were, Sable, a fess and two barrulets, between three
martlets, Or.

The manors of Cargoll and Ryalton being given by our earls of Cornwall
before the Norman Conquest to the Bishop of Bodmin or Cornwall, or the
prior thereof; some of them were founders and endowers of this college
of Crantock out of the lands and revenues thereof.


TONKIN.

I take the tutelar saint of this parish to be St. Kerantakers, a
disciple of St. Columb in the Hebrides; and the parish no doubt had
its name from him.

This parish is wholly impropriated to John Butler, Esq. of Morval, who
allows out of it a small stipend to the incumbent (at present Mr.
Warn), by which, together with the parishioners’ benevolence, he makes
a hard shift to live.

The collegiate church here was, as tradition saith, endowed by the
prior of Bodmin; but by which prior is unknown to me.


THE EDITOR.

Bishop Tanner, in his Notitia Monastica, says,

Karentoc or Crantoc, near Padstow, in the deanery of Pider. Here were
secular canons in the time of St. Edward the Confessor, who continued
till the general dissolution, when its yearly revenues were valued at
89_l._ 15_s._ 8_d._ which were divided amongst the dean, nine
prebendaries, and four vicars choral. The collegiate church was
dedicated to St. Carantocus, said to be a disciple of St. Patrick, and
was in the patronage of the Bishop of Exeter.

Doctor Tanner quotes the following extract from Prynne, vol. II. p.
736, (probably from his Records:) Many grants of the deanery and
prebends here by the king appear upon the rolls, but seem to be made
during the vacancy of the see of Exeter.

Anno Dom. 1315, Feb. 22, Walterus episcopus Exon. contulit Joanni de
Sandale, cancellario regis, Præbendam in ecclesia St. Karentoci. See
Wharton’s Historia de Episcopis et Decanis Londinensibus, necnon de
Episcopis et Decanis Assavensibus a prima sedis utriusque fundatione,
ad annum MDXL.

  This parish measures 2490 statute acres.
  The annual value of Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3244    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           265    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    299   |    358   |    389   |    458;
    giving an increase of 53 per cent in 30 years.
  Parish Feast, the nearest Sunday to the 16th of May.
  Vicar, the Rev. C. H. Paynter, instituted 1809.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is composed of the same kind of rock, and is in every
respect similar to St. Columb Minor, which occupies the opposite or
northern side of the gannel.




CREED.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north, St.
Stephen’s; east, St. Mewan; west, Probus; south, St. Tue. For the
present name, it is derived from Credo, i. e. belief, trust,
confidence; and refers to the holy Christian faith, read or rehearsed
in this church by the rector, viz. the Apostles’ creed, Nicene creed,
or St. Athanasius creed, in opposition to Arianism.

Now, for that beyond the records of time, as Mr. Carew in his Survey
of Cornwall tells us, the Creed, Lord’s Prayer, and Ten Commandments,
were translated into and used in the Cornish tongue for the benefit of
the inhabitants, who formerly little understood the Saxon or English
tongue; and for that the Cornish tongue is now comparatively lost in
those parts, I will here, for the reader’s satisfaction, set down the
Apostles’ creed as it was then used.

     _Me agris en Du, an Tas ologologack, wresses a neu_
      I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of
     _hag doar; hag en Jesu Chrest, ys nuell mab agan_
      heaven and earth; and in Jesus Christ, his only Son our
     _Arluth, neb ve conceveijs ryb an hairon Sperres, genijs_
      Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
     _ay an voz Mareea, cothaff orthaff Pontius Pilat; ve_
      of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate; was
     _crowsye, maraws hag bethens, Eff deskynas en the Iffran,_
      crucified, dead and buried, He descended into Hell,
     _hag an trysa journa, Eff sevye arte thort an maraws, ef_
      and the third day he arose again from the dead, and
     _askynnus en the neuf; hag setvah wor an dighow dorne_
      ascended into Heaven; and sitteth on the right hand
     _ay Du an Tas allogallogack, rag ena ef fyth dos the_
      of God the Father Almighty, from whence he shall come
     _judgye an beaw hag an maraws. Me agris benegas_
      to judge the living and the dead. I believe in the Holy
     _Spirres, an Hairon Catholic Egles, an communion ay_
      Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the communion of
     _sans, an givyans ay peags, an sevyans ay an corfe,_
      saints, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the body,
     _hag an bew regnaveffere. Amen._
      and the life everlasting. Amen.

At the time of the Norman Conquest this parish was taxed under the
name of Tybesta, of which more under. At the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, in order to the Pope’s Annats,
1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Credo, in Decanatu de Powdre, was valued
4_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it was rated 13_l._
6_s._ 8_d._ The patronage in the king or duke of Cornwall, who endowed
it; the incumbent Crews; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax, 1696, 132_l._

The great duchy manor of Ty-besta encloses almost the whole of this
parish; and there are yet extant in this manor the ruins of an old
chapel, called by the name of Tybesta. This manor is privileged with
the jurisdiction of a court leet within its precincts, and of the
court baron held for the hundred of Powdre, and hath stewards and
bailiffs to attend the service of both, and the royalties over the
river Vale.

Within this lordship is situate the borough of Grampont, Gram-pond, or
Gran-pont, that is, great bridge; on which Mr. Carew, in his Survey of
Cornwall, saith that in his time, (about a hundred years past,) if
that were its true name, it had nothing then extant but nomine sine
re, though now it hath a fair stone bridge over it, built and repaired
by the county stock. But, alas! notwithstanding those names, it
appeared from the charter lately extant, wherein the ancient rights
and privileges thereof are confirmed by Edmund Plantagenet Earl of
Cornwall, son of Richard, King of the Romans, Anno Dom. 1290, that it
was incorporated by the name of Coyt-fala, or Coit-fala; id est, the
wood, (river) in the midst of which wood heretofore the same was
situate; also Pons-mur, id est, great bridge, so named from some
eminent timber bridge over the river, before that of stone was
erected.

It is privileged with the jurisdiction of a court leet and quarterly
sessions of the peace, within the same, before the mayor, recorder,
and eight aldermen, or magistrates, and a town-clerk. The mayor to be
chosen out of the eight Magistrates that are free-men; and also with
sending two Members, to sit as their Representatives in Parliament,
who are to be chosen by the Mayor, Magistrates, and Freemen, or the
major part of them; by election of which, if common fame be true, the
townsmen have in the last ages reaped great gain and advantage. It is
also appurtenanced with public fairs, upon January 18 and June 11, and
a weekly market on Thursdays. The chief inhabitants of this town are
Mr. Teague, Mr. Harvey, Mr. Moor.

The arms of this Borough are, a castle, two ports open, over the same
a lion rampant crowned, within a bordure bezanty, which latter charge
was the proper arms of King Richard Cœur de Lion, uncle of the said
Edmund Earl of Cornwall, and his predecessors Caddock and Condur,
Earles thereof.

Tre-veleck, alias Tre-belech, in this parish, id est, the Priest’s
Town, in old British and the Armorican tongue, was of old the seat of
the De Boscawens, of Boscawen Rose in Buryan, of which family was
Lawrence Boscawen, gent. attorney-at-law, that married Tregothnan’s
heir, temp. Henry 8th, who left this place to his younger son; where
his posterity flourished in genteel degree down to the latter end of
the reign of King Charles I.; when the last gentleman of this house,
that married Tanner, had issue only two daughters, married to Brewar
and Tousen, which latter’s daughter and heir was married to Collins,
now in possession of those duchy lands.

At Ten-Creek, or Tene-Cruck, i. e. the fire-bank, or tumulus, viz. the
sepulchre of one interred there before the sixth century, whose body
was burnt to ashes by fire, according to the then accustomed manner of
intering the dead, and his bones and ashes laid up in an urn or
earthen pot, in a bank, or barrow, or tumulus, upon some part of the
lands of this barton; from which facts it was called Ten-creek, in
which place for many ages flourished a family of gentlemen, from
thence denominated de Tencreek (which compound word Mr. Carew, in his
Survey of Cornwall, by conjecture interprets as the town of the
burrow, bank, or tumulus); the last gentleman of which house died in
the middle of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, leaving issue only three
daughters, married to Mohun, Penwarne, and Polwhele. Those lands came
to Mohun, a younger brother to Reginald Mohun, Bart. father of John
Lord Baron Mohun, of Oakhampton. The present possessioner, William
Mohun, Esq. (my very kind friend), one of his Majesty’s Commissioners
for the Peace and Taxes, that married Jane, daughter of Sir John
Trelawney, of the Lawne, Bart. and hath issue Warwick Mohun, Esq.
whose arms are, Or, a cross engrailed Sable. [See BOCONNOC]. The arms
of Tencreek were, Argent, a cross pattée surmounted of a chevron
Sable.

Pennans, part of the Duchy manor of Tybesta, is compounded of
Pen-nans, the head of the valley, a name taken from the natural
circumstances of the place. It is the dwelling of Philip Hawkins,
Gent. attorney-at-law, who by his great pains, care, and skill in that
profession, hath got himself a very great estate in those parts. He
married Scobell, and giveth for his arms, Argent, on a saltire Sable,
five fleur-de-lis Or. The same coat armour is given by the Hawkins’ of
Kent. He had issue John, his eldest son, who married Rashleigh, and
was a doctor of divinity; Philip, that married Ludlow, of London,
Member of Parliament for Grampound; and daughters.

Nan-tell-an, in this parish Duchy, was the dwelling of John Vincent,
Gent. attorney-at-law, who got a considerable estate by the law; but
since his death I take it this place, and all other his lands, are
wasted by his son, &c. Nantellan sold to Henry Vincent, of Treleven,
Esq. Mr. Vincent married Evans, and giveth for his arms as mentioned
under St. Allen, the original tribe thereof.

Car-lyn-ike, in this parish, parcel of the Duchy manor of Tybesta
aforesaid, probably the rock and lake of water, is the dwelling of
John Woolrige, Gent. that married Maunder, and giveth for his arms,
Gules, a chevron Argent, between three wild ducks volant Proper. The
descendant of Woolridge, rector of St. Michael Penkivell, temp. James
I.

Nan-car (Duchy) i. e. the Valley Rock, or the Rock in the Valley, is
the dwelling of Walter Quarme, Clerk, that married Grace Gayer,
daughter of Samuel Gayer, of Araler, Gent.; his father Ceely, his
grandfather a Trefusis, and giveth for his arms, Barry lozengy Argent
and Gules.


TONKIN.

Trencreek is interpreted by Mr. Carew the town of the Burrow, by which
I apprehend he means a dwelling near some creeig, byrig or tumulus;
for that is the import of the word Trencreeig, from whence an old
family of gentlemen, now extinct, were denominated, who gave for their
arms, Argent, a cross patee, surmounted with a chevron Sable. But the
tumulus importing their name must have been erected since the doctrine
of Christianity was brought into this land; for before that time
graves were called beths,[35] veths, or byrigs, from whence our modern
words burrow or bury. The Brigantes mentioned by Tacitus were so
denominated from their lofty tumuli, byrigs, or graves.

All the lands in this parish are either held from or in parts of the
Great Duchy.

The Borough of Grandpont. This is the name given to it by the Normans,
for the ancient Cornish name was Ponsmur, signifying the same thing.
In all likelihood this is the ancient Voluba of the Romans mentioned
by Ptolemy; so called from its situation on the river Val or Fal.
Browne Willis, in his additions to Camden, cites a charter still
extant from John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, by which all former
privileges are confirmed to the vill of Grampont, with all the lands
of Coytpale, which signifies Tolewood, and a part of the town is at
this time called Caitfala. This charter is dated at Chippenham Oct.
26, 1332.

North of Grampond lies Trevellick, the town on the mill stream or
water, where is a ruined chapel and a well, dedicated to St. Naunton
or Nonnio, as at Alternum. The estate now belongs to Degary
Polkinhorne, Gent. To the North of this lies Nantellan, which was the
seat of John Vincent, Gent. an eminent attorney.

Trewinnow, that is the dwelling on the marshes, has been long held
under the Duchy by the family of Seccomb.

Pennance, the head of the valley, is held under the tenure of
customary Duchy, and was formerly the seat of Henry Hoddy, Gent.
descended from the Huddys or Hodys, of Nethoway, in Devonshire. He had
a considerable estate in these parts, which he foolishly lavished and
at last sold to Mr. Thomas Lower, younger brother to the famous Doctor
Lower,[36] who did not keep it long, but conveyed his right in it to
Philip Hawkins, Gent. since become the most wealthy attorney which
this county ever produced. He married Mary, the daughter of Richard
Scobell, of Menagwins, Esq. and left the bulk of his estate, computed
at one hundred thousand pounds, to his eldest son John Hawkins, D. D.
Master of Pembroke College, Cambridge, who married Rachel Rashleigh,
of Menabilly, but died sine prole. Doctor Hawkins laid out very large
sums of money on the improvement of Pennance. He died in London July
30, 1736.

Trigantan belongs to the family of Sperrack.

The Church is situated at one end of the parish near the river Val or
Fal, in a fruitful spot of land, but low. It is but a mean structure,
consisting of a nave, a south aile of the same length, and a cross
north aile. Here was formerly but a poor small tower covered with
wood, in which were three bells; but the parishioners took that down
in 1732, and have in this year (1733) finished a handsome square
tower. The Rectory House has also been new built in a neat manner by
the present incumbent Mr. Hughes.


THE EDITOR.

The manor of Tybesta, carrying with it the advowson of the rectory,
was purchased from the Duchy by the late Sir Christopher Hawkins.

Grampound is the only place ever wholly deprived of its privilege to
return Members to the House of Commons, previously to the general
dissolution of Boroughs in 1832. Cricklade, Shoreham, and Aylesbury,
had been thrown into adjacent hundreds, that is, the freeholders of
these districts were admitted to a concurrent right of voting with
those previously possessing it; but from Grampound the Members were
transferred at once to the County of York.

The passage referred to in Mr. Carew (p. 328 of Lord Dunstanville’s
edition) is this:

     “Grampond, if it took that name from any great bridge, hath
     now nomen sine re; for the bridge there is supported with
     only a few arches, and the Corporation but half replenished
     with inhabitants, who may better vaunt of their town’s
     antiquity than the town of their ability.”

The town is said to have very greatly improved, in all respects,
moral, physical, and intellectual, since the minds of its inhabitants
have been directed to other objects than low intrigue and servile
dependence on the exertions of others.

Mr. Philip Hawkins, who purchased and settled at Pennance, was the son
of Mr. Henry Hawkins, whose ancestor in the third or fourth degree, is
said to have come from Kent into Cornwall as Rector of Blisland.

Mr. Henry Hawkins had four sons, the Rev. John Hawkins, Rector of St.
Michael Caerhayes, St. Stephen’s, and St. Dennis, married, but died
sine prole.

Philip Hawkins, who married Mary Scobell, eldest daughter of Richard
Scobell, Esq. made heiress of his whole landed property.

Henry Hawkins, of St. Austell, who married Barbara, younger daughter
of Mr. Richard Scobell.

Joseph Hawkins, a merchant at Falmouth, married Reid, but died sine
prole.

Mr. Philip Hawkins had a very large family.

1. Henry, died at Oxford.

2. Mary, died young.

3. Elizabeth, married Mr. Thomas Corlyer, of Tregrehan, and left
several children.

4. Ann, married Sir Edmund Prideaux, of Devonshire, and left an only
daughter, who married John Pendarves Basset, Esq. of Tehidy.

5. George, died young.

6. The Rev. John Hawkins, D. D. Master of Pembroke College, Cambridge,
married Rachel Rashleigh, of Menabilly, died sine prole.

7. Mary, married, perhaps her distant relation, a gentleman of the
same name, Christopher Hawkins, of Trewinnard, in St. Erth, barrister
at law, made sole heir of his landed property by her brother Dr.
Hawkins.

8. Jane, married James Stone, of Bundbury, Wilts.

9. Philip, married Elizabeth Ludlow, of London, represented Grampound
in Parliament, died s. p.

10. Barbara, married Mr. Hambley, of St. Columb.

Mr. Henry Hawkins, who married Barbara Scobell, had also a numerous
family.

1. Henry, died in 1723.

2. John, died in 1722.

3. Ann, married David Moyle, and left a daughter Ann Moyle, married to
Mr. Carthew.

4. Barbara, married Mr. Edward Hoblyn, of Crone, and left a daughter,
Damaris Hoblin, married to Mr. Kirkham, a Captain in the Cornwall
Militia, but not a Cornishman; ob. s. p.

5. Elizabeth, married John Hawkins, of Helston, and left Mr. John
Hawkins, who married Catherine Trewren; ob. s. p.

6. Gertrude, married Mr. Thomas Kent, and left children.

7. Grace, married John Tremayne, of Heligan, Esq. who left a son, the
Rev. Henry Hawkins Tremayne, and a daughter married to Charles
Rashleigh, Esq. of Disporth.

The Creed given by Mr. Hals, in his account of this parish, differs
materially from both subjoined to my edition of “The Creation of the
World, and Noah’s Flood,” one of which is said to be in old Cornish,
and the other in modern. All the three go to prove how utterly vague
and uncertain must be a language not fixed by some general reference
to works of authority, nor guided by the superior influence of a
Capital.

  This parish contains 2552 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2442    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           205   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   217    |   226    |   279    |   258;
    giving an increase of 19 per cent in 30 years.
  Annual value of the Real Property in         £.   _s._ _d._
    Grampound, for 1815                       854    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           274   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    525   |   601    |   688    |   715.
    being an increase of 36 per cent.
  Vicar, the Rev. John Trevener, instituted 1817.


     [35] The word bethman, pronounced bedman, which is used in
     Cornwall for a sexton, must evidently be derived from beth,
     a grave. EDIT.

     [36] Richard Lower, M. D. an eminent physician and
     anatomist, was born in Cornwall about 1631, died in 1691. He
     wrote several important works; among them Tractatus de
     Corde; item de Motu et calore Sanguinis, et Chyli in eum
     transitu.




CROWAN.


HALS.

Has situate upon the north Camburne, west St. Erth, south Sythaney,
east Wendron. At the time of the Norman Conquest this parish was taxed
either under the jurisdiction of Lanmigell, viz. Michael’s Mount,
temple, or church, or Caer, id est, a city or castle, now Caer-ton,
Castletown; so called from the British treble entrenchments of turf
and stones yet extant in this parish. At the time of the Inquisition
of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Crowen, in
Decanatu de Penwith, was rated VIII_l._; vicar ibidem, XL_l._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, 11_l._ 9_s._ 0½_d._; the patronage in Sir
John Seyntaubyn, the rectory in Seyntaubyn, the incumbent Glyn. The
parish was rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1699, 177_l._ 10_s._
This church was endowed by the Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, its
patron. After its dissolution 26 Hen. VIII, it fell to the Crown; from
whence, as I am informed, the patronage was purchased by Thomas
Seyntaubyn, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 37 Hen. VIII.

Clowens, in this parish, id est, White Cloos, those sort of grey
marble stones so called, whereof an innumerable strag of them are
visible upon a great part of the lands of this barton above ground,
particularly in the Deer Park. Mr. Carew tell us, that Clowens is
derived from the Greek κλω, cloow, to hearken. But glewas in Cornish
is to hear, and golsowins, to hearken. This place for many ages hath
been the seat of the genteel and knightly family of the Seyntaubyns,
now Baronets, whose first ancestor came out of Normandy, a soldier,
with William the Conqueror, 1066, who first settled himself at ..., in
the county of Devon; and in process of time Guy Seyntaubyn (afterwards
knighted), Sheriff of Cornwall 22 Richard II. as I take it, first
settled himself in this place, and married Alice, one of the daughters
and coheirs of Sir Richard Sergreaulx, Knight, Sheriff of Cornwall 12
Richard II. (who died at Killigarth, or Colquite), by whom he had
issue. But after Sir Guy’s death, his lady Alice having her lands all
in her own dispose, married Richard de Vere, Knight of the Garter, and
the 11th Earl of Oxford of that house; by whom he had issue John the
twelfth Earl of Oxford; and Sir Robert Vere, Knight, that married
Margaret, the daughter of Sir Hugh Courtenay, of Haccomb, Knight, heir
to her mother Philippa, one of the coheirs of Sir Warren Archdeacon,
Knight, by the which Margaret he had issue John, who married Alice,
daughter of Walter Killrington, Esq. by whom he had issue John
fourteenth Earl of Oxford, that died without issue 14th July 1526 [See
KILLYGARTH], upon whom she settled most of her lands, and deprived her
issue by Seyntaubyn thereof.

Thomas Seyntaubyn, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 37 Henry VIII. Thomas
Seyntaubyn, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 30 Elizabeth. John
Seyntaubyn, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 11 Charles I. John
Seyntaubyn, Esq. was Sheriff of Cornwall 13 Charles II. who married
Godolphin, and had issue John Seyntaubyn, Esq. (my very good friend)
that married Anne, one of the coheirs of James Jenkyn, of Trekininge,
Esq. who by letters patent, bearing date 11 March 24 Charles II. was
created the 797th Baronet of England. He had issue by her, Sir John
Seyntaubyn, Bart. that married De la Hay, and had by her issue another
Sir John Seyntaubyn, now in possession of this place.

This famous worthy family, as it descended downwards, married
Sergreaulx, Colshill, Whittington, Grenvill, Mallett, Godolphin, and
others. The arms of Seyntaubyn are, Ermine, on a cross Gules five
Bezants. And the said family was denominated from Mount Seyntaubyn in
Normandy. Finally, as Sergreaulx’s heir, after the death of Sir Guy
Seyntaubyn, passed away her lands from her issue by him to her
children by her second husband, the Earl of Oxford aforesaid; so
Jenkyn’s heir, after the death of Sir John Seyntaubyn, Bart.
disinherited her heir by him, and sold most of her lands for the
payment of her second husband’s debts, Mr. Spencer, of Lancashire; and
after his death married one Mr. Page, for whose benefit she did her
son Seyntaubyn what further damage she was able to perform by sale of
more of her lands. So unconstant and irregular are some women’s
affections.

Tregeare or Tregeire, Cornish Saxon, in this parish, id est, the
dwelling of honour, or the honourable dwelling, gave name and original
to a British family, from thence denominated De Tregeare. It is now in
the possession of my very kind friend Richard Tregeare, Esq. Sheriff
of Cornwall 3d of Queen Anne, and Receiver of the Land Tax temp.
William III. who married Rawle, the relict of ――――, but died without
issue, who left his estate to one of his name (though none of his
tribe or blood, as I am informed), who gave for his arms, in a field
Argent, a fess Gules, between three Cornish daws Proper.


TONKIN.

For the name of this parish, it is in Cornish Crows-on, the cross;
probably so called from some notable cross erected in the parish.

But nevertheless, I learn from others that the name is derived from
its female patroness, Sancta Crewenna, and not from any noted cross.
In the Lincoln Taxation it is written Ecclesia Sancte Crewenne: which
Crewenne, says Leland, came over from Ireland with St. Breage, or
Breaca.

Mr. Tonkin reports what is stated by Mr. Hals of the family of St.
Aubyn, and adds, in the year 1733: This family has been no less than
six times Sheriff of Cornwall. They have served their prince and
country, not only in the office of sheriff, but also as members of
parliament and as justices of the peace.

The Sergreaulxes were of old a family of noble fame and worth in this
County. It appears, from Carew’s Survey, that Richard de Sergreaulx
held three fees by the tenure of knights’ service, tempore Henry IV.
at Killigarth, Lerneth, and Lonsallos. Also, he had Killcoid (now
Colguite) in the parish of Holland.

Tregeare, in this parish, Tre(g)eor (the g euphoniæ gratiâ to avoid an
elision), is the mansion of an old family from thence denominated.
Arms: Argent, a fess voided Sable, charged with three Torteauxes
between three Cornish choughs Proper. Tregeare, interpreted, signifies
not only a dwelling in honour, but an honourable dwelling; neither had
the Saxon nor Kernawith Britons any other word to express honour or
honourable by than the termination ge or gor, as appears not only from
that incomparable antiquary Verstegan,[37] but also from the names of
divers places among our ancestors. I have further to add respecting
the word geor, and as we have many places so called in the County I
shall once for all endeavour to give the true meaning of it.

Geare, fruitful, from guer, viridis, green (see Lhuyd’s Archæologia,
vol. I. fol. Oxford, 1707, p. 174,) as this estate is at present, and
as all others of the same name, I presume, formerly were. The family
of Tregeare are said to date from before the Conquest.

Manor of Hellegar and Clowance: For Hellegar was formerly the chief
place, and signifies the hall or place on the Downs; and there was
lately standing there, and I believe yet remains, a hall of large
dimensions. This was anciently the seat of a family bearing the same
name; whose arms were, Gules, a bend Vaire between six cross-crosslets
Or. Sibill, one of the daughters and co-heiresses of this house,
married Pierce Kemell, or Kymyell, of Kymyell, in St. Buian, whose
arms were, Argent, three dolphins in pale Sable. Elizabeth, one of the
daughters and coheiresses of Pearce Kemell, married Geoffrey St.
Aubyn, the second son of Guy St. Aubyn, Knight, and brought to him,
with several other lands, this manor of Hellegar and Clowance.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Hals commits an apparent mistake in assigning the advowson of this
parish to Mr. St. Aubyn at the period of Wolsey’s Valuation, and then
stating that it was acquired by purchase at the general dissolution of
religious houses.

It is probable that the advowson was acquired when the alien priories,
or all such houses as were cells in England subject to monasteries
abroad, were given to the King by an Act of Parliament, 2d year of
Henry V. A.D. 1415. See the statute in original Norman French, vol.
VI. p. 986, of Dugdale’s Monasticon, London, 1830; and in Latin, vol.
IX. p. 281, of Rymer’s Fœdera.

Sir John St. Aubyn, mentioned by Mr. Hals as in possession of Clowance
at the time of his writing, represented the County in Parliament, and
acquired popularity by opposing the administration of Sir Robert
Walpole. He married Catherine, daughter, and eventually coheiress of
Sir Nicholas Morice, of Werrington, and the Lady Catherine Herbert,
and great-granddaughter of Sir William Morice, Secretary of State at
the Restoration.

This lady brought a fortune of ten thousand pounds, which, the Editor
remembers to have heard from a very aged member of the family, were
conveyed in two carts from Werrington to Clowance, all in half crowns,
and that he assisted in taling them.

But in addition to ten thousand pounds Miss Morice also received at
her marriage, or afterwards succeeded to, the manor of Stoke Damarel,
on the Eastern bank of the Tamar, near Hamoaze, and purchased not a
long time before from the Wises, a respectable family in the South of
Devon, for eleven thousand five hundred pounds.

On this manor all the dock yards and government buildings have been
constructed, and the whole town of Plymouth Dock, now Devonport, has
been built, together with Morris Town, Stoke, &c. so that the annual
income has risen to perhaps three or four fold the original purchase
money.

This Sir John St. Aubyn left a son of his own name, and three
daughters, who married Basset, Molesworth, and Buller.

The son, Sir John St. Aubyn, had also the honour of representing the
County in Parliament. He married Miss Wingfield, from the North of
England; and dying in October 1772, left his estate to an only son,
the present Sir John St. Aubyn. He left also four daughters, who have
married Prideaux, Molesworth, Lennard, and White.

Mr. Lysons states that the church of Crowan was given by William Earl
of Gloucester to the Priory of St. James, in Bristol, which was a Cell
to Tewkesbury Abbey. If that is so, Mr. Hals must be entirely mistaken
in assigning the advowson to a St. Aubyn at the time of Wolsey’s
Valuation.

Mr. Lysons also says, that Kerthen, in this parish, belonged to a
family of the name of Cowlins, from whom it passed to the Godolphins
by a marriage.

Leland was entertained at Kerthen in the course of making his
Itinerary, by a Mr. Godolphin, who resided there. Leland, however,
writes the name Cardine.

In submitting to the press by far the greater part of Mr. Hals’
Manuscripts, and also of Mr. Tonkin’s Manuscript, in so far as it
differs from the former, the Editor has been especially careful to
preserve all such anecdotes and narratives of events as may tend to
illustrate the manners or the opinions of the times to which they
relate, adding to them many that have come to his knowledge from other
sources.

Just a hundred years ago such a series of events took place with
reference to the possession of Skewis, a farm in this parish, as would
induce any one of the present time to think that he must be living in
another land, under a different administration of the laws, and in a
totally dissimilar state of society.

Skewis had been, for I know not how long, the freehold patrimony of a
succession of yeomen proprietors of the name of Rogers. There were now
two brothers, the elder married and lived on the farm, but without a
family, the younger brother, Henry Rogers, married and had several
children. He carried on for several years in Helston the trade of a
pewterer, then of considerable importance to Cornwall, although it is
now lost. A large portion of the tin was then exported in the shape of
pewter made into plates, dishes, &c. all of which have been superseded
by earthenware. At the first introduction of earthenware, provincially
called clome, it was a popular cry to destroy the clome, and to bring
back the use of tin. He had for some years retired to this parish.

I have made many diligent inquiries about Henry Rogers, and they have
not gone to represent him as a bad man, but as one little in the habit
of restraining his passions, of great bodily strength, and of what is
termed a wilful disposition; and his prejudices were probably
supported by an opinion, still prevalent among country people, that
freehold lands, which have once descended to an heir cannot be
alienated by any possessor without the concurrence of his heir.

The elder brother died, when a will was produced giving all the
freehold property to his widow, whose maiden name was Millett. Henry
Rogers averred, and possibly believed, that the will was spurious, and
would be invalid at all events. Under that impression, and despising
legal remedies, he waited for an opportunity when his sister-in-law
was from home; he then turned some female servants out of the house,
and took forcible possession. The widow of course appealed to the law,
with the voice of the whole country, however, against her; and it is
universally reported that Sir John St. Aubyn, the principal gentleman
of the parish, would have supported Rogers in a legal proceeding.
However that may be, he prepared for violence, and refused to yield up
possession when judgment was given against him; so that the Sheriff
was at last directed to eject him by force. But Rogers got several
persons, ignorant and lawless as himself, to remain with him in the
house, which had been barricaded and adapted for defence, and great
numbers of people, partly from curiosity, but in part also to
countenance his resistance, having assembled on the spot, the civil
power was completely resisted, and two men killed by shots from the
house; the Under Sheriff himself having narrowly escaped,――as he
states in his evidence, rather ludicrously, that the discharge of a
gun from the house burnt his wig and singed his face.

This happened on the 18th of June, 1734.

On the following day the Under Sheriff came back, assisted by some
soldiers, who were fired on and one killed. They returned the fire,
but without effect. And then, which would appear almost incredible,
Rogers was allowed to remain in quiet possession, after these murders,
till March of the following year, when he was again blockaded by
soldiers; and the siege, I apprehend, continued for several days, with
the loss of two more men, when at last cannon were brought from
Pendennis Castle. On the night following their arrival, Rogers
contrived to effect an escape. He travelled on foot, and got as far as
Salisbury, with the intention, as he stated, of making his case known
to the King.

Whatever might have been the opinions of gentlemen, and educated
persons, on the abstract merit of his case, it became impossible for
them not to join in bringing to condign punishment one who had thus
taken away the lives of innocent persons, and set at equal defiance
the laws of God and man.

Sir John St. Aubyn now took an active part in endeavouring to secure
the fugitive, and being through his marriage connected with the
Herberts Earls of Pembroke, who resided in the neighbourhood of
Salisbury, handbills descriptive of Rogers were circulated round that
town. I have always heard that a postboy, driving homewards a return
postchaise, was accosted by a stout man walking with a gun in his
hand, requesting to be taken in. The boy drove him to the inn, where
he procured a bed; but the circumstances and description had excited
strong suspicion, and he was secured in his sleep.

The prisoner was of course removed to Cornwall. He was there convicted
of murder, together with John Street, who seems to have been his
principal partisan, and both made an atonement for their offences with
their lives.

Through the favour of Lord Hardwicke, I have procured a copy of the
evidence, and a portion of the charge given to the Grand Jury, in
reference to those prisoners, by his Lordship’s grandfather, the
justly-celebrated first Earl of Hardwicke and Lord Chancellor.

          Launceston, Aug. 1, 1735.

          The King against Henry Rogers and John Street.

     Indictment for murder of William Carpenter, by shooting him
     in the back with a gun charged with leaden bullets, 19th
     June 1734, at Crowan, in com. Cornub.

     Plea, Not Guilty.

     Sergeant Chapple pro Rege.

     _Stephen Tillie_ was Under-Sheriff 1734. 8 June 1734
     received a writ of assistance under the great seal. 31 Maij,
     7 Geo. II. writ of assistance, reciting the writ of
     execution of the decree and writ of injunction, whereby
     possession was to be delivered to Anne Rogers, commanding to
     put Anne Rogers into possession, and to remove and expel the
     said Henry Rogers, his tenants, and accomplices, from
     possession of the premises.

     18 June he went to the house; the prisoner was in the
     window, and held a gun at him; he called to him, and told
     him that he had the king’s writ, and must have possession;
     would not meddle with his person.

     Prisoner said Lord Chancellor made an unjust decree. He said
     that then he might deliver possession and appeal. Swore,
     damn him, he would not deliver possession. Saw two or three
     hundred people. Read the proclamation. The prisoner fired a
     gun, burned his wig, and singed his face. One of his
     officers said he was shot through the head. Expostulated
     again. Then he swore if the King and Lord Chancellor came he
     would not deliver it. Several guns were fired. He told him
     he would give him time till tomorrow morning eight o’clock.
     Sent to Captain Sadler for a few soldiers; the captain sent
     them; he went with them; he demanded entrance. Prisoner
     said, “Damn you, are you come again?” A gun was mounted out
     of the hole cut in the door within an inch of his body;
     discharged; and it shot Carpenter, who fell with it, and
     said he was a dead man. Another gun fired, and shot Hatch,
     his servant. Rogers had a gun in his hand when he first saw
     him, and afterwards came out with a gun in his hand.
     Carpenter was a bailiff to the sheriff, and he had commanded
     him to go to his assistance. Mrs. Rogers, the plaintiff, was
     there both times.

     _George Ellis._ 18 June was desired by Mrs. Rogers to go
     with them. Rogers and his wife in the window, and had a gun
     between them. Mr. Tillie demanded possession. Prisoner said
     he would not; swore and cursed, and said he had strength
     enough to defend his possession against any person; insisted
     the estate was his. The Under-sheriff expostulated with him,
     and told him if he had a right, his best way was to submit
     to the law. Sheriff read the proclamation. Rogers asked him
     to drink a dram; he went for it, and in the meantime his
     wife held the gun; guns were fired.

     19 June went again. Under-sheriff told him he hoped he was
     in a better mind now, and would deliver him possession.
     Refused. A gun fired from the house. Soon after, heard it
     called out that Carpenter was shot in the back, and a
     soldier shot in the groin. He is a surgeon, and dressed
     Carpenter; found him shot from about the fourth rib to his
     buttock; many slugs and jagged pieces of lead in it.

     Between two and three hundred men there the first day, and a
     great many the second day, but not so many. Sir J. St. Aubin
     having sent out his steward, heard the under-sheriff ask him
     who were in the house. He said only his own servants.

     No gun was fired, or any force used by any of the
     Under-sheriff’s company till Carpenter was shot.

     _Mr. Lukey_, surgeon. Found a gun-shot wound in the small of
     his back. He saw him on Wednesday the 19th, died on Friday.
     It was a great quantity of small shot; thinks the wound went
     through into his belly.

     _Samuel Hatch_, servant to Mr. Tillie, the Under-sheriff.
     18th was there. The Under-sheriff read the King’s writ to
     him. He did not see who fired the gun, but saw no man in the
     house that day but Rogers, whom he knows.

     Cannot say he saw Rogers fire the first time. Carpenter was
     shot, and another soldier shot, and two men wounded before
     any of the soldiers or Sheriff’s company fired. He was shot
     with slugs.

     _Richard Vinsam._ Was there the first day, and the Sheriff
     read and showed him the writ; told Rogers that if he would
     try the cause again he should be as ready to put him in as
     to take him out. He was there again the second day. The
     Sheriff told him he was come again to do his office, and
     desired him to be easy. Gives the same account, and that the
     soldiers did not fire till after Carpenter was shot.

     As to Street.

     _Edward Williams._ Was at Skewis House the 19th day of June
     1734. Saw John Street there in the house, with a sword in
     his hand. Kept people in the house, and said he would run
     any body through that offered to go away; said now was the
     time to do a friend service; assisted Rogers by keeping
     persons in by force; the Sheriff was then come to demand
     possession.

     Street was in the house when the firing was.

     Rogers’s wife was apprehended by the time the Under-sheriff
     came to the house.

     _Mr. Black_, ensign, was there with the soldiers; with the
     others; had orders from the commanding officer to attend the
     Sheriff. No firing by the soldiers or sheriff’s company till
     Carpenter and a soldier killed.

     _John Ellett_ was one of the soldiers who went with the
     Under-sheriff to assist him. Agrees with the rest, that
     Carpenter was shot from that part of the house where he saw
     Rogers. There was no firing by the soldiers or the sheriff’s
     assistants till Carpenter was wounded.

     _Henry Jeffries_ was corporal to the party. Heard the
     Under-sheriff read the proclamation, and demand entrance;
     when Rogers refused.

     Carpenter went up and struck at the door; and as he turned
     about was shot in the back; he was shot in the leg; had
     orders from the Under-sheriff to fire.

     The _Prisoner_. Had good counsel, and thought he had a good
     right to the estate; was unwilling to deliver it up the
     first day; told him he intended to appeal; said if he did
     not deliver possession he might bring a writ of rebellion
     against him. Sheriff swore he would have possession. Sheriff
     went off, and he did not expect to see him again. Next
     morning heard the soldiers were coming. Sent his wife out;
     they seized her. With beat of drum the Sheriff and soldiers
     came and fired at him; the soldiers fired about five rounds
     apiece.

     _Henry Berriman._ 18 day of June saw the sheriff go, and
     heard him demand entrance; and the prisoner said he should
     have none. The next day the Sheriff came with soldiers; but
     he was two coits cast off; the soldiers were on the eastern
     side of the house; the soldiers fired three rounds; but he
     did not see the gun fired out of the house. Carpenter was
     shot on the eastern side of the house, and he was on the
     western side of the house; the Undersheriff desired him to
     carry him off. Did not see Carpenter receive the shot. Was
     not on the same side of the house when Carpenter was shot;
     as far off as the tower of this town from this place.

     [Carpenter was on the eastern side of the house when he was
     shot].

     _Thomas Pendarves._ Rode through the town just as the
     soldiers came with the Sheriff; saw Henry Rogers’s wife; was
     on the south side of the house when the firing was first;
     but that was on the east side of the house; however, thinks
     he could distinguish whether it came from the house or the
     soldiers, because the firing from the house was by single
     pops now and then, and the soldiers shot many together. To
     his sight and perception the first firing was by the
     soldiers. Can’t say any more. He was not on the east of the
     house at all. A great number of people assembled.

     _Henry Johns_ was in company with Carpenter; said he forgave
     Mr. Rogers.

     _John Rogers_ saw Carpenter in his bed, and drank with him.
     He asked how he came to throw a great stone. He said he did
     not know; but he freely forgave the man that shot him; for
     if they had not been merciful they might have destroyed them
     all.

     _John Street_ was at the house at his labour.

     Writ of execution of the decree read.

     _Mr. John Hawkins_ was solicitor for Mrs. Rogers; went with
     the Sheriff; demanded possession; saw a gun fired from the
     house; did no hurt; saw Carpenter actually shot and fall; no
     firing by the soldiers till after that of two other guns.

     Verdict, both guilty of murder.


          The King against Henry Rogers and John Street.

     Indictment for the murder of George Woolston alias Wilson,
     with a gun charged with leaden bullets 19th June 1734, at
     Crowan, in com. Cornub.

     Plea, Not Guilty.

     Serjeant Chapple, pro Rege.

     Writ of Execution, Injunction, and Writ of Assistance, put
     in.

     _Mr. Tillie._ Gives the same account that he did before.
     Second day after Carpenter was shot, Henry Rogers came to
     the window with his gun on the east side, fired, and a shot
     went through his hat, and a soldier wounded. He ordered the
     soldiers to fire. Woolston was on the west side, and was
     shot there. No gun was fired by the soldiers, or any person
     in the assistance of the sheriff, nor a sword drawn, nor any
     force, till after Carpenter was shot and Hatch wounded, and
     Jeffries shot through the leg. Woolston declared that Rogers
     had shot him, on his asking him. Died in about half an hour
     after. Soldiers went to the assistance of him; ordered them
     to use no force till resistance.

     _John Ellet._ He was on the east side of the house; he
     carried off Woolston; was shot from the waistband of his
     breeches to the buckle of his shoes. Gives the same account
     as to the occasion. There was no firing on the eastern side
     of the house till after Carpenter was killed and Jeffries
     shot in the leg.

     _Nicholas Daniel_ was serjeant, and went to Skewis House.
     After the first firing William Carpenter was killed. The
     officer ordered him to go with ten men to the west side of
     the house. As soon as he came into the court, saw the
     prisoner Rogers come to the window and fire his gun and shot
     Woolston, of which he died in an hour.

     _Cross-examined._ After Carpenter was killed, some of the
     soldiers had fired on the east side of the house before he
     went to the west side.

     _Samuel Hatch_ gives the same account as before of the facts
     on 18th and 19th June. The first guns which were fired were
     by persons that were withinside of the house, and not by
     persons that were withoutside of the house. No firing by the
     soldiers, or any in assistance of the sheriff, till after
     one was killed and two wounded.

     _George Ellis._ The same as before. Saw Woolston go with the
     soldiers to the west side of the house. Soon afterwards
     heard a cry that Woolston was shot. Went and saw him. He was
     shot from the groin to the ancle. He was then in a manner
     dying; died of that wound. The first firing from within the
     house, before the Sheriff had finished the concluding words
     of the proclamation; three guns fired before the soldiers
     fired.

     _Richard Vinsam._ Saw Rogers looking out at the window.
     Several guns fired before the Sheriff had quite finished the
     proclamation. No guns fired by the soldiers till they had
     fired from the house.

     _Mr. Black._ After the firing from the east side, ordered
     eight or ten soldiers to go round to the west side, and soon
     heard Woolston was shot. No firing by the soldiers till
     after from the house.

     _Mr. John Hawkins._ 19th, no gun fired from the soldiers
     till after Carpenter dropped.

     _Piercy Price._ 18th March last at Skewis. Was with the
     soldiers when they took possession. Rogers looked out of the
     little door. Asked him how he came to let a man lay unburied
     who was there? owned “he killed him. As to the old soldier
     that was killed, I had no animosity against him. It is true
     I killed him, but it was time, he was too proud; intended to
     kill the Sheriff and his men.”

     _As to Street._

     _Edward Williams._ Was there when Woolston was killed.
     Street was on the inside of the house at the western door
     when Woolston was killed. Had a sword drawn. He asked to go
     out. Street said if he offered to do it he would run him
     through; hindered him and another from going out; said if
     they would do a friend any good or service now was the time;
     the service was to keep the possession against the Sheriff.
     The prisoner Rogers thought his appeal had been lodged.

     _Henry Berryman._ The soldiers fired upon the house about
     three times before they parted to different sides of the
     house; did not see Carpenter shot, nor does not know when he
     was shot; was as far off as the length of the whole hall;
     did not see Street there.

     _Thomas Pendarves._ By his perceivance the soldiers fired
     first. Stood on the south side of the house, two hundred
     yards off; did not see either Carpenter or Woolston shot.

    _John Street has no evidence._

     Verdict, both Guilty.


          The King against Henry Rogers.

     Indictment for the murder of Andrew Willis, alias Tubby, by
     shooting him in the breast on the 16th of March at Crowan.

     Plea, Not Guilty.

     Serjeant Chapple, pro Rege.

     _Edward Bennett._ Was a constable, and on 16th March called
     Andrew Willis, alias Tubby, to give in his assistance to
     take the prisoner Rogers at Skewis House on account of
     murders that he had committed. Tubby was about sixty yards
     from the house, and he saw a gun fired from a window of the
     house; immediately on that Tubby fell down; he ran off;
     immediately saw Rogers in the window from which the fire
     came; afterwards saw Rogers come out to the man and walk
     round him and take Tubby’s gun, but before Rogers came out
     another gun was fired; saw one or two more at the window
     afterwards; intended to apprehend him and bring him to
     Launceston.

     _John Williams._ Was with Bennett and Tubby at the
     constable’s desire to take Mr. Rogers, but ordered them not
     to shoot without necessity; about sixty yards off the house
     saw Tubby on his knee, almost before he heard the report of
     the gun; immediately saw Rogers in the window with a gun in
     his hand; thought Rogers was gone out of his house. Tubby
     cried, “Lord! Lord!” and fell down. Another gun fired, and
     he crept away through the hedge.

     _Henry Thomas._ Saw Rogers on 16th March, with a gun, walk
     by the dead body forwards and backwards. Said, “Here lies
     the black Bill.”

     _Henry James._ Was called to assist William John the
     constable the Sunday that Tubby lay dead at Skewis; saw the
     prisoner with a gun within twelve feet of the body. Prisoner
     said, “Sir Andrew, thou didst make thy brag last Sunday that
     thou wouldst lend me a brace of bullets, but I think I have
     paid thee.” Asked them to come in and drink a dram; refused.
     He said, “If he would, he would make them come into the
     castle.” They went away, and we retired. Rogers stood in the
     lane with a gun in his hand, bid them turn in; said, Sir
     John St. Aubyn would be angry if they had any thing to do
     with any body in the house. He said, “Damn them, if they did
     not he would shoot them.” Asked, if they knew who killed the
     man? “No.” Said, “There was a black man lay dead in the
     moor, if any body would own him they should have him. I have
     the bill;” produced the gun; “Damn him, if they don’t come
     and own him, I’ll cut off his head and stick it on the
     chimney.”

     _James Fall._ Heard the gun go off. Heard somebody say,
     “Take up the man.” He ran out, and Rogers looked out of his
     window, asked, what he was going for? said, “To see what you
     have done; you will be hanged at last.” Said, “If you do not
     go back, I will shoot you too.” Said to him, “Did not I tell
     you to tell Sir John, that I would take them off as he would
     fetch them.” He said “fetch them?”

     _Prisoner._ That these people followed him and endeavoured
     to shoot him.

     Verdict, guilty.


     An addition which appears to have been made to a charge
     delivered by Lord Hardwicke, Chief Justice on Western
     Circuit in 1735.

     Of the truth of this observation and of the pernicious
     consequences of lawless force, you of this country have
     lately had a flagrant but an instructive instance. In that
     you have seen from what small springs a torrent of violence
     may arise. How people once engaged in such practices, go on
     from invading the property, to taking away the lives of
     their fellow subjects; and from an obstinate contemptuous
     opposition to the regular decisions of the ordinary Courts
     of Justice, they advance almost to open rebellion.

     The honourable and indefatigable endeavours of the gentlemen
     of this county to reform and suppress such daring outrages
     cannot be sufficiently commended, and must always be
     remembered highly to their honour. And happy it is that
     these endeavours, enforced by the seasonable and gracious
     assistance of his majesty, had the desired effect. To
     consider this affair in its full extent, it ought on the one
     hand to be looked upon as a strong proof that the King will
     make use of the extraordinary as well as the ordinary powers
     of his government, only for protection and security of his
     people; and on the other hand, that the gentlemen of England
     will unite in the support of the laws, and of legal, well
     established government, against all attempts of any kind
     whatsoever to introduce disorder and confusion.

So great were the apprehensions entertained of a man who had in this
extraordinary manner, and for months set at defiance the whole
authority of the country, that, immediately after his absconding, the
magistrates of the hundred issued the following proclamation:

     Cornwall.――To all Magistrates, Headboroughs, and Officers of
     Towns and Parishes, to whom these presents shall come.

     Whereas several murders have lately been committed by Henry
     Rogers, of Skewis, in the parish of Crowan, in the county of
     Cornwall, and whereas the said Henry Rogers and his gang did
     last night abscond and withdraw themselves from justice,
     notwithstanding a strict guard of soldiers and others which
     were placed about the house at Skewis to prevent their
     escape, and any further mischiefs that might ensue from
     their wicked intentions and intrigues of the said Henry
     Rogers and his abettors; And whereas they withdrew from
     Skewis with their guns and ammunition, whereby it is
     suspected that they will plunder and ravage the whole
     county:――We therefore desire you to transmit this to the
     next town, that it may go through the whole county, not only
     that all his Majesty’s good and peaceable subjects may be
     guarded against the said Rogers and his gang, but that they
     may do their utmost endeavours to apprehend them, and bring
     them to their trial, that all such horrid practices, which
     threaten destruction to society and government, may for the
     future be prevented, the public peace preserved, and the
     authors of such infamous disorders be brought to condign
     punishment.

     We are, with much respect, gentlemen,
          Your most humble servants,
               JOHN ST. AUBIN.
               JOHN BORLASE.
               WM. ARUNDELL.

     March 21st, 1734-5.[38]

     There is a reward of 350_l._ for taking him. He hath on a
     whitish fustian frock, with bastard pearl buttons, and a
     blue riding-coat.

Although no one ventured to justify the violence, and especially the
murders committed by Rogers, yet long within my remembrance a strong
feeling of compassion was generally entertained for him. One of his
sons lived to a very advanced age at Penzance, where he procured a
scanty living as a saddler, merely employed, I believe, from kindness.

In October 1812 I had a long conversation with this old man about his
father; and the following are minutes made on the occasion:

     “On the 30th of October, 1812, I called on Mr. Henry Rogers,
     formerly a saddler at Penzance, but then residing there in
     great poverty, being supported by a small allowance from a
     club, and by half-a-crown a week given him by the
     corporation, nominally for yielding up the possession of a
     house, but in truth to prevent his becoming a common pauper.

     “Mr. Henry Rogers was then eighty-four years of age, and
     remembered the unfortunate transactions at Skewis perfectly
     well; he was between seven and eight years old at the time.
     He recollected going out with his father into the court
     after there had been some firing. His father had a gun in
     his hand, and inquired what they wanted. On this his father
     was fired at, and had a snuff-box and powder-horn broken in
     his pocket by a ball, whilst he stood on the other side.

     “He recollected that whilst he himself was in the bed,
     several balls came in through the window of the room, and
     after striking against the wall rolled about on the floor.

     “One brother and a sister, who were in the house, went out
     to inquire what was wanted of their father, and they were
     not permitted to return.

     “On the last night, no one remained in the house but his
     father, himself, and the servant-maid. In the middle of the
     night they all went out, and got some distance from the
     house. In crossing a field, however, they were met by two
     soldiers, who inquired their business, &c. The maid answered
     that they were looking for a cow, when they were permitted
     to proceed. The soldiers had their arms, and his father had
     his gun. The maid and himself were left at a farm-house in
     the neighbourhood, and Mr. Rogers proceeded on his way
     towards London. Mr. Henry Rogers said that he was born in
     Crowan, and he apprehended so were most of the children;
     that his father, although bred a pewterer, had for many
     years occupied land in that parish.”

All these circumstances, after so long an interval, were related to me
by the old man with tears in his eyes.

It is curious to compare this account of the escape of one man, a
woman, and a child, with the proclamation of the next day.

On the 8th of January, 1816, I called at Skewis, and saw several holes
in the partitions, made by shot of different sizes, when Mr. Henry
Rogers resisted the law in 1735.

I have an extract from a letter written by a Cornish gentleman in May
1735, who states that he had seen Rogers in the prison at Salisbury,
when he seemed to rejoice in what he had done. And I have found in an
account-book of my great uncle, Mr. Henry Davies, the following
receipt:

     “1st July 1735. Received of Mr. Henry Davies, towards the
     taking of Henry Rogers, two pounds two shillings, per
     Francis Arthur.”

A print of Rogers was soon after published with the following legend:

     “Henry Rogers lived at a village called Skewis. He was so
     ignorant of the reason as well as of the power of the law,
     that when a decree in Chancery went against him, he resisted
     all remonstrances, and fortified his house, making loopholes
     for his muskets, through which he shot two men of the posse
     comitatus who attended the Under-sheriff. A little after he
     shot one Hitchens, as he was passing the high road on his
     private business. He also fired through the window and
     killed one Toby, and would not suffer his body to be taken
     away to be buried for some days. At length the neighbouring
     justices of the peace assisted the constables, and procured
     an aid of some soldiers, one of whom he killed, and
     afterwards made his escape; but at Salisbury, on his way
     towards London, he was apprehended and brought down to
     Cornwall, when at the assizes in August 1735 five bills of
     indictment were found againt him by the grand jury for the
     five murders aforesaid; to save the court time he was tried
     only on three of them, and found guilty of every one, before
     Lord Chief Justice Hardwick. As he lay in gaol after his
     conviction, the Under-sheriff coming in, he attempted to
     seize his sword, with a resolution to kill him; swearing he
     should die easy if he could succeed in that design. He was
     attended by several clergymen; but they could make no
     impression on his brutal stupidity, and he died at the
     gallows without any remorse.”

Extract made at the British Museum July the 8th, 1812, from the Weekly
Miscellany, by Richard Hooker, of the Middle Temple, Esq. for Saturday
Aug. the 9th, 1735, No. CXXXIX.

     Launceston, August 1.

     This day came on before the Lord Chief Justice Hardwick, the
     trials of Henry Rogers and John Street, one of his
     assistants, for murders committed in opposing the Sheriff of
     Cornwall in the execution of his office.

     Rogers was arraigned upon five indictments, and Street upon
     two. The trials began about seven in the morning and ended
     about two in the afternoon. Rogers was tried upon the three
     first indictments, and being found guilty on all three, the
     Court thought it unnecessary to proceed upon the other two.
     Street was found guilty of the two indictments against him.
     And they both received sentence of death before the Court
     rose.

     The Counsel for the king were Mr. Serjeant Chapple, Mr.
     Fortescue, jun. The Counsel for the criminals Mr. Pratt and
     Mr. Draper. The Solicitor for the Treasury Richard Paxton,
     Esq. was also there on the part of the Crown, he being sent
     down purposely to prosecute the affair.

       *     *     *     *     *

     At the assizes at Launceston Henry Rogers and John Street
     received sentence of death for a murder they committed in
     opposing the Sheriff of Cornwall in the execution of his
     office, and were executed on the 6th of August 1735. They
     seemed very penitent, particularly Rogers, who did not care
     for any sustenance but bread and water. He said he was
     guilty of one of the murders, but knew nothing of the other;
     but had it been in his power he would have killed as many
     more, and thought he committed no crime. Street, who was his
     servant, had little to say, but that what he did was to
     defend his master, and he was willing to die, for by the
     course of years he could not live much longer, and he hoped
     God would receive his poor soul.

And lastly, I subjoin an address to the parish of Crowan, by Sir John
St. Aubyn, the gentleman whom I have mentioned as one of the opponents
of Sir Robert Walpole’s administration.

     “As I am obliged to attend at the assizes, I must earnestly
     recommend the care of the parish in my absence to you, and
     hope that you will do your endeavours to prevent the very
     great expense and mischief which must otherwise fall upon
     us; although you do not at present seem to perceive the
     danger that threatens us; for the outrage and murder which
     happened in our parish have justly alarmed the government,
     and induced his majesty to issue out a proclamation, wherein
     he offers a reward of two hundred pounds for apprehending
     Henry Rogers, and one hundred pounds for each of the other
     offenders, together with a pardon to any who shall discover
     and apprehend them. He likewise commands all civil
     magistrates, upon pain of his majesty’s displeasure, to be
     diligent in suppressing this riot, and bringing the authors
     of it to the punishment which their crimes deserve. In
     obedience to this, I think myself obliged, in the faithful
     discharge of my duty for the preservation of the public
     peace, and the good of our own parish in particular, to
     admonish you and the principal inhabitants of it, to give me
     your aid and assistance in this dangerous and troublesome
     affair. His Majesty, as he declares in the proclamations,
     being firmly resolved to put an effectual stop to such
     enormous practices, hath by his warrant from the Secretary
     of War, sent orders to the commanders of regiments of
     soldiers at Exeter, to send to the Sheriff so many soldiers
     as he shall require and think sufficient to suppress this
     notorious violation of the laws of the land, and which
     certainly will be done by force of arms, if it cannot be
     stopped by a gentle and careful process. This is a true and
     exact state of cause; and whoever considers it with due
     temper, must be filled with the most melancholy
     apprehensions of the mischief that must happen, if every
     good subject and Christian does not endeavour to keep off
     this evil, by endeavouring, as far as his influence can
     prevail, to make the usual method of bringing crimes to
     justice effectual. It is for this reason I now write this
     letter to you, which I hope you will read with serious
     attention more than once, that it may have a good effect
     upon you. I myself can foresee, and I wish you likewise
     could, the dreadful inconvenience and expense of a regiment
     of soldiers sent down and quartered upon us; particularly
     this parish, being the unfortunate place of this disorder,
     must, in a much heavier manner, feel the burthen of it.
     Consider the charges and the trouble of having every house
     in the parish filled with soldiers; consider what must be
     the consequence of abetting and supporting Rogers, whose
     house will be fired about his ears, and those lives which
     may be lost if he continues in his extravagance. Take
     notice, that I have done my duty as justice of the peace and
     a parishioner; and if you all likewise do yours, by
     encouraging a proper subjection to authority, and aiding the
     civil magistrates in discovering and bringing the offenders
     to justice, these dismal calamities may be prevented. I
     think more reasonable to advise you of this, because there
     is too general a mistake and prejudice, or rather vicious
     encouragement shown, and that too by many who should and do
     know better, to the unhappy author of this disturbance. To
     pity the unfortunate is a virtuous character, even to those
     whose vices have made them so; but at the same time we ought
     to detect their crimes, and it is for the public good they
     should be punished; and this consideration ought to prevail
     over the concern we may feel for a private person. Murder is
     a crime of the basest nature, and what the law in common
     cases never forgives; but when it is committed on any
     officer in the execution of his duty, and in supporting the
     usurpation of another’s right, and what the law shall
     determine such, it is certainly a more complicated guilt.
     Whosoever abets a murderer, or does what he can to conceal
     and defend him from justice, is in the eye of God a murderer
     himself in cold blood. To justify a murderer is the
     strongest indication of a most base temper; and whosoever
     does not cry out against the misguided spirit of the people
     in behalf of Henry Rogers, deserves that character. Whilst
     the lawsuit was depending all people were at liberty to
     weigh on either side. It does at first sight seem a little
     hard that one brother should give away an estate from
     another; and there must be some strong provocation to make
     it appear reasonable; but the circumstances of the whole
     case are not known, and therefore no man is able to form a
     true judgement of it; not even to pass harsh censures on
     particular persons; but when the law has determined right,
     all people must submit to that determination; otherwise no
     man is secure in his property, but a number of idle resolute
     fellows may wrest it from him, and declare that in their
     opinion he has an unjust title to it. So that if you give
     your estate by will unequally among your children, as they
     may have behaved more or less dutiful to you, that which has
     the least may take the other’s part from him; or another
     relation may possibly hire such another mob, to take away
     the whole from them. We shall not at such times see property
     determined by judge and jury, but by force of arms; and the
     richest and most powerful man will be able to swallow up all
     the estates of his lesser neighbours. The law is the only
     protection of our lives and estates, and if that is once set
     aside, we must hold them only by the base sanction of a
     giddy rabble. The law therefore should be strictly
     maintained by all such who have any possessions. The
     inferior people indeed, who have nothing to lose, will be at
     all times for breaking down the fences, that they may have
     some share of the common plunder. I should mention one
     instance. Suppose any of you had bought this estate of the
     late Rogers, being advised by your lawyer that he had the
     power to sell it, (which he certainly had, as the law has
     declared he had a right of giving it away,) you would then
     think it very hard that the present Rogers, with his wicked
     crew, should come and take it away by force, and afterwards
     keep it as he now does. Suppose the money you paid him for
     it he gave to his widow; should you in such a case agree
     that ’tis his brother’s right to have the estate? Let every
     one make this his own case.

     “I believe you all honest men, and wo’nt suspect any one of
     you of justifying this affair; but I have put these
     arguments into your mouths to warn other people from this
     vicious way of thinking, and that you may exert yourselves
     in keeping this hardship from the parish, from which I could
     never learn this Rogers deserved so much kindness as to
     suffer on his account; for he never paid church, priest, or
     poor, when he was in possession of the estate, and withheld
     from many their just due. The character of the honest and
     just man is to relieve the poor, to pity the unfortunate;
     but to use their utmost endeavours to punish the guilty, and
     to recommend and enforce an obedience to the laws of the
     land, which are the only protection of our lives and
     properties.”

          I am, gentlemen,
          Your friend and servant,
          JOHN ST. AUBYN.

The church of Crowan was given, by William Earl of Gloucester, to the
priory of St. James in Bristol (which was a cell to Tewkesbury Abbey),
and confirmed by Henry II. It contains a series of monuments to the
family of St. Aubyn, which are engraved in thirteen plates in Mr.
Polwhele’s History of Cornwall. There was formerly a chapel of ease at
Binnerton, of which there are no remains. The charity-school in this
parish was endowed with the interest of 100_l._ by the St. Aubyn
family, about the year 1830.

  This parish contains 6742 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815.        13,175    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         1,588   17    0
  Population, { in  1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    2587   |   3021   |   3973   |   4332;
    giving an increase of nearly 67½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Parish Feast the nearest Sunday to the 1st of February.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. William Grylle, presented by Sir John St.
    Aubyn in 1828.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, which is adjacent to that of Comborne, is composed of the
same kind of rocks. The eastern half reposes on granite, the western
on slate. Like Comborne it has long been celebrated for its mines.
Although its general aspect is dreary and barren, yet it contains some
very fertile spots; that of Clowance in particular gladdens the eye;
the rich and intrinsic beauties of its pleasure grounds and extensive
plantations being heightened by the contrast of surrounding desolation.


     [37] Richard Verstegan, born in London, is supposed to have
     died about 1634. His principal work is, “Restitution of
     decayed Antiquities concerning the most noble and renowned
     English Nation, with Cuts,” Antwerp, 1605, in 4to. London,
     1628 and 1634.

     [38] According to the New Style this date would be 1735.




CUBERT, or ST. CUTHBERT.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pider, and hath upon the north St.
George’s Channel, or the Irish Sea; west Peransabulo; east Crantock.
This new name of Cuthbert is Saxon, and compounded of Cuth-bert, id
est, knowledge, skill, wisdom, or understanding, clear or bright, and
refers to St. Cuthbert, the tutelar guardian and patron of this
church; for in Domesday Roll, 20 Will. I. 1087, this district was
taxed under the name of Chynowen, now Chynoweth. In the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, into the revenues of
Cornish benefices, Ecclesia Sancti Cuthberti in Decanatu de Pider, is
valued iiii_l._ xvii_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ibidem, x_s._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, is rated 8_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._
The patronage formerly in the prior of Bodman, who endowed it; now
Prideaux. The incumbent Bradford; the rectory or sheafe in Prideaux;
and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax 1696, 99_l._
9_s._ 6_d._

The history of St. Cuthbert.――He was born in Cumberland, of British
Saxon parents, about the year 600; and had his Christian education as
a monk in Bangor Monastery, in Ireland; from whence he removed to the
abbey of Landisfarne, opposite to Northumberland and North Durham,
where, after he had remained some years, he was chosen or made a
bishop of that diocese. I remember to have seen in this church,
painted against the wall, about thirty years past, the portraiture of
a bishop, attired in his episcopal robes, with mitre or crown on his
head, a crosier or shepherd’s crook or staff in his hand, and an
inscription in ancient character near it, viz. St. Cuthbertun. Which
picture, I am told, is since covered over with lime by the
churchwardens.

Now, it happened after the death of St. Cuthbert, that the island of
Landisfarne was extremely troubled with the piratical thievish Danes,
who wasted the same, without regard of secular or religious persons
and places. Whereupon the Bishop of St. Ethelwin, with his monks,
privately escaped into Northumberland, and left their houses and
estates a prey to their enemies, anno Dom. 800, carrying with them as
their chief treasure the enshrined relics or skeleton of St. Cuthbert,
with which, during the lives of twelve titular bishops of Landisfarne,
they wandered up and down Northumberland for the space of ninety
years, without any fixed place of abode or settlement, till Aldwyn,
titular bishop of that island, obtained leave of King Alfred, ann.
Dom. 890, to pitch and settle his episcopal church at Durham, where he
and his monks laid the foundation thereof; which, after it was by them
finished, was consecrated and dedicated to the honour of Almighty God
in the name of St. Cuthbert, where they again erected his shrine or
relics; thereby transferring or translating the bishopric of
Landisfarne to that place, and no more styling themselves bishops
thereof, but of Durham.

But this fabrick of Bishop Adelwyn, though a stately church, was
pulled down by William Carilepho, the 29th bishop (13 Will. I. 1080),
who in the place thereof laid the foundation of that cathedral church
now extant there; though he did not live to see it finished; but Ralph
Flambard, his successor, Lord Treasurer of England, went on with the
work, and brought it to that perfection it now showeth; though some
additions indeed were made by Nicholas de Farnham, and Thomas
Welscomb, prior thereof, 1242.

King Alfred, and Guthrun the Dane, his deputy-governor of
Northumberland, gave much lands to this church between the rivers Tees
and Tyne, which King Alfred confirmed by his charter.

In William the Conqueror’s days it was reputed a county palatine or
principality, and did engrave upon its seal an armed chevalier,
holding a naked sword in one hand, and in the other the arms of the
bishopric, viz. Azure, a plain cross between four lions rampant Or.

But the immunities of this church of Durham were shortened by the
statute 27 Henry VIII., and the lordly absolute power of this
bishopric conferred upon the king. Afterwards, temp. Edw. VI. the
lands and whole title of the bishopric of Durham was by act of
parliament conferred upon that king, which act was repealed 1 Queen
Mary, when the dissolved bishopric and the royalties of it were in a
measure revived and restored as it now stands.

       *     *     *     *     *

In this parish is that famous and well-known spring of water called
Holy-well (so named the inhabitants say, for that the virtues of this
water was first discovered on Allhallows-day). The same stands in a
dark cavern of the sea-cliff rocks, beneath full sea-mark on
spring-tides; from the top of which cavern falls down or distils
continually drops of water, from the white, blue, red, and green veins
of those rocks. And accordingly, in the place where those drops of
water fall, it swells to a lump of considerable bigness, and there
petrifies to the hardness of ice, glass, or freestone, of the several
colours aforesaid, according to the nature of those veins in the rock
from whence it proceeds, and is of a hard brittle nature, apt to break
like glass.

The virtues of this water are very great. It is incredible what
numbers in summer season frequent this place and waters from counties
far distant.

Chynowen, now Chynoweth, id est, New-house, was the voke-lands of a
considerable manor, under which jurisdiction this parish was taxed, 20
Will. I. 1087, from which place was denominated an old British family
of gentlemen, now in possession thereof, surnamed De Chynoweth; which
(were not comparisons odious) I would, for antiquity, rank with or
before the tribe of any other family extant in this province; though I
do not understand their estate, or post in the public service of their
country, was ever above the degree of a juryman of the parish of
Chynoweth (now Cuthbert), or that of a hundred constable; for, if
tradition may be credited, some of this blood were possessed of those
very lands before the Norman Conquest, and then at length, after the
manner of the French, writ de Chynoweth.

The present possesser, John Chynoweth, Gent. giveth for his arms,
Sable, on a fess Or, three eagles’ heads erased Gules.

Carynas, or Carrynas, id est, dead carrions, in this parish, it seems,
was so denominated from the lodging of such dead bodies of bullocks,
horses, or sheep, as died of age, poverty, or sickness, and were
either on trees, or in carrion pools, laid up here for hunters or
their dogs. It is the dwelling of John Davis, Gent. that married
Lannar, alias Vincent; his father Hoblyn, of Penhall; his grandfather.


TONKIN.

By the register of this parish (which is very ancient) it appears that
in the year 1569 there was a great plague here, by which died, from
the 20th of August to the 10th of November, seventy people, and it
then abating, from the 25th of December to the 23d of February fifteen
more; which is the more considerable, for that in the parish at
present, in its flourishing condition, there are not above three
hundred and fifty souls; and so healthy is the place in general, that
I have been assured by Mr. Bradford, the present Minister, there was
not a single burial from the 12th of September, 1699, to the 18th of
October, 1700, the year following.

The Holy Well, if it may properly be so called, (it being nothing but
a little water dropping out of the cliff under Kelsey, in a small cove
made by the sea, to be come at only when the tide is out,) has been
much frequented of late, and several strange cures attributed to it.
It is a water that petrifies of itself, as may be seen by the
incrustations on the rock over which it runs; and these incrustations
make the ascent to it very slippery and dangerous.

The Manor of Hellanclose, that is, the four halls, belonged to Robert
Trencreek, Esq. fell to Degory Polwhele, Esq. who sold it to Sir
Richard Robartes, in whose family it still is, Henry Earl of Radnor
being the present lord thereof. The barton has been in lease for four
generations to the Hoskins, the wealthiest farmers in those parts. Mr.
Joseph Hoskin is the present possessor.

The church is seated upon the top of a hill, and so visible at a great
distance.

One part of the parish is drowned in the sands, and that promontory of
land is called Kelsey, famous for feeding the sweetest mutton (though
but small) in England.


THE EDITOR.

  This parish contains 2009 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2552    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           185    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    269   |    289   |    322   |    487
    giving an increase of 81 per cent. in 30 years.
  The parish feast is celebrated on the Sunday next after the 4th of
    October.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Thomas Stabback, instituted in 1809; he is
    also patron of the vicarage.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is contiguous to Crantock, and has precisely the same
geological structure.




ST. CUBYE, alias TREGONY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north Probus
and the Val river; east, St. Tue; west, Ruan Lanyhorne. This new name
is taken from the tutelar patron and guardian of this church after it
was erected; for in the Domesday Tax, 1087, this district passed under
the names of Trigony, Tregny, and Tregony Medan.

At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester into the value of Cornish benefices, 1294, it was rated by
the name of Ecclesia de Tregny, cvi_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ibidem xx_s._
in dec. de Powdre. In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, 10_l._ 4_s._ by the
name of St. Cuby and Januarius. The patronage formerly in the prior of
Bodman, who endowed it, now Prideaux; the incumbent Bedford; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 91_l._ 13_s._
9_d._ The borough of Tregony 71_l._ 10_s._

The history of St. Cuby. He was the son to Solomon, Duke, King, or
Earl of Cornwall, about the year 350; and being bred up a zealous
Christian of the orthodox faith, and finding the churches of Britain
much pestered with the heresy of the Arians, who denied the equality
of the persons in the Trinity or Godhead, holding one to be before or
superior to the other, Cuby not inclining to receive this new
doctrine, especially having read some of the writings of St. Hilary,
Bishop of Poictiers in Gaul, in opposition thereto; he made addresses
to that worthy father in order to his better instruction; by whom he
was kindly invited into Gaul, and went there accordingly. He was so
charmed with the wisdom, piety, and holy doctrine of St. Hilary, that
he became his disciple, and was by him ordained or consecrated priest,
and took upon him the office of a preacher; in which capacity he grew
so famous for his preachings in that country, he was at length, by St.
Hilary, sent missioner of the gospel into North Wales; and he proved
so successful therein, that the greatest part of the people were
converted to the Christian faith, and the altars and images of
Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Minerva, and other gods worshipped by the
Britons and Romans there, were thrown down and defaced. Capgrave, who
compiled his life, tells us that St. Cuby wrought miracles, gave sight
to the blind, cleansed the leprous, caused the dumb to speak, cured
the palsy, and those possessed of devils. Moreover, saith he, Cuby was
in Ireland, where he preached the gospel, and built churches there
before St. Patrick came into that country. And he further saith of
him, that he was very studious of the peace of the church. And Bale
tells us he was such a self-denying man that, after his father’s
death, he refused the dominion of Cornwall, his fortune, and wealth,
out of a desire he had to acquire learning, and to preach the gospel.

Leland tells us in his Itinerary Manuscripts, that St. Hilary made St.
Cuby Bishop of the Isle of Anglesey; that he died about the year of
our Lord 400; after his death his disciples set up his shrine, that
is, his bones, in his church there; and when the Irishmen of Dublin, a
thousand years after, in June 1404, invaded the island and found this
relic, they carried away the same, and set it up in the church of the
Holy Trinity in Dublin. Nevertheless there are still extant in the
Isle of Anglesey three notable monuments of him and his master, viz.
Point Hilary, Holyhead, and Caer-Cuby, viz. Cuby’s City or Castle.

That Tregony Borough was invested with the privileges of a manor and
court-leet, before the Norman Conquest, Domesday Roll informs us. How
long before by prescription, no man living can tell. King Henry I.
(the Earldom of Cornwall being then vested in the Crown) gave it the
freedom of sending two burgesses, citizens, or townsmen, to sit in
Parliament as its representatives, to be chosen by the majority of the
townsmen that were housekeepers; which favour was obtained upon the
humble petition of Henry de Pomeroy, lord of this manor, temp. of the
said Henry I. But this place was not incorporated but by the charter
of King James I. 1621; and consists of a mayor, recorder, and eight
capital burgesses, the eldest of which is justice of the peace for
life within the borough. It hath also a weekly market on Saturdays,
and fairs yearly upon May 3, July 25, September 1, November 6, and
Shrove Tuesday. The castle of Tregony, as tradition saith, was built
by the said Pomeroy, on behalf of John Earl of Cornwall, in opposition
to King Richard I. his elder brother, then beyond the seas in the Holy
War. The chief inhabitants of this town are Mr. Tonkin, Mr. Penlyer,
Mr. Peters, Mr. Earle. The arms of which borough are, a pine-apple, or
pomegranate, on its stem, with two leaves.

This Pomeroy was the descendant of Ralph de Pomeroy, or Pomeraye, that
came into England with William the Conqueror, and was such a friend
and favourite of his, as Dugdale saith in his Baronage, that he
conferred upon him fifty-eight lordships, whereof this Tregony and
Wich (now Mary Wike) in Cornwall, were two; perhaps such lands as fell
to the Crown by virtue of their lord or owner’s rebellion against the
Conqueror in that insurrection at Exeter, in the second year of his
reign. This Ralph de Pomeroy had issue Joel, that married one of the
natural daughters of King Henry I. by Corbet’s daughter (mother also
by him of Reginald Fitz-Harry, Earl of Cornwall); the which Joel had
issue by her Henry and Josceline. Henry married de Villie’s daughter,
and by her had issue Sir Henry de Pomeray, lord of this place, and
Bury Pomeroy in Devon, who sided with John Earl of Morton and Cornwall
against Richard I. then beyond the seas; and afterwards gave to the
Knight Hospitallers of St. John the Baptist, the church of Maddarne in
Penwith.

One Sir Roger Pomeray of this tribe cousin and heir to Roger de
Vallorta, lord of the castle of Trematon, dead without issue male, did
by deed 12 Edward III. release to Prince Edward, then created Duke of
Cornwall, all his right, title, and interest in the said castle and
manor of Trematon; in consideration whereof King Edward III. granted
him and his heirs an annuity of 40_l._ per annum, to be paid out of
the Exchequer. The last gentleman of these Tregony Pomerays, temp.
Elizabeth, left issue one only daughter, married to Richard Penkivell,
of Resuna, Esq. in whom is terminated the name and estate of that
family, who gave for their arms, Or, a lion rampant Gules, within a
bordure engrailed Sable.

Mr. Penkivell, lord of this manor, borough, and leet, temp. Charles I.
having wasted his whole patrimony in this and other places, sold this
manor of Tregony Pomeroy to Hugh Boscawen, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 10
Charles I. from whom it passed by descent to his son Hugh Boscawen,
Esq. father of William Boscawen, Esq. who settled it as part of his
wife’s jointure, on the Lady Anne FitzGerald, daughter of the Right
Hon. Charles Earl of Kildare, who, over-living her husband, was
married to Francis Robartes, Esq. youngest son of the Right Hon. John
Earl of Radnor, who is now, in her right, as freehold for life, in
full possession thereof. The arms of Penkivell are, in a field Argent,
two chevrons and in chief a lion passant Gules.

King John by virtue of his manor of Tybester (vide CREED) granted the
liberty of fishing, or the royalty of the river Val, to one of the
Pomeroys, lord of the manor.

To remove an action at law depending in the court-leet of Tregony, the
writ of certiorari, or avedas ad curiam, was thus directed, as was
also the precept for members of parliament. Seneschallo et Ballivo
Henrici Pomeray, Manerii sui de Tregoni Pomeraye, in comitatu
Cornubiæ, salutem; again, ad curiam C. W. Arm. de Tregony in comitatu
Cornubiæ salutem. Who this C. W. Esq. set down in the Exchequer should
be, query? I take it to be Charles or Christopher Wolvedon, of Golden;
and this to be that manor set down in the Domesday Tax, by the name of
Tregny Medan aforesaid.

At Crego, that is a burrow, bank, or tumulus, in this parish, liveth
Charles Trevanion, Esq. barrister at law, that married ―――― Curthorp,
of London; his father ..., his grandfather Arundel, originally
descended from the Trevanions of Carhayes and Tregathin, who is that
great though unfortunate gentleman, who at his own proper cost and
charges, and for his own benefit, by virtue of an act of parliament,
19 Charles II. undertook to make the river Val navigable as far as
Crowe-hill, in St. Stephen’s; and though his first summer’s work
seemed to favour his design, bringing the salt water by two or three
sluices above Tregony Bridge, the place of its old flux and reflux,
yet by reason of the great and rapid confluence and washes of the Val
river, in the winter season, after the foundation of the walls of
those sluices being made upon mud or osier ground, where the sea was
driven back as aforesaid, were undermined, fell down, and were
comparatively driven away. However the good undertaker was not
discouraged at this misfortune, but re-edified the same the summer
following; and so on for many summers after with greater skill, cost,
and charges. But alas! still the lofty current of the river Val, in
winter season, was such a malicious and invincible enemy to this noble
project, that, as before, it continually undermined the walls of those
sluices for about the space of twenty years, so that the very worthy
gentlemen aforesaid, in order honestly to defray the charges of this
work, hath spent the greatest part of this fine estate, and given over
his undertaking as too difficult and unprofitable an enterprize.

At Carreth, in this parish, i. e. rock, grave, or tumulus, dwelleth
―――― Hearle, Gent, doctor or practitioner in physic, son of ――――
Hearle, Rector of St. Hearne, who by the honest practice of his
profession, and small fees, hath advanced himself to considerable
wealth and reputation in those parts. He married Nance, and hath issue
James Hearle, that married Daye, and Glynn; and Hearle, a student in
physic, that married the daughter and heir of Edmund Hals, doctor of
physic, by Curthop, of London, a younger brother of the Halses, of
Efford, in Devon, by whom he had a considerable estate.

The Right Honourable Hugh Boscawen, Esq. Privy Councillor to William
III. Lord and High Lord of this town, built a fair house or hospital
within the same for poor people, and endowed it with lands of
considerable value.


TONKIN.

The Manor of Crogith, which perhaps signifies the wooden cross, has
always gone with the same owner as Carhays. The barton is at present
the seat, on lease under Mr. Trevanion, of John Croaker, Esq.

As you enter into this parish from the West, you pass over a stone
bridge of ―――― arches, at the foot of which, and in the meadows
around, stood the old town of Tregony, part of the ruins of which are
sometimes visible after great floods; and a little to the north of the
bridge are still standing a part of the walls belonging to the church
dedicated to St. James Minor, which gives the title of rector to the
incumbent at St. Cubye, although he is not obliged to take a distinct
presentation. The patron, Prideaux of Devonshire.


THE EDITOR.

Much of uninteresting legend has been omitted from Hals respecting the
patron saint, and some fanciful etymologies from him and from Tonkin.

Mr. Whitaker has collected every thing that can be known or
conjectured respecting the ancient state, not of Tregony, but of a
town or city supposed of great commercial and ecclesiastical
importance, which must have stood nearly on the same spot.

Mr. Whitaker describes the ancient castle, and a priory adjacent to
it. The whole, including further particulars of the patron saint, is
much too long for this parochial history. It may be found in Mr.
Whitaker’s work, “The Cathedrals of Cornwall historically surveyed,” 2
vols. 4to, 1804, vol. II. sec. ii.

Bishop Tanner says of Tregony, in his Notitia Monastica, the advowson
of the Priory of Tregony, as belonging to the Abbey of De Valle, in
Normandy, is mentioned fin. div. com. 52 Hen. III. n. 18. Perhaps,
instead of the priory, it should have been only the rectory or church
of St. James, in Tregony; which, by means of some exchange, was made
over by the abbot and convent of De Valle to the prior and convent of
Merton, to whom it was appropriated, and a vicarage endowed by Peter
Quiril, Bishop of Exeter.

Dugdale, edit. 1830, vol. VI. p. 1045, repeats from Tanner, and adds
in a note, Tanner says: Vide inter munimenta Eccl. Cath. Exon, cartam
Abbatis et Conventus de Valle, de resignatione hujus Prioratus. See
also MS. Cole, British Museum, vol. XL. p. 59.

  Cubye contains 2,186 statute acres.
  Annual Return of the Real Property, as       £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815 £2,402
  Tregony                         841        3243    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831, the parish  £187 15_s._
  ――――               the town     466  3      653   18    0
  Population,   { in 1801,|in 1811, |in 1821, |in 1831,
    The parish, {     139 |    152  |    140  |    155
    The town,   {     937 |    923  |   1035  |   1127
                     ―――― |   ――――  |   ――――  |   ――――
                     1076 |   1075  |   1175  |   1282
    giving an increase on the whole of 19 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Thomas Vaughan, presented by the Marquis of
    Cleveland in 1825.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Cubye extends much further south than the parishes of Cornelly and
Creed; but it is composed of similar kinds of rocks, principally
abounding in beds of a lamellar micaceous rock, all belonging to the
micaceous series.




CURY, OR CURYE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Kerryer, and hath upon the east St.
Martin’s, south Mullion, west Gunwallo, north Maugan in Meneage.

At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, 1294, into the value of Cornish Benefices, this parish
church was not extant or named; but I find, 24th Henry VI. the same
was rated to fifteenths by the name of Curytowne 15_s._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, it is called Curyton, of the same signification. It
goes in presentation and consolidation with Breock, Germow, and
Gunwallow. The patronage in the Crown; the rectory in ...; the
incumbent Trewinard; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land
Tax, 1696, 108_l._ 12_s._

At the time of Domesday Roll (1087) this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Buchent, now Bochym, that is to say, the cow, kine, or
cattle house or lodge; which place gave name and origin to an old
family of gentlemen surnamed de Bochym, tempore Henry VIII. who were
lords of this manor and barton, till such time as John Bochym, tempore
Edward VI. entered into actual rebellion against that prince, under
conduct of Humphry Arundell, Esq. Governor of St. Michael’s Mount, and
others, whose force and power being suppressed by John Lord Russell,
lieutenant-general of that prince at Exeter (as is elsewhere shown),
and those rebels attainted of high treason, their lands were forfeited
to the Crown. Whereupon King Edward VI. gave this barton and manor to
Reginald Mohun, sheriff of Cornwall 6 Edward VI. who gave this barton
of Bochym to one of his daughters, married to Bellot, but settled it
upon his great-grandson, William Mohun, Esq. now in possession
thereof. Lastly, by this rebellion Bochym lost not only his lands, but
his life also. The arms of Bochym were, Argent, on a chief Sable three
mullets pierced of the Field.

If those Bellots came not into England with William the Conqueror,
they were of the number of those three thousand French gentlemen that
came out of France into this land with Isabel, wife of King Edward II.
who all settled themselves in this kingdom, as our chronicles and
Verstegan testify. Since they came to Bochym they married with Mohun,
Monk, Pendarves; and the present possessor, Renatus Bellot, esq. one
of her majesty’s commissioners for the peace, married the inheritrix
of Spour of Trebatha, who is dead without issue. The arms of Bellot
are, in a field Argent, on a chief Gules three cinquefoils of the
Field.

Since the writing of the above, this estate of Bellot’s is all spent
by riot and excess, and, as I take it, the name extinct in those
parts; and this barton sold to Robinson.

Bonython is in this parish; from whence was denominated an ancient
family of gentlemen surnamed de Bonithon, who for many descents
flourished here in good reputation till the reign of Queen Anne; at
which time Charles Bonython, Esq. serjeant-at-law, sold this barton to
one Carpenter, now in possession thereof. The arms of Bonithon were,
Argent, a chevron between three fleur-de-lis Sable.


TONKIN.

Charles Bonython, of Bonython, in this parish, was a serjeant-at-law,
and steward of Westminster, which city he also represented in
parliament. He married Mary, the daughter of ―――― Livesay, Esq. of
Livesay, in Lincolnshire. His father, John Bonython, married Ann, a
daughter of Hugh Trevanion, of Trelegon, Esq. His grandfather, Thomas
Bonython, married Frances, the daughter of Sir John Parker, of London.

From this place also were descended the Bonythons of Carclew, in
Milor.

This Charles Bonython, however, in a fit of madness shot himself in
his own house in London, leaving two sons, Richard and John, and a
daughter, married to Thomas Pearse, of Helatin. Richard Bonython, the
eldest son, a very ingenious gentleman, was called to the Bar; but
being tainted likewise with his father’s distemper, first sold
portions of his estate in parcels, and at last this barton, which had
been so long in his family, to Humphry Carpenter, jun.; and then, to
complete the tragedy, for he was never easy in his mind after this
sale, first of all he set fire to his chambers in Lincoln’s-inn, burnt
all his papers, bonds, &c. and then stabbed himself with his sword,
but not effectually; but he then threw himself out of the window, and
died on the spot.

John Bonython, the second son, was bred in King’s college, Cambridge,
and is now an eminent physician in Bristol.

Roskymer Bonython, of this place, was Sheriff of Cornwall in the 17th
James I. A.D. 1619.

Bochym. In 1703 this barton belonged to Renatus Bellot, Esq. who then
represented the borough of Michell in parliament. He married the
inheritrix of Spoure of Trebartha. He died of a fever in 1709, leaving
an only son of the same name, who died soon after his father, when the
estate was sold for the payment of debts to George Robinson, Esq. who
has made it his seat.

In this parish is the manor of Skewys, supposed to be so called from
skeu, a shadow. It was formerly the seat of a family of the same name,
of which John Skewys was sheriff of the county in the 12th year of
Henry VIII.


THE EDITOR.

Several supposed etymologies have been omitted from Mr. Hals and from
Mr. Tonkin, as being evidently unfounded. Bonython appears to be
derived from the well-known word for an house, and possibly ethon,
furze.

  This parish contains 2,673 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2529    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           221    9    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {     304  |    347   |     505  |     525
    giving an increase of 73 per cent. in 30 years.
  Parish Feast on the nearest Sunday to November the second, or to all
    Souls Day.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The most southern portion of Cury forms a part of Goonhilly Downs,
which rest on a dark and rather hard serpentine, spangled with small
scales of diallage, and having asbestos, indurated talc, and other
magnesian minerals, lining the joints, by which this rock may be
easily split. The remainder of the parish is composed of compact and
schistose hornblend rocks, of the calcareous series, which are best
exposed on the shores of Gunwalloe.




DAVIDSTOWE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the north
Lesnewith, west Lanteglos, south Altar Nunn, east Treneglos. Its
present name David refers to the tutelar guardian or patron of this
church, David, Bishop of Menevia in Wales. At the time of the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of
Cornish benefices, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto David in Decanatu de Major
Trigshire was rated vii_l._ v_s._ Vicar ibidem xv_s._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition and Valor Beneficiorum 8_l._ The patronage in the Crown,
the incumbent Pennington; the rectory in possession of ――――, and the
parish rated to the four shillings in the pound Land Tax 1696, 163_l._
10_s._

_The History of St David._ He was a Welsh Briton by birth, but of what
place in Wales I know not, about the year 840; bred up in the
Christian religion; afterwards became learned in all the liberal arts
and sciences; was ordained priest, and by reason of his regular living
and sanctity of life, was constituted Presul or Bishop of Menevia, and
held the Christian faith in great purity, opposite to the doctrines of
Arius and Pelagius.

Near this church is situate the barton of Davidstowe, formerly the
lands of ―――― Pearse, Gent. whose daughter and heir carried it,
together with herself, in marriage, to John Nicholls, Esq. whose son
married Erisey, his grandson a daughter of Sir Joseph Tredinham,
Knight, as his father did Pearse.

Since which time the heir general of this family of Nicholls is
married to ―――― Glynn, of Glynn, Esq.


TONKIN.

That this parish was called Davidstow from St. David, the titular
saint of the Welsh, I make no question; for I have never heard that
the holy King David was ever enlisted for the patron of a Christian
church. I shall say no more of St. David, than that he was uncle to
King Arthur, and therefore it is not wonderful that this church should
be dedicated to him; and that after he had attained the age of a
hundred and forty-six years he died at his bishopric of Menevia, in
Wales, since called from him St. David’s, A.D. 642.


EDITOR.

St. David appears to have been a very extraordinary person, in
reference to the period in which he lived. Giraldus Cambrensis, in his
Itinerarium Cambriæ, published with annotations by David Powell, at
London, 1585, 8vo. and by Sir Richard Hoare, in 2 vols. 4to. 1806,
gives many particulars of St. David, his predecessor in the bishopric;
and the praises bestowed by Giraldus on a founder of monasteries may
be esteemed deserving of credit, as he was a professed and violent
enemy to the monastic orders. He is even said to have added to the
Litany, “A monachorum malitia libera nos, Domine,” in an age when
their power and influence were esteemed irresistible.

St. David is said to have been the son of Xantus, Prince of Caretica,
since named Cardiganshire. He was made a priest early in life, and
then participating in the opinion universally prevalent, that the
Deity would alone be propitiated by men rendering themselves useless
to their fellow-creatures, by assuming almost the feelings and habits
of brute beasts, and by adding, so far as they were able, to the
misery and wretchedness of the human race, he betook himself to an
ascetic life in the Isle of Wight, under the guidance of one Paulinus.
But having at length acquired a sufficient stock of reputed sanctity
by these efficacious means, he emerged like others from the desert,
added to the establishments at Glastonbury, or as some say refounded
the great work of St. Joseph of Arimathea, and then created twelve
monasteries in Wales.

But St. David owes the largest share of his popularity to the active
part which he took in the controversy at that time dividing the
Western church; one party maintaining that it had pleased Almighty God
to bestow at once on his creatures, and from their births, the
inclination and capability of serving him; the other, that these gifts
were reserved for some future period, or dealt out from time to time,
and bit by bit. The latter opinion having been voted to be the
orthodox faith, was zealously supported by St. David against the
former, known as the Pelagian heresy.

He certainly lived to a very advanced age, and was buried in the
cathedral at Menevia; from whence, we have the testimony of St.
Kentigern that his soul was visibly carried by angels into heaven. It
is more certain that about the year 962 his relics were transported to
Glastonbury, as this transaction is circumstantially related by John
of Glastonbury, in his history of that splendid abbey, published by
Hearne.

St. David affords a remarkable instance, not merely of the fact that
events are wrested to suit the taste or the prejudices of aftertimes,
but of their being utterly inverted and transformed.

When Eastern fictions became blended with the chivalry of Europe, this
anchorite, polemic divine, and apostle of his native country, appeared
as a military hero, expelling the Saxons from Wales, at the head of an
army in which each individual was distinguished from their Pagan
adversaries by affixing to his helmet the plant which has since been
ever venerated by the Welch. And finally, Mr. Richard Johnson, a canon
of Exeter, having adopted the mystical number seven for the Champions
of Christendom, and bestowed the undue proportion of four out of seven
on these Islands, makes St. David, the champion of Wales, perform all
the ordinary achievements of knight errantry, and adding, as was
highly proper, a spirit of gallantry to that of valour, presents him
as a lover eloping from Jerusalem with an Hebrew princess, who on her
part had previously, by entreaties to her father, preserved the hero’s
life.

The great tithes of this parish belonged to the priory of Trewardruth,
the vicarage to the duchy.

  This parish contains 5734 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3393    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           235    5    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    217   |    262   |    363   |    389
    giving an increase of nearly 80 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish extends southward from the church to the foot of the
granite hills near Roughtor. The northern part consists of the same
rocks as St. Cleather. On the common near the church numerous large
blocks and boulders of rock occur, composed of crystalline hornblend,
in a basis of compact felspar. It resembles the rock already noticed
on the side of the hills descending to Pollaphant, in the parish of
Alternun.




ST. DENIS.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the north, St
Columb; east, Roach; south, St. Stephen’s, in Brannell; west, St.
Enedor. As for the name, it is derived from the tutelar guardian and
patron of this Church, St. Denis or Dionysius the Areopagite,
President of Athens, in Greece, whose name Dionisius in Latin, hath a
Greek original, viz. from διονυσος Dionusos, Bucchus, Vini Inventor;
quod excitet mentem.

This place I take to be that Landines, or Landineri, taxed in Domesday
Roll 20 William I. 1087, that is to say, Denis’s church, temple, or
chapel; though, indeed, I meet not with the name thereof in any other
authentic record till Wolsey’s Inquisition into the value of benefices
in Cornwall 1521; at which time it was wholly appropriated, or
impropriated, together with St. Stephen’s, to the Rector of Carhayes,
and consolidated into it; and this parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax, 1696, 62_l._ 4_s._ The patronage in (Tanner[39]) Pitt. The
incumbent (Tanner[39]) Sutton.

St. Denis was born in the city of Athens in Greece at the time of
Tiberius’s reign over the empire; a place renowned for wisdom,
learning, arts and sciences. He was descended of a rich and honourable
family, morally just, courteous, and loving to strangers. From his
youth he was bred up and addicted to learning, and became so eminent
therein, that he had a chief place amongst the magistrates and rulers
of the academy and city of Athens. He was most elegant in the Attic
tongue, as being the dialect of his native country, and consequently a
good rhetorician. But that which made him more eminent was his skill
in the doctrine of the Stoics, Epicureans, and other philosophers.

Mr. Hals continues through several pages the history of St. Denis, but
as the facts want altogether the support of historical authority, and
do not include the most interesting of all, that of his walking from
Montmartre, where the sentence of decapitation was executed, to the
place since denominated from him, with his head under his arm, I shall
omit the whole; as also an account of blood having fallen in this
remote and sequestered churchyard, as the best and most authentic mode
of apprising the whole nation that their fleet would be defeated by
the Dutch, and that a plague would break out in London; notwithstanding
that some of the stones, having blood upon them, were seen by the
author himself.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has not a single observation different from Hals on this
parish.


THE EDITOR.

The church of St. Denis is placed on the top of a hill, without any
appearance of habitations, and very little of cultivation; and the
flat country round it is destroyed in the most efficacious manner,
having been turned over and over again down to the solid rock, in what
is termed streaming for tin.

The only village of any size in the parish is called Hendra. The late
Mr. Thomas Rawlings, of Padstow, had some property in the parish, but
much the greater part belongs to Lord Falmouth.

This parish, united in the same presentation with St. Michael Carhayes
and St. Stephen in Branwell, may claim a share in the honour of Robert
Dunkin, who was ejected in the interregnum and restored with the
monarchy, and who has acquired celebrity by entering the field as a
controversialist with the great John Milton.

  This parish contains 2789 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1524    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           318    1    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {     318  |     478  |     592  |     721
    giving an increase of 126 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The southern part, situated on granite, amounts to more than half the
parish. Near Restowrick the granite is large-grained and crystalline,
like that of the range of Roughtor and Brown Willy; but it is
associated with porcelainous granite, similar to that of Breage and of
St. Stephen’s (which will be noticed under the latter parish), and
also with shorl and shorl rocks, as in Roach where the rocks are
better displayed.


     [39]  Erased, and the other names substituted.




ST. DOMINICK.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Eastwellshire, and hath upon the north,
Calstock; east, the Tamar river; south, part of Landulph; west, St.
Mellen. For the modern name of this parish and church, it is derived
from St. Dominick the monk of Spain, presidual saint and tutelar
guardian of this church, who instituted that religious order of men
called Ordo Prædicatorum, or the Order of Preaching Monks or Friars,
(who taught the Gospel without hire or reward, except what was given
them of charity or alms, as the Franciscans did); he flourished anno
Dom. 1215. At the time of Domesday Roll 20 William I. 1087, this
district was taxed under the name of Halton. In the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, Ecclesia Sancti Dominici, in
Decanatu de Estwellshire, was rated to first fruits or annats iii_l._
vi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it was valued at 23_l._
11_s._ The patronage in Clarke, the incumbent Clarke, and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 164_l._ 8_s._

History of St. Dominick, abridged from Hals:

He was born at Calarvega in Spain, about the year 1167. His father was
Don Felix de Gusman, his mother Donna Giovanna Deza, both well
descended and faithful servants of God. Dominick early distinguished
himself by his great ability, diligence, and proficiency in learning.
He first studied at the University of Placentia, and from thence he
was removed to Salamanca by Frederick the Second, King of Castille. He
here obtained a reputation so far above all the other students as to
induce Don Diego, Bishop of Osuna, to select him as the most proper
person to become a canon in his church. Dominick was soon after
appointed by Don Alonzo, King of Castile, to accompany his ambassador
to the Court of France. On this journey the saint first encountered
some of the Albigenses, and to the extinction of their heresy he
chiefly devoted the remainder of his life, by instituting his
celebrated order of Dominican Preaching Friars A.D. 1215, in imitation
of the Franciscans, established about six years before. St. Dominick
did not, however, implicitly rely on his own exertions, or on those of
his order, suited as it was to the ignorance and abject slavery of
those times; but called loudly to their aid the secular arm, and
established the Inquisition, so that after thousands had been
converted from their heresy, and tens of thousands massacred, the
conquerors enjoyed in the possession of their plundered property the
additional conscious satisfaction of having freed the church from
heretics so audacious as to deny that wheaten[40] flour was entirely
changed into the body of Christ.

Dominick departed this life in the odour of sanctity on the 6th of
August 1221, having completed his fifty-first year. Having performed
various miracles, and even raised people from the dead, he was
canonised by Gregory IX. in 1234. Before the close of his short life,
a great number of houses were founded throughout Europe for his
disciples, and, faithful to the original object of the new order, he
bequeathed to their charge the Tribunal of the Inquisition.

The Dominicans and Franciscans for a long time supported the power of
Rome, according to the dream of Pope Innocent III. in which he saw the
Lateran Church in danger of falling down, and St. Dominick sustaining
its weight. But finally, the sale of indulgences, through the medium
of this order, excited the resentment or the envy of others, and Friar
Martin Luther, assisted by the growing genius of the age, crumbled to
pieces a spiritual authority, of which it was fondly believed that
destiny had said with more truth than of its temporal predecessor,

     His ego nec metas rerum nec tempora pono;
     Imperium sine fine dedi.

Hall-ton, in this parish, id est, either a town notable for a hall, or
a moor-town; wherefore, the natural or artificial circumstance of the
place must be considered to determine which. By this name the now
parish of St. Dominick, as aforesaid, was taxed in the Domesday Roll
20 William I. 1087, which place gave name and original to an old
family of gentlemen, surnamed De Halton, who flourished here in gentle
degree from the Norman Conquest to the ninth year of Edward the
Second, at which time Joan, the only daughter and heir of Richard de
Halton, Lord also of the Manor of Hardfast, in this county, was
married to Robert Wendyn, of Compton Gifford, in Devon, who had issue
by Joan de Halton, one only daughter, that became his heir, married to
John Whiteleigh, of Efford, in Devon, father of Richard Whiteleigh,
Sheriff of Devon 9 Richard II. grandfather of Richard Whiteleigh, Esq.
Sheriff of Devon 6 Henry VII. whose two daughters and heirs were
married to Roger Grenvill, of Stowe, and Richard Hals, of Kenedon,
from whom the writer of this book is lineally descended. Of this
family was John de Halton, Bishop of Carlisle, who died 1318.

The 19th of Elizabeth, Anthony Rous, Esq. then Sheriff of Cornwall,
was possessed of this place; as was also his son Anthony Rous, Esq.
Sheriff of Cornwall 44th Elizabeth. But ―――― Rous, Esq. the last
possessor of this barton, dying without issue, as I take it, passed
these lands to his widow for payment of debts, who afterwards married
―――― Cossens, and then sold it to her brother Henry Clerk, gent, that
married ―――― Sescomb, of St. Kevorne, now in possession thereof. Mr.
Clerk’s father came into those parts as steward to the Lady Drummond.

Rous’s arms are, Or, an eagle displayed Azure, pruning her wings,
langued Gules.


TONKIN.

Crockaddon in this parish is the mansion house of James Trevisa, Esq.
descended from John Trevisa, born in this place, as I am informed, and
bred at Oxford. He became a secular priest and chaplain to James Lord
Berkeley, by whom he was made vicar of Berkeley in Gloucestershire,
and at his request he translated the Bible into English, although the
same had been done by John Wickliff fifty years before, but not with
that perfection of language that Trevisa did it, although Trevisa’s
translation fell as far short of Tindall’s in Henry the Eighth’s days;
by reason the English language was still improving to a higher pitch,
for they all agreed in the original sense and meaning of the text.
Trevisa also translated Bartholomew de Proprietatibus Rerum, the
Polychronicon of Ralph Higden, and divers other Treatises. He died a
very aged man, about 1410, since which time the descendants of his
family have flourished in good fame in those parts.

Their arms are, Gules, a garb Or.

Pentilly is the mansion of Sir James Tilly, Knt. formerly steward to
Sir John Corington, who married first, a daughter of Sir Henry Vane,
and was afterwards knighted by King James the Second. After this,
having assumed the arms of Count Tilly, of Germany, together with his
supporters, he had them taken from him, and was fined by the kings at
arms several hundreds for his presumption. This occurrence gave rise
to an unfounded story of his having been degraded from his knighthood,
for that he was not a gentleman either of blood, arms, or descent; but
it is clear that a knight need not be a gentleman of blood, witness
the number at present that are not so. To his second wife he married
the widow of Sir John Corington, his former master; she was one of the
daughters of Sir Richard Chiverton, of London; but he did not leave
any remaining issue by either of his wives. This Pentilly is a new
name given by himself to this his seat, from its situation on the side
of a steep hill, having a pleasant prospect of the river Tamar, and of
the country round about. He has adorned it with fine new buildings,
composed of several towers with gilded balls, and several walks of
lime-trees on the side of the hill. All which together at a distance
made a pretty show, Sir James Tilly dying without issue, left his
estate and his house to his sister’s son, James Tilly Woolley, who, by
the name of James Tilly, Esq. is now, 1734, sheriff of Cornwall.

The manor of Halton, the town in the moor. In Domesday Book it is
called Haltone; and it was one of the manors given by William the
Conqueror to his brother Robert Earl of Morton, when he created him
Earl of Cornwall.

I believe this parish does not derive its name from St. Dominic de
Gusman, the first author of that barbarous tribunal the Inquisition,
the name being anterior to him; but that it has a female patroness,
Sancta Dominica, for in the Taxatio Beneficiarum, A.D. 1291, it is
called Ecclesia Sanctæ Dominicæ, and valued at 3_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._


THE EDITOR.

I believe that St. Dominica must be sought for in the same Canon with
St. Veronica and St. Kurie Eleeeson.

Mr. Lysons says that Francis Rous, distinguished as a member of both
houses during the Protectorate, was born at Halton about the year
1579. He was made provost of Eton College, and died at Acton, in
Middlesex, in January 1659. The property now belongs to Mrs. Bluett,
daughter and heiress of Mr. John Clerk, in whose family were this
manor, and the advowson of the living.

Mr. Lysons further states that Charles Fitz-Geoffry, rector of this
parish, where he died in 1637, published the Life of Sir Francis
Drake, written in lofty verse and when he was only Bachelor of Arts, a
Collection of Latin Verses, &c.

Sir James Tillie appears to have been at the least an eccentric man,
from the fanciful directions which he gave respecting his funeral. He
was succeeded, as has been stated, by his nephew, James Woolley, who
took his name; and the only daughter of this gentleman’s grandson
married the late Mr. John Coryton, of Crockadon, descended by a female
line from the Corytons of Newton. Mr. Coryton was Sheriff of Cornwall
in 1782. His son, Mr. John Tillie Coryton, has built a splendid Gothic
mansion on Pentillie, and made it one of the finest seats in Cornwall.

Both Mr. Hals and Mr. Tonkin have reference to Crockadon and Pentillie
in the parish of St. Dominick, whereas Pentillie is in Pillaton, and
Crockadon in St. Mellion.

  The parish of St. Dominick measures 2,778 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4149     0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          595     4    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    538  |     534  |     690  |     726
    giving an increase of 35 per cent, in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. E, J. Clarke, presented by Edward
    Bluet, Esq. in 1803.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geology of this parish is the same as the southern part of
Calstock and the eastern part of Callington.


     [40] The bread about to be transmuted by consecration into
     actual flesh must be made, at least as to the larger part,
     of flour from wheat, or the conversion will not take place.
     See the Summa totius Theologiæ, by St. Thomas of Aquine,
     Part iii. Quæstio lxxiv. Articulus iii. Conclusio, where the
     authority of St. Augustine is adduced to prove that the meal
     of any inferior or harder grain would be typical of the
     severity enacted by the Laws of Mount Sinai, whereas “Hoc
     Sacramentum pertinet ad suave jugum Christi, et ad veritatem
     jam manifestatam, et ad populum spiritualem. Unde non esset
     materia conveniens hujus sacramenti panis ordeaceus.”――EDIT.




DULO.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north, St. Keyn;
west, Lanreth; east, Morvale; south, Plint. For the modern name of
this district, it is taken from the church, and is compounded of
Du-Lo, Du-Loe, or Loo, id est, God’s Lake or River of Water, either
referring to the Loo River, on which it is situate.

In the Domesday Roll 20 William I. 1087, this parish was rated under
the jurisdiction of Treworgye. At the time of the Inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, into the value of Cornish
benefices, Ecclesia de Dulo in decanatu de West Wellshire, was taxed
at vii_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xxx_s._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition it was rated as a rectory 22_l._ The vicarage 8_l._ 0_s._
11½_d._ the patronage in Seyntaubyn and Arundell alternately. The
incumbent Fincher (Smalle). The parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax 3 William III. 1696, 246_l._ 4_s._ The rectory of the
vicarage is in possession of Knicker (Sandford).

One Forbes, or Forbhas, was presented rector of this parish in the
latter end of Cromwell’s usurpation, and lived here on this fat
benefice, without spending or lending any money, many years, always
pretending want thereof; at length he died suddenly intestate, about
the year 1681, having neither wife nor legitimate child, nor any
relation of his in blood in this kingdom; upon news of whose death Mr.
Arundell, his patron, opened his trunks, and found about three
thousand pounds in gold and silver, and carried it thence to his own
house. The fame and envy of which fact flew suddenly abroad, so that
Mr. Buller, of Morval, had notice thereof, who claimed a part or share
in this treasure, upon pretence of a nuncupative will, wherein Forbes
some days before his death had made him his executor, and the same was
concerted into writing, whereupon he demanded the 3,000_l._ of Mr.
Arundell. But he refusing to deliver the same, Mr. Buller filed a bill
in Chancery against him the said Mr. Arundell, praying relief in the
premises, and that the said money might be brought or deposited in the
said court, which at length was accordingly done; where, after long
discussing this matter between the lawyers and clerks in that court,
in fine, as I was informed, the court, the plaintiff, and the
defendant shared the money amongst them, without the least thanks to,
or remembrance of the deceased wretch Forbes for the same; abundantly
verifying that saying in the Sacred Writings, “man layeth up riches,
but knows not who shall gather them.”

Since the writing of the above, the incumbent, Mr. Fincher, has built
a pretty fine house on the glebe lands of this vicarage, equal if not
superior to any other of that sort in Cornwall of its bigness, except
Altar-nun, as designing to buy the patronage thereof, being a
sinecure, which I interpret too often to be, without care, thought,
regard, or guardianship, over souls, where the rector presents to the
vicarage. But maugre all designs and endeavours of Mr. Fincher to
purchase the patronage of this church, Sir John Seynt-aubyn and Mr.
Arundell, the patrons thereof, sold the same to Balliol College in
Oxford 1701. At the consideration of which fact, as common fame saith,
Mr. Fincher was so dismayed, that forthwith he grew melancholy, and
the grief thereof so depressed his spirits, that he broke his heart,
and departed this life 26th November 1703, at night; and so went to
Heaven in that great tempest and hurricane that then happened, with
many others. The vicar has now all the tithes, paying 40_l._ yearly to
the master or one of the fellows of Balliol College, by act of
parliament. Properly he is the rector of a church, that hath a
parsonage where a vicarage is endowed, to which he presents, as in
this parish; and yet it is supposed, in some places, that person is
the patron, or he in whom the right of patronage is; for before the
second Council of Lateran, A.D. 1131, he had right to the tithes, in
regard of his having endowed the church which he had founded. But the
Council of Lateran aforesaid, under Pope Innocent II. consisting of
two thousand bishops, made it sacrilege and damnation for laymen to
take tithes.

Tre-wer-gy, id est, the village or farm-town, the same, I suppose, in
Domesday Roll, taxed by the name of Treworgan, being still the voke
lands of an ancient barton and manor, which claims the royalty or
liberty of fishing over the river and haven of Loo, by virtue of the
grant thereof from the ancient Earls and Dukes of Cornwall in right of
their honour, manor, borough, and castle of Liskeard, situate upon the
same river, which place was the mansion of the ancient, worshipful,
and gentle family of the Kendalls for many ages; and in particular
here lived Richard de Kendall, Sheriff of Cornwall 8 Richard II. 1385,
as his posterity continued to do till John Kendall, Esq. having no
issue temp. William III. and his estate being incumbered with debt,
sold this barton and manor to William Williams, of Boderick, merchant,
now in possession thereof. The arms of Kendall are, Argent, a chevron
between three dolphins Sable. Ken-dall signifies to see or behold the
dale or valley; otherwise Kendall or Cendall is fine linen; and
Cen-dale may be a corruption of Pendall, id est, the head of the
valley.

Tremada in this parish signifies the extasy or transport town, alias
Tremodart, that is, the dart or javelin affliction (as Cornish-English
for hobel is a dart). This barton and manor, as I am informed, was the
dwelling of the Col-shills, id est, neck-shields; so called from their
wearing, in time of battle, their shield or coat armour with a ribbon
about their neck, originally denominated from Colshill parish, in
Arden hundred, in Warwickshire. And in particular here lived John
Collshill, sheriff of Cornwall 16 Rich. II. 1393; John Collshill was
sheriff of Cornwall 21 Richard II.; John Colshill was sheriff of
Cornwall 17 Henry VI.; John Collshill, Knt. was sheriff of Cornwall 7
Edward IV., whose issue male dying, his inheritance fell amongst his
two daughters, married to Seyntaubyn and Arundell (a younger branch of
the Arundells of Trerice), now in possession thereof, that married
Kelland: his father Drew; and giveth the same arms as the Arundells of
Trerice. The lords of this manor and barton of Tremadah, I suppose,
founded and endowed the vicarage and rectory church of Dulo. Perhaps
the Collshills, since their posterity aforesaid, have long been
patrons thereof. Their manor of Manley Collshill is in St. Veepe. This
gentleman is dead, and the family extinct.

West-north, or rather north-west, is the voke-lands of a dismembered
manor, formerly belonging to the Kendalls of Treworgye, and was by one
of them, temp. Edward IV. given with his daughter in marriage with
Kellyow; whose only daughter and heir was married to ―――― Bastard, a
barrister-at-law, temp. Hen. VIII. which brought this then undivided
manor into that family, who seated themselves therein for several
generations, till Sir William Bastard, Knt. sold it to John Antis,
Gent. Register of the Archdeaconry of Cornwall, now in possession
thereof. Bastard’s arms are painted in several glass windows of this
house, together with divers matches or quarterings; whose arms are,
Or, a chevron Azure. The arms of Kellyow are, Or, a chevron between
two cinquefoils and a mullet Sable.

Trenant in this parish, id est, the valley-town, is the seat of ――――
Medhop, Gent. whose father married Porter. His grandfather, rector of
St. Martin’s by Looe; his great grandfather, rector of the same
parish; which gentlemen, as I am informed, are lineally descended from
the Mydhops of Essex, some of whose ancestors gave lands in
frank-almoine to the Abbey of Furneaux there, 1290, viz. Roger de
Mydhop, son and heir of Henry de Mydhop, who gave for his arms,
Ermine, a lion rampant Azure, crowned Or. See GWILLIM, p. 195.

Tre-wenn, in this parish, id est, the white town, or town-white, is
the dwelling of William Dandy, Gent. attorney-at-law, that got a
considerable estate in that profession. Since the writing of the above
this estate is much impaired, and gone out of the direct to the
collateral heir, of the name of Dandy; which name signifies in
Cornish, deadly, cruel, mortal, fatal.


TONKIN.

This parish is a rectory. The vicarage is valued in the King’s Book at
8_l._ 0_s._ 11_d._ The rectory is a sinecure, and the rector presents
to the vicarage.

Trenant was sold by Mr. Medhope in the 1st year of Queen Anne to
Edward Dennis, of Liskeard, attorney-at-law, who had before a mortgage
on it, and it is now the seat of his son, George Dennis, Esq. sheriff
of Cornwall in the 1st year of George II. In respect to the name of
this parish, I cannot agree with Mr. Hals in supposing it God’s Lake.
I rather interpret it the Black Lake, alluding to the river Looe,
which runs through it, and I guess takes that name from its forming a
deep lake or pool between the two towns and it when the tide is in.


THE EDITOR.

The etymology of Dulo given by Mr. Tonkin appears to be very probable;
but another is quoted by Mr. Bond, in his excellent work, entitled,
“Topographical and Historical Sketches of the Boroughs of East and
West Looe, in Cornwall,” printed by Nichols in 1828, p. 48:

     “In Archbishop Usher’s work, Britannicarum Ecclesiarum
     Antiquitates et Primordia, it appears that the church of St.
     Theliaus, in Wales, is called, Lhan Deilo Vaur, the Church
     of Great Theliaus; and the change of Deilo to Dulo is so
     easy, says a recent writer, that St. Theliaus seems to have
     the best title to this parish, as patron and owner of it. In
     confirmation of this conjecture, says the same writer, we
     find in the barton of Treridern in St. Burian a chapel
     dedicated to St. Dillo, who is indisputably the Theliaus.”

St. Theliau, or Theliauses, was born at Ecclesis Gwenwau, near
Monmouth. He is said to have made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem about the
year 500, with St. David and St. Paternus. On his return he became
Bishop of Landaff, and he has ever since been considered as the patron
of that diocese.

Trewargy, properly Tre-war-gie, the house or town on a stream, is now
the property of Mr. Eliot, a gentleman resident in London.

Trenant has frequently changed its proprietors since the time of Mr.
Hals. It passed from Mr. Dennis to his sister’s son, Sir Christopher
Treise, who was Sheriff of Cornwall at the accession of King George
the Third, and knighted on the occasion of presenting an address. The
property thus devolved on his nephew Sir John Morshead, of Cartuther,
who acquired a large fortune by his marriage, succeeded to an ample
patrimony, dissipated the whole, and left the prefix of three letters
as an inheritance to his son. It was then purchased by Admiral Sir
Edward Buller, and again disposed of after his decease to Mr. Hope,
who at this instant, 1833, offers it for sale. Some at least of these
changes have been ascribed to combinations and arrangements which were
materially varied in the last year.

  This parish contains 5,051 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5094    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           901    5    0
  Population, {in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    704  |     821  |     779  |     928
    giving an increase of about 31 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The structure of this parish is not well explored; where-ever the
rocks make their appearance, they are found to belong to the
calcareous series.




DUNDAGELL, ALIAS DYNDAGELL, ALIAS BOSITHNEY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the north, the
Irish sea; east, Trevalga; south, Lantegles; west, St. Teth. For the
etymology of the first compound word, it signifies the safe, secure,
or impregnable fort or fortress; for the second, safe, secure,
impregnable, or invincible man; or a man so fortified, magnified, or
fenced, by art or nature, that he was not liable to hurt or danger,
referring perhaps to the King or Earl of Cornwall, whose fort or
castle it was; as also the manor of Dundagell, contiguous therewith,
privileged with the jurisdiction of a court leet, and other marks of
grandeur over the adjacent country, still pertaining to the Duke of
Cornwall.

In the Domesday Roll, 20 William I. (1087), this place was taxed under
the name of Dune-cheine. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia Dundagell, alias Bosithney, was valued
viii_l._ the vicar iiii_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, it was valued 8_l._ 11_s._ 2½_d._ the patronage in the Duke of
Cornwall. The incumbent ―――― Chilcott. The rectory in possession of
――. The parish of Dundagell rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
1696, which comprehends the boroughs of Trebennen and Bosithney,
200_l._ 4_s._, which from thence appears to be only adjectives, and
fallen upon the parish, as several other boroughs in Cornwall are.
Those boroughs have a weekly market, and a fair on October 8 yearly.

Trebennen, in the Exchequer, signifies the woman’s town, alias
Trevenna, the spring, marsh, or well of water town.

The arms of these united towns are, King Arthur’s Castle of Dundagell,
port open, on the top three turrets or watch towers. They are
privileged with a court leet, and a mayor chosen annually by a jury
out of the sworn free members, as also with sending two members to sit
in the Commons House of Parliament, elected by the freemen of the
borough that have lands of inheritance there. And the parliament
precept from the sheriff, as also the writ to remove an action from
this court to a superior, must be thus directed:――“Majori et
Burgensibus nostris de Trebennen, alias Bosinny,” otherwise “Majori et
Burgensibus Burgi nostri de Trevenna, alias Bosythny, in comitatu
Cornubiæ, salutem.”

Dundagell gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen,
surnamed De Dundagell, now extinct, of which family was Robert de
Dundagell, who, temp. Richard I., held in this county, by the tenure
of knight service, five knights’ fees. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p.
44.

But that which made this place most famous was the castle and palace
of Dundagell, wherein in all probability, the Kings, Dukes, or Earls
of Cornwall, at some time had their residence, for pleasure and
safety, before Cæsar came into this land; and for that it was the
birthplace of Arthur King of Britain, of whom more under. The castle
itself stood on the sea cliff, and a high promontory of land or
island, shooting into the North Sea or St. George’s Channel, fastened
to the main land or insular continent of Britain, by an iron chain and
drawbridge, which Mr. Carew saith was extant about 100 years before he
wrote his Survey of Cornwall 1602. Hence it was that in the Domesday
Tax, 20 William I. 1087, it is called Dunecheine, as aforesaid, viz.
the fort, fortress, or castle chain or chained. Under which drawbridge
the sea formerly did daily make its flux and reflux, through the rocky
passage beneath. But now this passage is barred up by the falling down
of the contiguous cliffs, and want of repair; nevertheless, thereby at
low water is offered to the foot traveller an indifferent way of
access to the castle or island aforesaid. Which island is now by lease
from the crown in possession of Mr. Travers, who sets it to rent for
about 5_l._ per annum, where twice a year about thirty fat sheep are
bred or fed, that thrive to admiration.

The back or outer part of this fort or island, contains about three
acres of land, which affords good pasture for sheep, goats, and
rabbits, whereon is a consecrated well, and chapel heretofore applied
to the service of God, by the Prince Gothlouis, his domestic servants
and soldiers, though now neglected and falling into continual decay.
The most northerly and remote part of this island is called Pen-dew,
or Pen-diu, that is to say black head, so named from the black cliffs
and rocks thereof; a well known seamark, amongst mariners. The cliffs
all round this island and decayed castle are from the sea
inaccessible, excepting in one place on the east, where is an
indifferent landing place for boats; but the same is artificially
barred with a long lofty and strong wall of lime and stone, through
which was a gate, called in British, Porth Horne, Anglice Iron Gate,
leading to the hill. Under this island the sea runneth through a
natural cave or arch of rocks, where boats may pass at full sea
without danger, though scarcely without horror and amazement of the
passengers; which tremendous place gave occasion to a British bard to
describe the same in verses, mentioned by Camden in his Britannia, viz.

     Est locus Abrini sinuoso littore ponti,
     Rupe situs media, refluus quem circuit æstus
     Fulminat hic latè turrito vertice, castrum,
     Nomine Tindagium veteres dixere Corini.

Thus Englished by Mr. Carew, p. 286, Lord Dunstanville’s edition:

     There is a place within the winding shore of Severne sea,
     On midst of rock, about whose foot the tides turnkeeping, play;
     A towry topped castle here, which blazeth over all,
     Which Corineus’ ancient brood Tindagell Castle call.

However, I think, the meaning of the author is rather thus in English
prose: “There is a place in the intricate windings of the Severn sea,
situate in the middle of a rock, which the waves or billows of the sea
compass or flow about, a towering top of a castle, shining or blazing
abroad far and near, which the old or ancient Cornish call Dundagell.”

Of this place Joseph of Exeter, a priest of that Cathedral, that went
with King Richard I. into the Holy Land, and described the wars
thereof, in his poem called Antiochesis, written at Antioch 500 years
past; a person excellently skilled in the Greek and Latin tongues who
after his return from the Holy Land, was made Archbishop of Bourdeaux
(see Hooker and Isaac), hath these words (thus Englished) of Dundagell.

     From this blest place immortal Arthur sprung,
     Whose wondrous deeds shall be for ever sung,
     Sweet music to the ear, sweet honey to the tongue.
     Look back, turn o’er the great records of fame,
     Proud Alexander boasts a mighty name,
     The Roman annals Cæsar’s actions load,
     And conquered monsters rais’d Alcides to a god.
     But neither shrubs above tall pines appear,
     Nor Phœbus ever fears a rival star;
     So would our Arthur in contest o’ercome
     The mightiest heroes bred in Greece and Rome.
     The only prince that hears this just applause,
     Greatest that e’er shall be, and best that ever was.

From which words it is evident Joseph had seen Merlin’s prophecy of
King Arthur.

The History of King Arthur and his progenitors is this:

After the death of Ambrosius Aurelius, anno Dom. 497, succeeded to the
dominion of Britain, some say his brother, others a Britain named
Uter, alias Uter Pen-dragon; that is to say in British the terrible or
dreadful head or chief dragon, so called, as our historians tells us,
from a direful, bloody, or red dragon, pourtrayed in his banners of
war with a golden head, as is to this day borne in our imperial
standards of war, in memory doubtless of the red dragon mentioned in
Merlin’s Prophecy, by which the British nation is figured. For his
paternal coat armour, as Upton saith, was, in a field Vert, a plain
cross Argent; in the dexter quarter the image of the blessed Virgin
Mary, holding the image of her blessed Son in her right hand, Proper.
He likewise gave for his cognizance of Britain, d’Or, deux dragons
Verd, coronés de Goules, contrelés, or endorsed.

Which prince, about the fourth year of his reign, having had divers
notable victories over his enemies the Saxons, killing Pascentrus, the
son of Hengist, and Gwellimoore King of Ireland, taken Octa and
another son of Hengist, and Cossa, his nephew, prisoners, and routed
their forces; he resolved the Easter after to make a kind of triumphal
feast and solemnity for the principal nobility, gentry, and soldiers,
of his kingdom; and ordered likewise that their wives and daughters
should also be invited to his court, to congratulate his victories
against his Pagan enemies. Now this feast was to be kept at
Caer-Segont, id est, the city or castle of conquest or victory,
afterwards called, by the Saxons, Cell-Cester, id est, Great Castle,
now Winn-Chester, as much as to say, the overcoming, conquering, or
winning castle, as before; the very place where the Emperor
Constantine first put on the purple robes, in order to his dignity.

Amongst other princes and confederates that attended this solemnity,
Goth-lois, or Goth-Louis, id est, purple back or spear, Prince, King,
or Earl of Cornwall, with Igerna, his lady, graced the same with their
presence. And it was observable that in this great assembly, the said
lady, for beauty, port, and mein, exceeded all other women then
present. With whose unparalleled demeanour and charms, King Uter was
so much taken and delighted, or intoxicated rather, that for several
days he omitted all other most necessary affairs of his kingdom, in
order to enjoy her company. Yea, so violent was his affection, that he
could not restain or curb his passion, but kissed and courted her
openly, even in the sight of her lord and others. Whereupon Gothlouis
was so possessed with jealousy that he took the first opportunity,
without leave taken of the king or his nobility, together with his
duchess and servants, and posted from Winchester, towards his own
country of Devon and Cornwall. He had not been long gone, but the
notice thereof was soon brought to the king, who took it in so ill a
part, by reason of his inordinate affection to his lady, that
forthwith he sent messengers after him, to let him know that he had
further occasion to use his counsel about affairs of the nation.

But Gothlouis so highly prized his lady, who by this artifice he
foresaw would be exposed to the king’s attempts, that he sent back
positive answer that he would not come. At which return the king grew
more enraged, and sent the Prince of Cornwall word, that if he
persisted in his obstinacy, he would invade his country, and beat his
towns and castles about his ears; but in vain were his menaces, for
Gothlouis returned him word that he was, as his predecessors time out
of mind had been, a free prince, and owed him neither homage nor
allegiance. Nevertheless, as his countryman, he acknowledged himself
his ally and confederate against all foreign opposers, and would keep
his articles of agreement; but if Uter were not contented with this
answer, but would forcibly invade his country and property, he would
endeavour to keep and preserve the same against him and his adherents.
Whereupon King Uter denounced hostility against him, and sent him
defiance as an enemy, and forthwith set all things in a posture of war
against him. Neither was Gothlouis less solicitous to keep his country
and duchess from Uter’s possession or indeed vile usurpation.

In brief, therefore, as aforesaid, King Uter having raised a great
army of soldiers, under pretence of chastising the pride and contempt
of Gothlouis, marched with them towards his territories, which
extended as far as Axminster, where he no sooner arrived than he falls
a plundering the country, and burning the houses of the inhabitants,
with the terror whereof some fled away, and others submitted to his
mercy. Gothlouis being then at his chief palace and castle of
Caer-Iske, id est, the Fish Castle or City, situate upon the Fish
River, now called Exe, as the City is Exeter, and hearing of this
affrightment and revolt of the people on the east part of his
dominions, and fearing the cowardice of his citizens of Caer-Iske, he
quitted the same upon Uter’s approach with his army, and fled from
thence with his lady, and posted themselves in this castle of
Dundagell, where he left his duchess, himself retiring to Dameliock
Castle, now in St. Veye or St. Vewe, where his army lay entrenched
within a treble walled fortification of earth, still extant, and
retaining its name, wherein he had laid up sufficient provision and
ammunition for his camp and soldiers, &c. And there also he was
promised to receive assistance of soldiers from one of the five Kings
of Ireland, which were daily expected.

King Uter understanding of Gothlouis’ departure from Caer-Iske, soon
marched after him with his army into Cornwall, and laid siege to the
castle of Dameliock, that is to say, the house or place of skirmish,
battle, or hazard of war, and no sooner approached the lines, but he
sent an herald or trumpet to Gothlouis, demanding the surrender of
himself and castle on mercy. Gothlouis, rewarding the trumpet,
returned answer, “that he gave King Uter no just cause of war, or for
breaking the league or invading his country, and wasting the same in
such barbarous manner. But especially, he being a free prince, neither
could nor would betray his trust, or give up his dominions and
subjects to an unjust invader.” At which answer King Uter was so
enraged, that he gave order for a straight siege of the castle, and
forthwith made many violent assaults by storm in several places
thereof; but he was as stoutly repulsed and driven back by the
besieged. In this manner, with various success, for many days the
siege and war continued, which occasioned the many camps,
fortifications, and intrenchments in those parts, called Castle Kitty,
Biny, Castle Kynven, &c.

Whereupon King Uter being more desirous to obtain the Lady Igerna,
than to shed blood, or take the fort of Dameliock, thought of nothing
more than how to get possession of her. In order to which, he was so
vain as to inquire whether the said lady was within the said castle,
and whether she was in so good state of health as when he saw her at
Caersegant. To which questions answer was made, that fame reported
nothing to the contrary as to her health, but for her person, that was
not in Dameliock Castle, but kept in a much more secure place, within
the impregnable fort of Dundagell. Then, inquiring further of a
deserter what manner of place that was, he was told it was a castle
munified by art and nature, and of so narrow entrance over the sea and
rocks by a drawbridge, that three armed men at once would keep out his
whole army, maugre all their skill and strength. At the relation of
which circumstances, King Uter seemed mightily dismayed, so that his
countenance changed through anguish and perplexity of mind, which put
him into such great anxiety as was Ahab for want of Naboth’s vineyard,
David for Bathsheba, and Nero for Sabina Popeia, other men’s wives.

King Uter Pendragon, in this extremity, as not being able to reduce
Dameliock Castle by storm, nor, if he could, would that redress his
grief, by procuring the sight of Igerna, resolves upon this expedient,
to dislodge part of his soldiers and troops from Dameliock, and march
with them to Dundagell, in order to try the fortune of war in both
places. But as soon as he came in sight thereof, the same appeared
more formidable, tremendous, and invincible, than what report or fame
had spoken of it. For in those days the wit and force of man, could
not oblige that castle to a surrender, unless through bribery or
treachery of its defendants, for that the same could neither be
scaled, battered, or starved.

The consideration of which put Pendragon into greater sadness and
perplexity of mind, through the charge and fatigues of war, the stain
of his honour in these unsuccessful attempts, but chiefly for that he
could not obtain the fair Igerna; whereupon he grew sickly and took
his bed, his physicians despairing of his life. When it happened, as
historians tell us, that one Ursan, of Richardock, a place near
Dameliock or Dundagall, one of King Uter’s cabinet council, advised
him to send into Wales, for the old British prophet Merlin, and try
whether he could do that by his magic art which neither the art or
courage of men of war could effect; whereupon Pendragon sent for the
prophet, who when arrived to his camp was made acquainted with the
premises, and immediately bid the king to be of good comfort, for that
he doubted not but in short time he would introduce him to the company
of Igerna, without further bloodshed or hostility.

The king gladly heard this discourse, and promised to follow any
expedient he should prescribe, in order to obtain the lady; and
further assured him of a great reward, in case his project succeeded.
Whereupon Merlin ordered the king, together with Ursan, of Richardock,
to attend him one night in the twilight, with whom in secret manner he
went towards the drawbridge gate of Dundagell Castle, where, making a
noise, the sentinel or porter demanded in the dark who they were?
Merlin being transformed into the shape of Bricot, a servant that
waited on Gothlouis, and lay in his chamber, made answer that his
master, Duke Gothlouis, escaped from the siege of Dameliock, was at
the gate for entrance. The porter apprehending he heard the very voice
of Bricot, and seeing at some distance two persons talking together,
the one King Uter metamorphosed into the shape of Duke Gothlouis, and
another, viz. Ursan, of Richardock, transformed into the shape of
Jordan, of Dundagell, he let down the drawbridge, and so gave them
opportunity to enter into the insular castle aforesaid, where he had
further confirmation of the identity or reality of their persons, by
their speech and apparel, as far as the night would permit him.

Whereupon he forthwith joyfully conducted King Uter to Igerna’s
chamber, who, not discovering the fraud, gladly received him as her
lord; when that very night was begotten that valiant, noble, and
religious Prince Arthur, who for his brave, facinourous, and heroic
achievements, made his name glorious in his days, as it is still the
paragon of ours.

Now on that same night his soldiers were so careful and valiant in the
siege of Dameliock Castle, that they stormed it with their scaling
ladders, but were as stoutly driven back by the besieged; whereupon,
Duke Gothlouis resolved no longer to be thus cooped up, or confined in
walls or trenches, but either to conquer or die, and the next morning
sallied forth with a party of soldiers, and assaulted his enemies in
their quarters by surprize: but alas! the success was not answerable
to his courage and resolution, for King Uter’s men were all in
readiness to receive his charge and onset, so that in the brunt of the
first encounter Gothlouis was killed on the spot, his party slain or
routed, and all that were taken in arms put to the sword. The castle
of Dameliock yielded on condition of life, though some say otherwise,
the plunder to the king’s soldiers.

Early on the same morning, before King Uter and the duchess were out
of their chamber, or had on their wearing apparel, to the great
astonishment of the porter, centinel, and the garrison, a messenger
arrived at Dundagell Castle, giving a full account of the tragical
fact. But when he was admitted to the Duchess’s bedchamber, and saw,
as he verily believed, Duke Gothlouis in her company, he could hardly
credit his own report; especially the Duchess Igerna being of the same
opinion. But then, alas! so unavoidable a thing is fortune or fate,
the prophet Merlin began to uncharm and dissolve his former spells and
incantations, so that King Uter appeared no longer as Gothlouis Duke
of Cornwall, but sole monarch of Britain; his companion, not Jordan of
Dundagell, but Ursan of Richardock; and the third, not Bricot, but
Merlin the prophet, to the great admiration of all spectators.

Whereupon the king took leave of the Duchess, and posted to his army,
then in possession of Dameliock Castle, and ordered search to be made
for the dead body of the duke; where at length it was found in common
soldier’s apparel, extreme bloody, mangled, and cut. Whereupon he
called an embalmer, who forthwith embalmed the body with salt and
aromatic spices, to prevent putrefaction till a military interment
could be prepared for him, which a month after was splendidly
provided, the King and Duchess being chief mourners; when, a few days
after, King Uter publicly married Igerna the duchess, by whom as
aforesaid he had a son named Arthur and a daughter named Amye.

Lastly, it is observed by our annalists upon the foregoing history,
that after this bloody war, and unjust fact of King Uter’s, he never
had any tolerable success against his Saxon enemies; but in many
battles was worsted by them, and finally, some of them understanding
of a good spring or well of water, whereof he usually drank, they
secretly envenomed the same, so that afterwards the king, drinking his
customary draught thereof, soon after, with intolerable pains, died in
the fifteenth year of his reign, and the flower of his age, anno Dom.
515, fulfilling that saying in the Sacred Writings, “The same measure
that ye mete shall be measured to you again, brimfull and running
over.” So that I shall conclude this history in the words of St. Paul,
“O the height of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are
his judgments and his ways past finding out!”

After the death of King Uter Pendragon, his son and heir Arthur,
begotten as aforesaid, succeeded to his dominion of Britain, anno Dom.
515, but as others say 518. He is therefore rightly named by some
authors, Arthur Mab Uter Pendragon, viz. Arthur, the son of Uter
Pendragon. Which name Arthur is probably derived from the British
Arthou, a good or sharp pointed weapon. Of this King Arthur, long
before his birth, had Merlin prophecied to King Vortigern:

     “Aper etenim Cornubiæ succursum præstabit [si non potius
     erit] et colla eorum sub pedibus suis conculcabit, insulæ
     oceani potestati ipsius subdentur; et Galicanos saltus
     possidebit; tremebit Romulea Domus sevitiam ipsius; et
     exitus ejus dubius erit; in ore populorum cœlebrabitur, et
     actus ejus cibus erit narrantibus. Sex posteri ejus tenebunt
     sceptrum,” &c.

Which in English amounts to this:

     “That the boar of Cornwall shall bring aid and assistance,
     and shall tread the necks of our enemies under his feet, the
     islands of the ocean shall be subject to his power, and the
     Gaulish forests he shall possess, the house of Romulus shall
     tremble at his wrath. As for his death or end, it shall be
     doubtful or uncertain. His name shall be celebrated by the
     people, and his famous acts shall be food to those that do
     relate them. Six of his lineage shall sway the sceptre,” &c.

King Arthur no sooner succeeded to his father’s dominions but he
applied himself with great piety and religion to administer law and
justice to his people, the best expedients to establish a tottering
sceptre. In the next place he took care to fortify and strengthen
himself with soldiers and arms against his Saxon enemies, a mighty and
warlike people, then possessed of the greatest part of this kingdom by
the late misfortunes of his father and other princes, in battle with
them, so that only Wiltshire, Devon, Dorset, Cornwall, and Wales, made
up his dominion. Against these King Arthur drew into the field a
mighty army of soldiers, and after eleven pitched battles against
them, overthrew their whole armies, and obtained the total dominion of
this kingdom, and confined the Saxons, on condition of tribute and
submission, only to the kingdom of Kent. And recorded it is by
annalists, that in one of those battles which King Arthur had with
them, he girded himself with an approved sword, called Callib-burne,
with which in one day he slew with his own hands 800 Saxons. It seems,
this weapon was like Goliah’s sword wrapped in the ephod, there was no
sword like it. And thus, according to Merlin’s prophecy, did the boar
of Cornwall bring help and assistance, and tread Britain’s enemies
under his feet.

But no sooner was this land settled in peace at home, but plots and
designs from abroad were laid to disturb the tranquillity thereof. For
at that time the Romans, having made a peace with their enemies the
Vandals, sent messengers to King Arthur, demanding 3,000_l._ per annum
tribute, a prodigious sum in those days, many years in arrear,
according to the agreement Julius Cæsar made with King Cassibellan,
and was still due to the senate. At which demand King Arthur was so
distasted, that he sent away the messengers in scorn, and prohibited
any Romans ever after to come into this land upon that account.
Especially for that the Romans for many years had voluntarily quitted
or forsaken the government thereof, so that the Britains had neither
their protection nor aid against their Saxon or other enemies. When
these messengers returned to Rome, this contempt of King Arthur was
resented by the Senate, who thereupon unanimously voted a war against
him. And accordingly a great army was raised in order to conquer and
reduce this land, which arrived here under conduct of Lucius, their
prince or emperor, as historians tell us, together with ten kings, his
confederates and auxiliaries. Against these king Arthur advanced with
a mighty host, and gave them battle, where, after a sharp and bloody
conflict, the Roman Emperor Lucius was slain, his body afterwards sent
to Rome, the whole Roman army routed, and the greatest part of them
put to the sword, and those whose lives he spared he made his feodors
and vassals.

But, alas! notwithstanding King Arthur’s good fortune in this island
against the Romans, he was not contented therewith, but he resolved to
be further revenged upon them for his wrongs, bloodshed, and
indignity, and for prevention of any such invasion for the future, to
make a descent with his army upon the Roman territories in Gaul,
especially for that from thence the Romans were assisted with great
numbers of soldiers, under Lucius, to invade his kingdom of Britain.
Whereupon King Arthur, with a considerable fleet of ships, and a great
army of soldiers, landed in Normandy, then called Neustria, and
summoned the people either to come and submit to his sceptre, or give
him battle. But they, confiding in the strength of the Roman legions
in that country, slighted his offer, and gave him battle, in which
contest they were totally overthrown, routed, or slain. So that, soon
after the province of Normandy submitted to his mercy, cast down
armour, and payed tribute. Whereupon he gave to Gaius his taster, the
earldom of Andegavia, now Angieurs; and to Bedeverus, his cupbearer,
the dukedom of Normandy, for their good services. In memory of which
donations, it grew to a custom amongst the kings of France, for many
ages after, to make their tasters and cupbearers Earls of Andegavia
and Normandy.

After this victory King Arthur dislodged his forces, and advanced
further into the Roman Gaulish provinces, and subdued by conquest to
his sceptre Flanders, Burgundy, Aquitain, and Andegavia, and as some
tell us afterwards Poland, and obliged those people to pay him an
annual tribute according; as Merlin had predicted of him, that the
Gaulish forests he should possess, and that the house of Romulus
should tremble at his wrath. After those victories he returned safe
into Britain, and then also by his fleet and army reduced to his
dominion, Scotland, Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, Norway, Dacia, and
made them all tributary, which also was foretold by Merlin in those
words, “the islands of the ocean shall be subject to his power.”

When, after he had established peace in all those lands, and returned
into Britain, he instituted an honourable order of knighthood, called
the Knights of the Round Table, the most antient order of knighthood
in the world, chiefly to promote self-denial, and prevent differences
amongst his nobility and gentry or soldiers, who had well deserved of
him and his country, for their good services at home and abroad, that
so no occasion of dispute might arise about precedence, in merit,
antiquity, valour, wealth, honour, or nobility, amongst them, for that
all the knights of this his order were alike equal in those respects
in his esteem, and might sit down indifferently at the table, go in
and out of the house or church, field, or market, before each other as
they came without exception; being an allowed rule amongst them, that
the highest seat at the court, senate, church, or table, did no more
argue the worth, value, religion, valour, or prudent conduct of a man,
than the precedence of a military officer did prove him more valiant
than his soldiers. The place of meetings of those knights was at
Winchester aforesaid, where they assembled yearly at Pentecost or
Whitsuntide.

He gave the same religious Christian coat armour as was given by his
father, which I have blazoned before; and in testimony of his thirteen
victories over so many crowned heads, he bore also in a field Azure,
thirteen imperial crowns Or, as Upton tells us.

Lastly, after this prince had thus vanquished his enemies abroad and
at home, had restored the Christian Religion, eclipsed by the Saxons,
ordained this useful order of knighthood, and done all the good
offices a just, pious, and religious king could do to his subjects, he
was at last, as many others, ungratefully dealt with by his own
people, who at the instigation of his discontented cousin Mordred on
the Roman Pictish title, confederated with the Saxons as against a
bastard, and rose a great army in Cornwall in opposition to his power;
against whom King Arthur marched with his army, and gave them battle
at a place near Camelford. Where, though he obtained the victory, and
Mordred was slain, yet in that battle King Arthur received his mortal
wounds, so that, soon after, in order to a cure, he retired to the
vale of Avallan, id est, the apple valley, near Glastonbury, Somerset,
where he lies buried.

King Arthur’s usual place of residence, where he kept his court (as
Hennius the Briton tells us, who flourished anno Dom. 600), was at
East or West Camellot, near Cadbury, in Wiltshire.

There was extant in the Welsh tongue in bard’s verses 1170, temp. Hen.
II. a song which said that the body of King Arthur was buried at the
Isle of Avallan, near Glastonbury, between two pyramids. Whereupon
King Henry ordered search to be made after his corpse, as that most
classical and authentic author Giraldus Cambrensis, who was an eye
witness thereof saith, who relates, that after the pioneers had sunk
about seven foot deep, they lighted upon a stone in form of a cross,
to the back part thereof was fastened a rude leaden cross, something
broad, with those letters inscribed: “Hic jacet sepultus inclitus Rex
Arturius in Insula Avalonia.”

Two feet beneath this cross they then also found two coffins made of
hollow oak, wherein were the bones and skeletons of King Arthur and of
Genevour his wife, the hair of the said lady being then whole and of
fresh colour, as Fabian saith, but as soon as touched it fell to
powder. This history, for substance is gathered out of Galfridus and
other chronologers, John Trevisa’s book of the Acts of King Arthur,
temp. Henry IV. John Lidgate, a monk of St. Edmondsbury, who wrote a
tract of King Arthur’s Round Table, anno Dom. 1470, William Caxton,
the author of that Chronicle called Fructus Temporum, who also wrote
the history of King Arthur, 1484, Nicholas Upton, Canon of the
Cathedral Church of Wells 1440, and others.

King Arthur’s three admirals at sea, as appears from the book of
Thriades in British, were Gerint ab Erbyn, a nobleman of Cornwall, for
then Cornwall and Devon were one county or province, slain at
Lhongporth, now London, by the Saxons, anno Dom. 540; March ab
Meircyon, and Gwenwynwyn ab Nau.

There is yet extant in the British tongue an elegy upon the death of
this Gerint, which amongst others contains those words. Ray
Rhytharmaur mab Erbin.

     Yn Longborth yllas Gerint,
     Gur deur o godir Dyfneint,
     Wyntwys yn Lladhgyt as ledeint
     Yn Llongborth llas y Arthur,
     Guyr deur Kymmuvint o dur
     Amheravdyr llywyadyr llauur.
     In Longporth was slain Gerint,
     A man beloved of Devon,
     Overcome in fight or vanquished
     In Longporth where he was slain for Arthur,
     A man beloved, that commanded over the water,
     Admiral or General of a fleet great.

King Arthur also, by reason of the great schism in the Church between
the Arian and Catholic Clergy, instituted the order of Knights of the
Holy Trinity, and built the Chapel of Trinity at Restormell.

Pierce Gaveston being made Earl of Cornwall by King Edward II. and
afterwards banished for his wicked practices, and put to death by
licence of that king, took out of the jewel house a table of gold, and
tressells of the same, that once belonged to King Arthur, and
delivered them to Amery of Friscoband, a merchant, to be carried into
Gascoigne, where they were sold at a great price to his own private
advantage, as our chronologers tell us.

But in memory of King Arthur, Roger Mortimer soon after, at such time
as he and Queen Eleanor his concubine, wife of Edward the Second,
governed this kingdom, in imitation of him, kept a round table, to
which many noble knights belonged and frequented, to his infinite cost
and expense, which by him were called the Knights of the Round Table.
(Heywood’s Chronicles, p. 193.)

The Isle of Man being conquered by William Montacute, Earl of
Salisbury, temp. Edward III. he caused him to be styled King of Man,
and gave him leave to institute at Windsor, in a chamber two hundred
feet round, in imitation of King Arthur, a society of Knights of the
Round Table. (Daniell’s Chronicle, p. 196.)


TONKIN.

I shall offer a conjecture touching the name of this place, which I
will not say is right but only probable. Tin is the same as Din,
Dinas; and Dixeth, deceit; so that Tindixeth turned for the easier
pronunciation to Tintagel, Dindagel, or Daundagel, signifies the
Castle of Deceit, which name might be aptly given to it from the
famous deceit practised here by Uter Pendragon, by the help of
Merlin’s enchantment.

The manor of Tintagel was very antiently demesne land of the crown,
and famous for its castle, and Browne Willis says, the castle, manor,
and borough of Tintagel, were settled by Edward the Third on his son
Prince Edward, whom he created Duke of Cornwall, and continued it to
his heirs, the succeeding Dukes of Cornwall, before which this king’s
brother, John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, held it. This castle boasts
much greater antiquity, and is said to have been the seat of the Dukes
of Cornwall, and pretends to have been the birthplace of the famous
King Arthur, which happened above five hundred years before the Norman
Conquest, that prince having been born in the year 500, fifteen years
after which he is said to have succeeded his father in the kingdom,
and to have lost his life in the thirty-sixth year of his reign in a
place near Camelford. The borough of Bossiney, known in this county by
the name of Tintagel, is a very small village, and contains scarcely
twenty houses, and those not better than cottages. This place, with
Trevenna, another little hamlet equally mean, lie in the parish of
Tintagel, from which church they are at no great distance, and with it
make up the one borough. It was privileged by Richard Earl of Cornwall
and King of the Romans, who granted “Quod Burgus noster de Tyntaivil
sit liber Burgus.” It is governed by a mayor. The first return of
Members to serve in Parliament is in the reign of Edward the Sixth.

In an indenture during the reign of Queen Mary it is styled Trevenna
alias Bossiney, in others Trevenna simply, in others Bossiney alone.

The borough is held from the duchy at a fee-farm rent of 11_l._ 16_s._
9½_d._


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons says, “this castle, which is of great antiquity, is
reported to have been the birthplace of King Arthur, with respect to
whom it was the opinion of Lord Chancellor Bacon, ‘that there was
truth enough in his story to make him famous, besides that which was
fabulous.’ His history nevertheless has been so blended with the
marvellous by the monkish historians, that some authors have been
disposed to doubt of his existence; and the circumstances connected
with his supposed birth at Tintagel, are clearly not among those parts
of his story most entitled to credit. We find no mention of this
castle in authentic history till the year 1245, when Richard Earl of
Cornwall was accused of having offered an asylum at his castle of
Tintagel, to his nephew David Prince of Wales, in rebellion against
his uncle Henry the Third. Thomas de la Hyde was governor or constable
of the castle in 1307, Thomas le Arcedekne in 1313, and William de
Botreaux in 1325. It appears by a survey taken about that time, that
the castle was in a very ruinous state. The great hall was taken down
by John of Eltham. John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, was made
constable in 1388.” Mr. Carew states, p. 286 Lord Dunstanville’s
Edition, “that being turned from a palace to a prison, this castle
restrained one John Northampton’s liberty, who for abusing the same in
his unruly mayoralty of London, was condemned hither as a perpetual
penitentiary,” and Thomas Earl of Warwick was also a prisoner there in
1397.

Lord Treasurer Burleigh abolished the office of constable or governor
of this castle.

Norden has a print, accompanied by a description of the castle, as it
remained in his time, about 1584, when considerable portions of the
fortress appear to have remained both on the island and on the main
land.

The living belonged to the Great Benedictine Monastery at Fontevrault
in Anjou, distinguished by the peculiarity of being presided over by
an abbess, although the establishment consisted of monks as well as
nuns. Having been seized into the king’s hands with other benefices
belonging to alien houses, this parish was given by Edward the Fourth
to the collegiate church of Windsor, where the great tithes and the
patronage of the living still remain.

It is stated by Doctor Borlase, that besides the chapel within the
fortress, dedicated to St. Ulette or Uliane, two others existed in the
parish, one dedicated to St. Tiron and the other to St. Dennis.

I have retained the fabulous history of the Great Arthur, with
feelings similar to those which induced the Greeks to dwell on the
twelve labours of their Hercules, or the Scandinavians to recount the
exploits of Odin. In a manner similar to what took place with respect
to them, there exist reasons for conjecturing, at least that a
mythological personage of remote antiquity became blended with a
British warrior who opposed the Saxons, and that the constellation
Arcturus is in this way connected with the Cornish chief.

The tales translated from the Celtic by Jeffery of Monmouth, Bishop of
St. Asaph in 1152, are followed by the author from whom Mr. Hals
collected his materials; they are also copied into the romance of
Prince Arthur, where in Caxton’s edition is a print of the king
sitting in the middle of his round table, with the knights companions
surrounding its circle. And this print has evidently given origin to
the lines of our most facetious poet, proving from the round table
that knight errants were accustomed to eat like other persons. See
part I. canto 1, line 387.

Mr. Hals says this is the place called Donecheniv in Domesday Survey.
Dunechine, would mean the fortress or a chasm, corresponding precisely
with the situation.

Joseph of Exeter, from whom Mr. Hals has translated some lines on this
place, is mentioned with great commendation in Warton’s History of
English Poetry: “But a miracle of this age in classical composition
was Joseph of Exeter, commonly called Josephus Iscanus. He wrote two
epic poems in Latin heroic verse. The first is on the Trojan War; it
is in six books, and dedicated to Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury.
The second is entitled Antiocheis, The War of Antioch, or the Crusade.
The former is preserved; but a fragment only remains of the latter,
found in the library of Abingdon Abbey.”

In the retreat of Gothlouis before Uter Pendragon, Mr. Hals mentions
Exeter under the name of Caer Iske, but without much commendation of
the martial spirit possessed by its inhabitants. If either Iske is the
proper name of this river, or the general term for a river has been
changed into Ex, the Celtic name will exactly accord with the present
Ex-cester, as the word is still pronounced in Devonshire, the camp or
fortress on the Ex.

  Tintagel parish contains 4001 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3674    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           499   10    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   649    |   730    |   877    |  1006
    giving an increase of 55 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Charles Dayman, presented by the Dean and
    Canons of Windsor in 1810.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish offers many objects of considerable interest to the
geologist. It is entirely situated on rocks belonging to the
calcareous series. In the southern part, its rocks consist of clay
slates possessing various degrees of fissibility, from the most
perfect roofing-slate of Delabole, to a slate that can only be
separated into thick flags. Amongst these strata occurs an interesting
rock, which appears to be composed of hornblende and compact felspar,
and in some parts of hornblende and calcareous spar only. The latter
variety is well known in the neighbourhood under the name of green
freestone, and may be seen in the walls of the oldest churches. It is
_in situ_ in a croft near the pretty little waterfall of Nathan’s or
Kneighton’s Kieve.

In the northern part of the parish, near King Arthur’s Castle, and in
Bossiney Cove, the slate is very _talcose_, and is occasionally coated
at its joints with calcareous spar. At the former place also occurs a
large mass of compact felspar, but which is so much decomposed that
its precise nature has not been ascertained. In the sea-cliffs are
several slate-quarries, the quality of which, however, is inferior to
the Delabole, and is known in the market by the name of _cliff slate_.
In this slate are impressions apparently derived from shells, which
have been referred to the genus _producta_. This is the only instance
of a fossiliferous slate hitherto detected in Cornwall, though it is
probable that others may exist, particularly between St. German’s and
the Rame Head.




ST. EARTH.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north,
Philack; east, Gwyniar; west, Breage, Geenlow, and St. Hillary. For
the modern name, it signifies holy or consecrated ground or earth,
referring to the church and cemetery thereof. In Domesday Roll this
district was taxed under the jurisdiction of Trewinard, of which more
under. At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, 1294, into the value of Cornish Benefices, this church was
neither extant or endowed, since it is not named in that inquisition,
in Decanatus de Penwid. But in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it is
called San Etghi, or Yrghe; id est, the holy charge, cure, or command,
viz. of souls, and was then valued 14_l._ 1_s._ The patronage in the
Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent Ralph. The rectory in
Painter, by lease under the Dean and Chapter; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 125_l._ 19_s._ 2_d._

Trewinard, taxed in Domesday Roll, by the name of Trewinerder, id est,
the high, haughty, beloved town, alias Trewinar, id est, the town of
the beloved lake or river of water, on which those lands are situate,
viz. the Hayle River, gave name and origin to an old family of
gentlemen surnamed De Trewinard, who flourished here for many
generations in genteel degree down to the latter end of the reign of
King Henry VIII. at which time John Trewinard, Esq. was Member of
Parliament for the borough of St. Ives, and so became privileged
against his creditors, being a man much encumbered with debts, who
during the intervals of parliament kept house here and stood upon his
guard, at which time one of his creditors obtained judgment and
outlawry against him, after three terms in the county court, broke his
house, took his person, and carried him prisoner to the sheriff’s
ward, where he remained till the next session of parliament, against
which time he brought his writ of habeas corpus, and was brought up to
Westminster in expectation of great damages against his creditor that
put him in durance. Upon this restraint of Mr. Trewinard’s person, the
house resolved not to sit, looking upon it as a breach of privilege,
but entered before their rising into a grand committee for hearing
this case pro and con, betwixt Trewinard and his creditor, when it
appeared as aforesaid Trewinard was outlawed and so out of the king’s
protection, and till that outlawry was reversed he could not lawfully
sit as a member; by which expedient Trewinard was forced to compound
with his creditor and sue forth the king’s pardon, and then appeared
in parliament in statu quo prius. This John Trewinard had, as I take
it, issue Martin Trewinard, steward of the stannaries, who had issue
Deiphobus Trewinard, that in his rage or anger killed an innocent man
and buried him secretly in Trewinard Chapel, of public use before the
Church of St. Earth was erected; however, this fact was not so
covertly carried, but the coroners of the shire had notice of it, who
accordingly came to this place, opened the grave, took forth the body,
and impannelled a jury thereon, who upon oath gave their verdict, that
this party’s death happened by a wilful murder of Trewinard’s,
whereupon he was carried before a justice of the peace, and upon
further examination of this matter, had his mittimus made, and was
accordingly sent to Launceston gaol, where he remained till the next
assizes.

In the mean time, foreseeing that this barbarous fact would tend both
to the destruction of his life and estate, he applied to Sir Reginald
Mohun, Knight, a favourite of the Queen Elizabeth’s, and proposed to
him, that he would make over and convey to him, his heirs, and assigns
for ever, all his lands and tenements whatsoever, under this proviso
or condition, that in case he were condemned for the murder aforesaid,
that he should or would procure the Queen’s pardon or reprieve for his
life; which proposal being accepted by Sir Reginald Mohun, lease and
release of his lands were made and executed for a valuable
consideration accordingly to him, bearing date the day before this
tragical fact was committed, whereupon Sir Reginald Mohun forthwith
became seised of this barton and manor of Trewinard, and at the next
assizes held for this county, Mr. Trewinard being indicted for this
murder, was found guilty by the grand and petty juries, and
accordingly condemned to be hanged to death, at which instant Sir
Reginald Mohun having gotten the Queen’s reprieve or pardon for Mr.
Trewinard, put it into the sheriff’s hands, whereby his execution was
stopped, and himself afterwards, on sureties for his good behaviour,
was set at liberty from the gaol, and subsisted upon some small
stipend allowed him by Sir Reginald out of his lands during life.

The arms of Trewinard are yet extant in the glass windows of this
house, viz. in a field Argent, a fess Azure, between three Cornish
daws Proper. Sir Reginald Mohun took such pleasure in this place, that
at some times he lived on it in the middle of Queen Elizabeth’s reign,
and finally settled it upon his three daughters, one of whom was
married to Sir Thomas Arundell, of Talvorne, Knight.

Sir Thomas Arundell’s part of the premises was purchased by Sir
Nicholas Hals, of Fentongallan, Knight, who having leases of the other
two parts, some time also for pleasure resided on this barton, whose
son and heir John Hals sold the same.

The present possessor of one third part in fee, and two third parts in
lease of this barton and manor, from Praed and Penrose, as I take it,
is Thomas Hawkins, Gent. who giveth for his arms the same bearing as
Mr. Hawkins, of Creed.

Such another tragical story of murder is to be seen under Falmouth
district, as also in Prince’s Worthies of Devon, how that Sir John
Prideaux, of Orchardton, killed in a duel Sir William Bigberry, of
Bigberry, Knight, whose ancestors from the Norman Conquest had lived
there, in worshipful degree, for nine descents, to the year 1360, when
the two daughters and heirs of this murdered gentleman were married to
Champernowne, of Beer Ferries, and Durneford, of Stonehouse. By this
misfortune Prideaux being condemned to be hanged, gave most of his
estate to obtain his pardon from Edward the Third.

In like manner he tells us that Sir Alexander Cruwys, Knt. temp. Henry
VI. slew one Mr. Carew, and for that fact was condemned to be hanged,
but in order to procure his reprieve or pardon, he sold twenty-two
manors of land. Also that John Copleston, of Copleston, in Devon, Esq.
commonly called the Great Copleston, in the middle of Queen
Elizabeth’s reign, in a rage slew his natural son and godson, for
which fact he was condemned to the gallows, but in order to procure a
reprieve or pardon, he was forced to sell thirteen manors of land in
Cornwall. His son left only two daughters that became his heirs,
married to ―――― Copleston and ―――― Elford.

Lastly, he further tells us that Sir John Fitz, of Fitzford, Knight,
slew in a rage one Mr. Slannen, in the time of Queen Elizabeth, after
which fact, posting away to London, with his servant, in order to get
his pardon, and at every stage shutting his chamber door, for fear of
being taken where he lodged, it happened in the night that his servant
knocking violently at his chamber door with some intelligence, and he
not well awaked out of his sleep, or not well understanding his
servant’s voice in the dark, he rushed to the door, shot off a pistol,
and slew his own servant, which as soon as he understood, he took
another pistol and shot himself dead also.

Trenhayle, in this parish, that is to say, the stout, strong, or rapid
river, gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen, from
thence denominated Trenhayle, whose sole inheritrix, temp. Edward III.
was married to Tencreek, as Tencreek’s daughter and heir, by her was
married to Thomas Budeoxhed, of Budeoxhed, in Devon, by whom he had
Thomas Budeoxhed, Sheriff of Devon, 26 Henry VI. whose son married
Pomeray, his grandson Trevilload, his great-grandson Halwell, and his
posterity successively Stroote, Trowse, and Champernowne, which last
gentleman, Philip Budeoxhed, having no issue male or female, temp.
Elizabeth, his sisters became his heirs, and were married, Winifred to
Sir William Gorges, Elizabeth to John Amadis, of Plymouth, Agnes to
Oliver Hill, of Shilston. Gorges sold Budeoxhed, temp. Charles I. to
Mr. Trevill, a merchant of Plymouth, now in possession thereof. The
arms of Budeoxhed are, Sable, three fusils in fess between three
bucks’ heads caboshed Argent.

Mr. Budeoxhed, aforesaid, Sheriff of Devon 26 Henry VI. at his own
proper cost and charge, pulled down the old church of Budeoxhed, and
built the new church of Budeox, as it now stands, wherein himself lies
interred, some time after his eldest daughter died, who was the first
person that was buried therein after the same was built and
consecrated. Prince’s Worthies of Devon, p. 71.

Trelizike, in this parish, the town or lands situate upon the gulph,
cove, creek, or bosom of waters (see Landowenach Lizard), temp. Edward
IV. as appeared from a deed that I have seen, was the lands of Otho de
Trefusis, ancestor of the Oates of Peransabulo, from whose heirs it
came to the Smiths and others. In particular, Sir James Smith, of
Exeter, was seised thereof, temp. Charles II. who sold the
reversionary fee thereof to Arthur Paynter, Gent. attorney at law, his
father having a chattel estate therein before that purchase. The
ancient name of those Paynters, as Mr. Arthur Paynter informed me, was
De Camburne, from which name they were transnominated, upon this
occasion; John, the son of John De Camburne, being bound an apprentice
temp. Queen Mary to a painter in London, and happening, in some
contest, to kill or murder a man there, he forthwith made his escape
thence, and fled into Ireland, where he remained undiscovered for
several years, at length returned into his native country, and fixed
in St. Earth church town, where he set up a painter’s shop, and
surnamed himself Paynter, from whom those gentlemen so called are
lineally descended. The present possessor Francis Paynter, gentleman,
that married Sutherland, and Paynter, his father Praed, his
grandfather ――――, and giveth for his arms, in a field Sable, three
slabs of tin Proper.

Gurlyn, id est, the husband’s lake, or riveret of water, otherwise
Gorlyn, is the fat or fertile lake of water in this parish, formerly
held of the Crown by the tenure of knight’s service, was, temp. Edward
III. the lands of Dinham, from whose heirs it came to Nansperian, and
by Nansperian’s daughter and heir, to Matthew Prideaux, and by
Prideaux’ two daughters and heirs, in marriage to Gregor and Bickford,
now in possession thereof. The arms of Nansperian were, Argent, three
lozenges Sable. Nansperian signifies the valley of thorns.


TONKIN.

In the Taxation of 1291, the 20th Edward I. this parish is called,
Ecclesia de Lanhudnow, the rectory being valued at xxvi_s._ viii_d._
and was appropriated to the Church of Exeter, to which it still
belongs. As for the present name, St. Earth, I take it to be a
contraction of Sancta Hierytha, of whom Camden, in Devon, speaks thus:
“Chettlehampton, a little village where Hierytha, calendered among the
female saints, was buried.”

Trewinard, in this parish, was of old the seat of a well regarded
family of gentlemen, from thence denominated De Trewinard. It is now
in the possession of Thomas Hawkins, Gent. attorney at law, that
married, first, the daughter of James Praed, Esq.; and secondly, Anne,
the daughter of Christopher Bellot, of Bochim, Esq. By the first he
has only one daughter, but by the second a numerous issue. He giveth
for his arms, in a field Argent, a saltire Sable, charged with five
fleurs-de-lis Or.

Mr. Hawkins owns but a third part of the mansion and barton of
Trewinard, of which Sir John St. Aubin, and Mr. James Praed, are joint
lords with him. Mr. Thomas Hawkins is since dead; and this is now the
seat of his son Christopher Hawkins, Esq. and Clerk of the Assizes. He
hath married Mary, one of the daughters of Philip Hawkins, of
Pennance, Esq.

I take the etymology of this name, Trewinard, to be a town or dwelling
on a marsh.

The Trewinards lived here probably before the Norman Conquest, and
were once possessed of an estate worth at the least three thousand
pounds per annum, as I have been informed by one of their descendants,
the late Rev. Mr. James Trewinard, Rector of St. Mawgor in Meneage.

James De Trewinard was one of the Knights of the Shire for Cornwall 20
Edward III. William De Trewinard was so likewise in the 28th year of
this reign.

Martin De Trewinard, Esq. (whom Mr. Carew calls a merry Cornish
gentleman, and tells a comical story of) I believe was the last of
them that possessed this estate, for Norden, who wrote his description
of Cornwall towards the latter end of Queen Elizabeth’s reign, saith,
that Trewinard was the seat of Mannering.

Trelisick, compounded of Tre-lis-ick, a dwelling on the broad creek,
suitable to its situation on that part of the river Hayle, where it
openeth itself into a lake, is the seat of the ancient family of
Painter. The present owner of which is Francis Painter, Esq. formerly
one of the Clerks of the Admiralty, and now General Receiver of the
Prize Money which shall become due to captors. He married a daughter
of ―――― Sutherland, Esq. late one of the Clerks of the Admiralty, by
whom he has only one surviving son Mr. James Painter. His arms are,
Azure, three slabs of tin Argent, each charged with an annulet Sable.

Mr. Francis Painter is since dead, leaving two daughters by his second
wife, a daughter of his uncle Mr. Francis Painter, of Boskina in
Burian. William Painter, D.D. Rector of Exeter College in Oxford, was
also a brother of his father Arthur Painter.

―――― Painter, of Antron, was, I am informed, a younger branch of this
family, and arrived at considerable eminence, but, like many branches,
it has withered, while the parent stock remains fair and flourishing.
But the family of Trelisick is now extinct in the male line, by the
death of Mr. Francis Painter, jun.


THE EDITOR.

St. Earth, now invariably written without the a, is supposed to derive
its name from St. Ergan, one of the female missionaries from Ireland.

The church stands at the side of what must have been an estuary in
former times, pretty much like Egleshayle, near Wadebridge. The church
is neat and plain, with three ailes of equal height, the roof has
wooden ribs with bosses, and the whole was plastered about the year
1747. The tower is not inferior to most others, and the south porch is
remarkable for its beauty. The whole eastern extremity of the south
aile is said to have belonged exclusively to Trewinnard, but for want
of asserting it, the right has been lost.

The walls of the church were covered with sentences, and the windows
were ornamented by stained glass, but in the great repair bestowed on
the church in 1747, all these were removed, as it is said, by the zeal
of Mr. Collins, at that time Vicar, against all vestiges of the
religion professed by our forefathers. A few small panes of glass only
remain, and the cross engrailed Sable, on a field Or (the arms of
Mahon), can alone be distinguished. The south wall of the church is
supported by a continued buttress, added about the year 1760.

On a slab stone, just before the communion table, is the following
inscription:

  Here lyeth the body of the below named
  John Ralph,
  who ended this life the 10th of Feb. anno Domni 1729,
  in the 85th year of his age.
  The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

  Here lyeth the body of Loveday, the wife of
  John Ralph, Vicar of this parish,
  by whom he had three children,
  Mary, John, and Loveday;
  the last died in her infancy.
  The other two were alive at their
  mother’s death.
  She was a virtuous and prudent wife,
  a loving and indulgent mother,
  a friendly and prudent neighbour,
  and very charitable to the poor.
  She exchanged this life for a better
  the last day of November, in the year
  of our Lord 1715, and in the 82d year
  of her age.

  “Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, yea, saith the spirit,
  that they rest from their labour.” Rev. xiv. 13.

John Ralph, son of the above, obtained the living of Ingatestone, in
Essex, and died there in 1755.

Adjoining to this stone is another, with an interesting inscription:

  Underneath is deposited,
  in hopes of a joyful resurrection,
  the body of Elizabeth, wife of Edward Collins,
  Vicar of this parish, whose filial piety and obedience,
  conjugal love and fidelity, maternal care and affection,
  unfeigned charity and benevolence, uniform and constant
  perseverance in all the duties of Christianity,
  have been equalled by few, excelled by none.
  She was the daughter
  of Nicholas Kendall, of Pelyn, Clerk,
  Canon Residentiary of St. Peter’s, Exeter,
  and Archdeacon of Totness,
  by Jane, daughter of Thomas Carew, of Harrabear, Esq.
  son of Sir Alexander Carew, of East Anthony, Bart.
  She was born Aug. 19, 1701; married July 22, 1731;
  died Nov. 30, 1749.
  M.
  Conjugis opt. dilectissimæ
  H. M. L. M. P. C.
  Maritus amantissimus
  juxta cum Deo visum deponendus.

The six letters stand for, Hoc Marmor Loco Monumenti Poni Curavit.

       *     *     *     *     *

Mr. Collins died in October 1755, and was buried under the same stone,
but without any additional inscription. Mr. Edward Collins was the
eldest son of John Collins, Esq. of Treworgan, in St. Erme, and
brother of Mr. John Collins, Rector of Redruth. He studied for some
years at the Temple, with the view of being called to the bar, and it
is said that he became a clergyman from principles of conscience.

Mr. Collins retained uniformly through life the respect of all around
him; he appears to have been a man of learning and of taste, but of
austere manners. I have heard from one who was present, that Mr. and
Mrs. Collins meeting accidentally, at a neighbouring gentleman’s, a
lady who was not of the Established Church, they refused to hold any
conversation with her.

Their only son, Mr. John Collins, Vicar of Ledbury in Herefordshire,
supported the reputation derived from his father. He distinguished
himself as a man of letters on various occasions; one of the editors
of Shakspeare left his library to Mr. Collins, in gratitude for
assistance afforded him, and there may be found a very curious note at
the conclusion of Troilus and Cressida, in the edition by Johnson and
Steevens, with Mr. Collins’s name subscribed.

The next Vicar of St. Earth was Mr. Symonds, who acquired the living
through a curious combination of circumstances. Mr. John Stephens, the
principal merchant at St. Ives, and agent for the Earl of
Buckinghamshire in the management of the borough, was a zealous
Presbyterian. The living of St. Ives with Lelant, had been designed
for some young man of the town, who indiscreetly, and probably in
joke, declared that when he succeeded to the church he would preach
furiously against Presbyterians, and teach that Hell itself was
strewed over with their bones. This was said in a garden, in defiance
of the Cornish proverb, Nynges gun heb lagas, na kei heb scover.
“There is no downs without eyes, nor hedge or wall without ears.” And
Mr. Stephens walking in a garden adjoining overheard this declaration,
and in consequence exerted his influence with the patron to obtain the
living from the Bishop of Exeter for one who might prove less
unfavourably disposed towards his sect, the only one at that time
considered as formidably hostile to the Established Church; and to
ensure this object Mr. Symonds was selected, because his father, who
exercised the trade of a barber at Cambridge, discharged also the
office of clerk to a Presbyterian meeting-house.

Mr. Symonds was received as a friend at St. Ives, and elected into the
Corporation. But in the course of a few years a violent struggle arose
respecting the election of a Recorder, when Mr. Symonds most prudently
considering that nothing further was likely to be obtained from those
who had already given him a living, sold himself to the opposite
party, carried the election for them by his casting vote, and received
the living of St. Earth. See various Essays in the London Magazine,
with the signature Y. Z. for 1767, pp. 225, 456, 464, 628; for 1768,
pp. 25, 199, 575; for 1769, pp. 18, 235, 578.

Mr. Symonds died in 1775, and was succeeded by Mr. George Rhodes, of
Devonshire, some time a Fellow of Exeter College. This gentleman
having obtained preferment near his immediate connections, resigned
the living in 1781, and was succeeded by Mr. Mayow, of Bray near Looe,
who never resided, and died in the year 1800, when the benefice was
given to Mr. Samuel Gurney, recently deceased (1833) and to whose
memory a marble slab has been immediately placed over the chancel door
by his mother, in her ninety-fourth year.

The glebe land is more extensive and of greater value than in most
other parishes, and the vicarage house is one of the best in Cornwall,
a new front having been added by Mr. Collins, and some improvements
made by Mr. Rhodes. There is also a rectorial glebe; and a large house
near the eastern end of the bridge, stands on the spot where formerly
was a barn for receiving the tithe corn.

There is a third slab stone in memory of Mr. Richard Shuckburgh,
brother to the well-known mathematician and astronomer of
Shuckborough, in Warwickshire. Mr. Humphrey Williams, then the
resident curate, had married Miss Sarah Bate, his half-sister, who is
also buried in St. Earth’s church.

The church-yard is still too small for the parish, notwithstanding its
being enlarged in the year 1817, chiefly at the expense of the Editor,
and by virtue of a general Act of parliament which he brought into the
House of Commons for that express purpose, 56 Geo. III. c. 141.

The bridge is said by Leland to have been constructed two hundred
years before his time, or about five hundred years ago. The causeway
is very long, but there were originally only three small arches. A
fourth, somewhat larger, has been added at the eastern end. The
roadway was so narrow that a single carriage had, at one part, great
difficulty to pass, and the whole created a large expense to the
county, occasioned by accidents to the walls, and by wheels always
running in the same track. In the year 1816, the Editor procured a
grant of fifty pounds, and, expending somewhat more than an equal sum
himself, he got the road widened sufficiently for all useful purposes,
more especially as in the year 1825 a causeway was made across the
river, about a mile further down. St. Earth adjoins to no less than
seven parishes: Lelant, Ludgvan, St. Hilary, Breage, Crowan, Gwinear,
and Phillaek.

Trewinnard has been, without all comparison, the principal place in
this parish.

I have not any means of affirming or of contradicting the relation of
Mr. Hals, as to the tragical event imputed to the last Trewinnard:
some indistinct tradition of a murder was handed down to within my
remembrance. The transactions of this gentleman’s grandfather with the
House of Commons are given by Mr. Hatsell, as derived from authentic
sources, in his Parliamentary Precedents, vol. i. p. 59, of the
edition of 1796, and p. 60 in the last edition. I apprehend that he
was then Member for Helston. One of the family resided till very
lately in the Strand, London; for, struck by the name “Trewinnard,”
the Editor was induced to call at the house. Mr. Trewinnard said that
his family came, as he had heard, from a town so called in Cornwall,
and that he had some old deeds in his possession. These were
exhibited, and proved to be leases of various farms in St. Earth
parish. The Mohuns appear to have made this place a principal
ressdence, for the cross engrailed exhibits itself not only on
fragments of painted glass preserved in the church, but also on the
seat or pew, quartered or impaled with various arms, and in one
instance with the fleur-de-lis and the lions, of England and France.

Mr. Hals states that the estate was divided between the three
daughters of Sir Reginald Mohun; that one of these daughters married
Sir Thomas Arundel, of Talvorne, and that his part was purchased by
Sir Nicholas Hals, of Fentongallon, who had the other two-thirds on
leases for lives; but that John Hals sold the whole. It is probable
that the purchaser must have been Mr. Bellot, of Bochym, whose
daughter brought the one-third freehold, and the two-thirds lease for
lives, to Mr. Thomas Hawkins; yet Reginald Mohun is said by Mr.
Lysons, under Cury, to have given one of his daughters, with Bochym,
to Francis Bellot; through whom Mr. Hawkins, the present possessor,
connects himself with the ancient and baronial family of Mohun.

However Mr. Thomas Hawkins acquired Trewinnard, the property has now
been possessed by his family above a century and a half.

The _first_ of his ancestors who settled in Cornwall was Mr. John
Hawkins, who is said to have come from Kent in the year 1554. He
married a daughter of the officiating Minister of Blisland.

_Second_, John Hawkins, their son, designated merchant, married Jane
Rother or Williams, of Grampound.

_Third_, John Hawkins, gent. married Paschas, daughter of Joseph
Cooke, of Mevagissey.

_Fourth_, Thomas Hawkins, who died in the lifetime of his father,
married Adry, daughter of ―――― Crudge.

_Fifth_, John Hawkins, gent. married Loveday, daughter of George
Trenhayle.

_Sixth_, Thomas Hawkins, their son, married, first, Florence, daughter
of James Praed, esq. of Trevethow, by whom he had one daughter,
married to John Williams, of Helston, merchant. He married, secondly,
Ann, daughter and coheir of Christopher Bellott, of Bochym, and died
in 1716, leaving one son and one daughter.

_Seventh_, Christopher Hawkins, esq. barrister-at-law, married Mary,
daughter and coheir of Philip Hawkins, of Pennance, esq. and
practically his sole heiress, as well as of her brother Philip
Hawkins, D.D. sometime Master of Pembroke college, Cambridge.

They resided during several years in London, where Mr. Hawkins
practised as a lawyer; but, having lost several children, they
determined on removing into the country, and finally settled at
Trewinnard about the year 1750. They had one daughter, Jane, married
to Sir Richard Vyvyan, of Trelowarren. And

_Eighth_, Thomas Hawkins, esq. who married Anne, daughter of James
Heywood, esq. a merchant of London. He represented Grampound in
Parliament, and died in 1766, leaving four sons and one daughter.

Philip died at Eton.

Sir Christopher, Member for Michell, Grampound, Penryn, and St. Ives,
in different Parliaments, and created a Baronet July 28, 1791. He was
a Fellow of the Royal, Antiquarian, and Horticultural Societies, and
published in 1811 “Observations on the Tin Trade of the Ancients in
Cornwall, and on the Ictis of Diodorus Siculus.” He died unmarried in
1829.

Thomas died a young man.

John Hawkins, the present representative of the family, celebrated
throughout Europe for his general knowledge on all subjects, his
science, literature, and travels, especially through Greece, the most
interesting portion of the ancient world, married the only daughter of
Mr. Sibthorpe, Member for Lincoln, and has two sons and four
daughters; the eldest, Mr. John Heywood Hawkins, is a distinguished
Member of the present Parliament. His sister is the widow of Mr.
Trelawney Brereton.

The house at Trewinnard has been so much altered and improved since
Mr. Christopher Hawkins came to reside there, about eighty years ago,
as scarcely to leave a trace of what it had been in former times; but
the garden remains, a pleasing specimen of cut yew, trim box, and
thorn hedges. There was also a building, detached from the house,
supposed to have been the ancient chapel, although, I think,
inaccurately, as it stood north and south. One of the upstairs rooms
has tapestry representing the victory of Constantine, with his
celebrated vision of the Cross. But, above all, here are preserved the
remains of an old coach, suspended on long leathers without springs,
and in general form corresponding with the coach exhibited by the Lord
Mayor of London. I believe, however, that it is much less ancient than
has generally been supposed, and it has been in actual use within
seventy years.

Trewinnard has the advantage of a stream of water, brought with great
art over very uneven ground from a distance of two or three miles,
conducted into almost every field, and supplying the house.

The place of next importance in this parish is Trelisick. Perhaps the
etymology of this word may be tre-lès-ick, the town on the inclosed
water, les, or lis, being an inclosed place; and the river Hayle here
expands itself into the appearance of a lake; and the same
circumstance applies to Trelesick as the head of Falmouth harbour.

The tale related by Mr. Hals respecting the change of name from De
Camborne to Paynter, does not seem very probable. I remember, however,
a man of that family who was a house-painter, and who would be driven
into most violent fits of passion when boys hallooed after him,
“Painter by name and painter by nature.”

Mr. Francis Paynter is said to have married, first, a daughter of ――――
Sutherland, Esq. one of the Clerks of the Admiralty, and to have had
by her one son, who died in his father’s lifetime. I apprehend that
this son, James, too warmly espousing the politics then most popular
in Cornwall, took an active part in proclaiming King James on the
death of Queen Anne; that he was indicted by the victorious party,
acquitted at Launceston, and welcomed by bonfire and by ball from
thence to the Land’s End.

Of the two daughters by his second marriage, with his cousin of
Boskenna, one made a most imprudent match with a foreigner, and
settled in France, leaving many descendants.

The other daughter, Mary, born in 1709, married a very respectable
gentleman, Mr. Hearle, of Penryn. They acquired the other sister’s
share of the property by purchase, and the whole is now equally
divided between the families of her three daughters. One married the
Rev. Henry Hawkins Tremayne, of Heligon; another Francis Rodd, Esq. of
Trebather; and the third Capt. Wallis, of the Royal Navy, well known
for his discovery of Otaheite, in a voyage round the world.

The house at Trelisick has been greatly reduced in size; but the whole
place continues to bear the appearance of a gentleman’s seat, and the
property is much improved by the rapid advance of trade and of
establishments at Hayle.

This portion of the Hearle and Paynter estate has been assigned to Mr.
Francis Hearle Rodd.

       *     *     *     *     *

The place next of importance in this parish was probably Tredrea. The
name, perhaps, imports the thoroughfare town, as it lies on the way
from Trewinnard to the church.

There was here a large house inhabited by a family of the same name,
who appear in the parish register two centuries ago as Esquires, a
distinction then sparingly applied. The property is said to have
passed, by a mortgage unredeemed, to the St. Aubyns of Crowan, who
granted it on a lease for lives, in the year 1685, to Mr. Matthew
Phillips. One of his daughters married Mr. John Davies, younger
brother of Henry Davies, Esq. of Bosence. Mr. John Davies had a
daughter, Catherine Davies, eventually heiresss of her brother Henry
Davies, and through him of her father and uncle. Her son is the Editor
of this work.

The old house at Tredrea having fallen into a state of decay, Mr.
Henry Davies took it down about the year 1750, and built small a neat
house on the same spot, where the Editor still occasionally resides.

Bosence, in St. Earth, has belonged time out of mind, (certainly from
before the reign of Henry the Seventh,) to the family of Davies. On it
there is a very perfect Roman entrenchment; and various articles of
Roman workmanship, found on removing the earth, are described and
figured by Dr. W. Borlase, in his Antiquities of Cornwall, p. 316,
edit. 1759; and also in a Paper communicated to the Royal Society in
1759, vol. xi. p. 322, of the Abridgment; and the Articles themselves
having been presented by Mr. Henry Davies to Dr. Borlase, were by him
deposited in the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, where they are now
preserved. Another Roman intrenchment, but much less perfect, is
situated on the summit of the hill on the south side of the road
leading eastward, at about half a mile distant from St. Earth bridge:
this is mentioned by Leland. The Editor availed himself of an
opportunity for purchasing it about ten years ago, to prevent its
further destruction.

In the church-yard are several monuments to the Davieses, particularly
one to Mr. William Davies, the Editor’s great-grandfather.

       *     *     *     *     *

A flat stone, lying on a raised grave, having the arms of Davies, a
chevron between three mullets pierced, impaled with the ancient arms
of Noye, Azure, three crosses botony in a bend Argent. The more recent
arms are, Argent, three bendlets and a canton Sable, on the canton a
cross of the Field. There is this inscription round the edge.

     Here lieth the body of William Davies, of Bosworgy, in this
     parish, Gent. who was buried the 28th day of February, in
     the 54th year of his age, anno 1690.

On the middle of the stone:

                Virtus post funera vivit.
  Must death divide us now, and close thine eyes?
  How shall I live, when thou art gone, to hear
          Our children’s cries?
  Look on, but spare your tears, forbear to weep:
  My death’s no death――in Christ a blessed sleep.
  O blessed Sleep to me! that art both free
  From sting of Death, and from Grave’s victory!
  O, Death, where’s now thy sting, or, Grave, thy power?
  My soul triumphs in Christ, my Saviour;
  Cease, then, your tears for me, who am in bliss――
  Tho’ here intomb’d, my soul in Heaven is.
  Be sure always t’ observe old David’s song,
  And never trust that man that did me wrong.
  Survivors will be apt to act their part,
  And seek all means they can to break thy heart;
  But trust in God, and he will thee defend
  From all thine enemies: and love thy friend.
  Farewell, dear wife and children! Friends, adieu!
  Observe those friends whose promises prove true.

I cannot account for this extraordinary epitaph.

Near this tomb stands a handsome marble sarcophagus, erected over a
stoned vault, with the following inscriptions:

On the south side:

  In memory
  of Henry Davies, of Tredrea, Esq.
  a Lieutenant in the Cornwall Militia.
  He was a dutiful son, an affectionate brother,
  an obliging relation, a sincere friend,
  and in all repects a worthy gentleman.
  He died of the smallpox at London,
  December 10, 1760, aged 36,
  justly lamented by all his friends and acquaintance.

       *     *     *     *     *

On the north side:

  Here lyeth interred the remains
  of John Davies, Gent.
  who departed this life May the 29th, 1737,
  in the 51st year of his age.
  And of Mary and Philippa, his daughters.
  Mary Davies died Jan. 2d, 1740, aged 8.
  Philippa Davies died at Bristol Wells,
  August the 18th, 1755, in the 25th year of her age.

       *     *     *     *     *

On the northern end:

  Elizabeth Davies,
  widow of Mr. John Davies,
  and daughter of Matthew Phillipps,
  of Tredrea,
  died April the 21st, 1775,
  aged 80.

       *     *     *     *     *

On the west end:

  In memory of
  the Rev. Edward Giddy, M.A.
  during 43 years an active and most useful Magistrate,
  who departed this life March the 6th, 1814,
  in his 80th year.
  Also of
  Catherine, his wife,
  sister and heir of Henry Davies, Esq.
  who died February the 3d, 1803, aged 75,
  leaving one son and one daughter:
  Davies Giddy,
  and
  Mary Philippa Davies Guillemard.

The Editor is desirous of preserving a short memorial to a relation,
whose kindnesses to him were unceasing from infancy to the fifty-fifth
year of his age; and to a servant whom he has ever regarded with
gratitude as the one whose precepts and instructions he imbibed with
the utmost pleasure and delight, and whose tales of the times of old
remain deeply impressed upon his mind.

  To the memory of
  Mrs. Grace Jenkins,
  born at Treloweth, 1734,
  died April 7th, 1823,
  having passed the greater part of her life
  in this parish, universally
  esteemed and respected.

       *     *     *     *     *

  This memorial,
  in gratitude for her long and faithful service,
  is inscribed to the memory of
  Jochebed Hoskin,
  who died March the 23d, 1814, aged 86,
  by Davies Gilbert.
  She came to live with Mrs. Elizabeth Davies,
  at Tredrea, in 1750,
  and continued in the family ever afterwards.

    Time rolls his ceaseless course! the race of yore,
  That danced our infancy upon their knee,
    And told our wondering childhood legends store
  Of strange adventures happ’d by land or sea,
  How are they blotted from the things that be!

There is a vault belonging to the family of Hawkins; and Mr.
Christopher Hawkins, in 1767, and his widow, Mrs. Mary Hawkins, in
1780, are laid in it, I believe with some of their children; but there
is not any inscription.

       *     *     *     *     *

Perthcolumb presents some appearance of antiquity. There is a
tradition of its once having given a sheriff to the county. The place
now belongs to Mr. Andrew Hoskin, descended from a very ancient family
in the adjoining parish of Lelant.

Gear has a good house, once the seat of another branch of the
Davieses, but bought by the Editor’s father.

Tregethes belonged for several descents to the Penroses. It is now the
property of Mr. Ellis, who resides in it.

About the year 1782, a mill was constructed on a part of Trewinnard,
for rolling copper and iron, by a company established at Hayle thirty
years before, on the supposed patriotic principle of smelting our own
copper ore; but, after many years of competition against the
smelting-works in Wales, it was discovered that one shipload of copper
ore required three shiploads of coal, and that by importing coal from
Swansea to work the steam-engine, and by exporting the ores to be
smelted there, vessels were enabled to obtain cargoes in both
directions; and, in consequence, the works at Trewinnard and at Hayle
are no longer employed for their original purposes.

The rage for importing coals to reduce our own ores at home, which was
epidemic about the middle of the last century, seems to have
originated from a confusion of ideas in the application of analogies,
the most abundant source of error. It would be absurd to send our food
across the seas to be roasted or boiled; therefore the same principle
was extended to copper ore.

These establishments were, however, maintained for some considerable
time by the genius and the abilities of one man. Mr. John Edwards had
been taken as a clerk for general business by Mr. Hawkins, just at the
time when he and other Cornish gentlemen set on the copper-works. Mr.
Edwards soon forced himself into the chief management, became a
partner, and continued the works during the whole of his life; not
being distinguished merely as a merchant or manufacturer, but as a
scholar and a gentleman.

Gurlyn is said by Mr. Lysons to have been the residence of various
considerable families. It has, for perhaps a century, been the joint
property of Messrs. Gregor and Harris. About the year 1760, Mr. John
Millett, possessing a lease of this place for lives, built an entirely
new house there; but the lease has been bought in by the gentleman
seised of the freehold, and the house taken down.

Treloweth is a manor heretofore the property of the Tredreas. On a
part of this manor stands a tin-smelting house. Tin, by the laws of
the Stannaries, must be reduced to the metallic state in Cornwall; and
much less quantities of coal are required than in the case of copper.
Till about the commencement of the last century, all the tin ores of
Cornwall were smelted in small blast furnaces, by means of charcoal or
of peat. At that period some Germans introduced the reverberatory
furnace, and with it the use of coal. Several smelting-houses were
immediately constructed by the gentlemen of the county, and although
not among the first, that at Treloweth. I have ascertained the exact
period of its building, from this circumstance, that the workmen were
interrupted by the total eclipse of the sun, which happened about 15
minutes before nine on the 22d of April, 1715, O. S.

Mr. Henry Davies, the Editor’s great-uncle, was among those who
contributed to the building, and the crest of his arms, a lamb
carrying a flag, was adopted as a mark to distinguish the slabs of
this house; all the different smelting and blowing houses having
always used specific marks. The crest, had, I presume, been originally
taken in allusion to the Welch and Cornish sound, at least of his
name; _davas_ being Cornish for a sheep, or perhaps a shepherd. This
mark, however, conveyed to the minds of persons in Catholic countries
some idea of consecration, and procured a preference for the Lamb Tin,
although it never claimed to have the slightest superiority; and
finally, all the other houses have taken the same, or similar marks.

Among the Germans who introduced the reverberatory furnace, was the
celebrated Becker. His son became a bricklayer, and his grandson’s
widow died about twenty-five years ago in the poorhouse at St. Earth.

The Rev. John Ralph, Vicar of Ingatestone, son of the Vicar of St.
Earth, gave in 1754 a hundred pounds towards founding a school at St.
Earth, to be applied as Mr. Collins, the then Vicar, and Mr. Hawking,
of Trewinnard, should direct. Some portion of the 100_l._ was expended
in repairing a small house in the church-yard. The remainder, together
with another hundred pounds, given by Mr. Hawkins, remain in aid of
the schoolmaster.

  This parish measures 3,791 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,708    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           558    2    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1122   |   1317   |   1604   |   1922
    giving an increase in 30 years of 71 per cent.
  The feast is the nearest Sunday to all Souls, Nov. 2.

Present Vicar, the Rev. John Punnett, collated in 1835 by the Right
Rev. Henry Phillpotts, present Bishop of Exeter, on a lapse from the
Dean and Chapter. Mr. Punnett has wonderfully improved the house and
the vicarage generally, which had previously been considered one of
the best in Cornwall.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

St. Earth is situated on felspar and hornblende rocks belonging to the
porphyritic series. In many parts these rocks are so silicious as to
give rise to very unproductive soils; but in other places, where the
felspar predominates, the land is very fertile. These rocks are
traversed by metalliferous veins, which are richer in copper than in
tin ores.




EGLES-HALE, or EGLES-HAYLE.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Trig-minorshire, and has upon the north
St. Minvor, east St. Mabyn and Bodman, south and west the river Allan.
For the modern name, it is taken from the church and the place of its
situation, and signifies the river church, or the church upon the
river. In the Domesday Book, 20th William I. this parish was taxed
under the jurisdiction of Treworder, or Trevorder, viz. the further
town, upon the confines thereof. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Egles-haile was valued to
first fruits c_s._; _Vicar ejusdem nihil, propter paupertatem_, the
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who endowed it. The incumbent Maye;
the rectory in possession of Walker. This church, in Wolsey’s
Inquisition, 1521, was rated 16_l._; and valued to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax, 1696, 200_l._ Walter Brounscomb, Bishop of Exeter 1270,
endowed this church, and Stoke-Gabriel church in Devon, and gave the
sheaf thereof towards celebrating the festival of the Angel Gabriel,
which he had instituted.

Park, that is, a field of any sort, otherwise in this parish it
signifies a deer-park, was one of the ancient seats of the Peverells,
lineally descended from William the Conqueror, by Jane his concubine,
the wife of Randolph Peverell, of Hatfield-Peverell parish, in Witham
Decanatus, in the county of Essex, who abdicated the said Jane, and
left her wholly on the Conqueror’s hands, who had issue by her a son,
named William Peverell, (who, because born during the joint marriage
and lives of the said Randolph and Jane, was surnamed Peverell,) upon
whom the Conqueror settled the honor, manor, and borough of
Nottingham, and town of Lyndeby, on him, and his heirs male. [Here Mr.
Hals goes into a long history of the Peverells, wholly unconnected
with Cornwall.]

Thomas Peverell, of Park, a supposed descendant of the Conqueror’s
son, who was also of Ermington and Sandford, in Devon, was Sheriff of
Cornwall 13 Richard II. He was also Sheriff of Devon 20 Richard II.
Richard Peverell, his son, was Sheriff of Devon 14 Henry IV. who dying
without issue male, his lands went in marriage with his daughter,
married to Basset of Umberleigh, Botreaux, and others.

On this lordship of Park those gentlemen had their deer-park, some of
the walls and fences being yet standing; their tower-house, and other
buildings answerable, their gardens, walk, and fish-ponds beneath the
same, the ruins whereof are yet extant. How those lands descended down
from Peverell’s heirs to the last age I know not; about which time it
was in the possession of Opie and Hickes; from whom it passed by sale
to the Hon. John Molesworth, temp. Queen Anne, as I take it.

The arms of Peverell were, Gules, a fess Argent between six crosses
pattée Or.

Those Peverells are especially memorable here by two crosses of
moorstone in the highway set up by them, still extant, and called
Peverell’s Crosses. Not far from them is another moorstone cross, near
Mount-Charles, called the Prior’s Cross, whereon is cut the figure of
a hook and a crook, in memory of that privilege and freedom granted by
him to the poor of Bodmin, for gathering, for fire-boote and
house-boote, such boughs and branches of oak-trees in his contiguous
wood of Dunmear, as they could reach to or come at with a hook and a
crook, without further damage to the trees thereof. From whence arose
the Cornish proverb, concerning filching, purloining, or taking
another person’s goods, overmuch or indirectly, beyond what is allowed
them, &c. “that they will have it by hook or by crook.”

Pen-carou, Pen-caro, alias Pen-carow, i. e. head-deer, or chief-deer,
formerly part of the Peverell’s deer-park; and from thence so
denominated, as some think. But when I consider that Caer-kynock, or
Caer-kunock, is situate on the lands thereof, now called
Castle-kynock, i. e. the king, prince, or sovereign’s castle, extant
here long before the Norman Conquest, I take the modern name Pen-carow
only to be a corruption of Pen-caer-ou, or Pen-caer-ow, i. e. my head
castle, or city, intrenched or fortified place, according to the
artificial and natural circumstances thereof, it being on a high hill,
overlooking the contiguous country, the ruins are of the largest
British camp or intrenchment that ever I saw in Cornwall, containing
about 100 acres of land, and consisting of a four-fold rampart, yet of
a great height in some places, with several platforms or counterscarps
within the same, for offence or defence, in case of storm or surprise.

[The camp in Pencarrow Park has a double vallum, the inner one oval,
inclosing an area 250 feet by 200; the outer one of an irregular form.
On the east side, at the distance of about 700 feet from this camp,
are some extensive outworks. _Lysons._]

This barton gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen,
surnamed De Pen-carow, who siding with Richard the Third against Henry
the Seventh, as some say, but, as others will have it, with Flammock,
in his insurrection against that King, he lost this place, and other
lands, by attainder of treason (see Bocarne, in BODMIN), having before
conveyed a great part of his estate to Henry the first Lord Marney, of
Colquitta, to procure a reprieve, or pardon of his life, from that
king; from whose heirs it came to the Walkers of Exeter, by descent or
purchase, and from them to John Molesworth, of Tretane, Esq. first but
an attorney-at-law, afterwards commissioner or auditor to Queen
Elizabeth in those parts for the Duchy of Cornwall, that married one
of the coheirs of Hender, so called from the parish of Molesworth, in
Lightstone hundred, in the county of Huntingdon.

From the local place aforesaid, was denominated Walter de Molesworth,
Sheriff of Bedfordshire, from the 26th to the 36th of Edward I. anno
Dom. 1298; the which gentleman accompanied King Edward into Palestine,
and returned with him safe into England again. After the decease of
the said Edward, he was knighted by King Edward the Second, and was
made Sheriff of Bedfordshire again by the name of Walter de
Molesworth, Knt. from the 6th to the 9th of Edward II. 1316, in which
year he died, and was succeeded by John de Pabenham. From which
gentleman, as I am informed, was lineally descended John Molesworth,
Esq. aforesaid, that married Hender, and by her had issue, Hender
Molesworth, Esq. that married Spark of Plymouth, and by her had issue
my very kind friend John Molesworth, Esq. and Hender Molesworth, with
a daughter married to Dr. Hart; the which John Molesworth married two
wives, Wise, and Slannen, the relict of Legard, afterwards knighted by
Charles the Second, and had issued by Wise, John Molesworth, Esq. that
married Arscott of Tetcot, and hath issue, Hender Molesworth
aforesaid, the son of Hender Molesworth, who being bred a soldier,
managed affairs with that valour and conduct, that, after passing
gradually to the dignity of a colonel, he was by King James the Second
made a baronet of England, and governor of the Island of Jamaica,
where he purchased a considerable estate in land, and called it
Tremolesworth, which, together with his honour (if he died without
issue male, according to the limitation of his letters patent as a
baronet), is now legally descended to Sir John Molesworth, of
Pencarow, Bart. The arms of Molesworth are, Vaire, a bordure Gules,
charged with eight cross-crosslets Argent.

Kestell, in this parish, i. e. a castle, so called, I presume, for
that heretofore it had upon the lands thereof some camp or castle-like
intrenchment, for kestell is derived from the provincial Latin of the
Romans in Britain, _castrum_, or _castellum_; which place gave name
and original to an old family of gentlemen, surnamed de Kestell. The
first possessor thereof of this tribe, as appears from the record in
the Office of Arms, was John de Kestell, temp. Edward I. where his
posterity have ever since flourished, to the time of writing hereof,
in good fame and reputation, between the degrees of a justice of the
peace and that of a hundred constable; the present possessor James
Kestell, Gent. that married Vaughan of Trewothick and Ottery, in
Devon, his father Kestell of Manacow, and giveth for his arms, Argent,
three falcons Proper; as also, Or, three castles turreted Gules. (See
Kestel, in MANACCAN.)

Pen-davy, or Pen-duffy, i. e. David’s head, (why so called, qu.?) a
head or promontory of land situate between the Alan and the Kestell
rivers, was formerly the lands of Kestell (and before that the Prior
of Bodmin’s, as I am informed); by Kestell’s daughter and heir it
passed in marriage to Nathaniel Moyle, Esq. barrister-at-law, of
Bakehouse, who for want of issue sold it to Mr. Ustick, now in
possession thereof.

Crone, Croan, in this parish, signifies a skin or hide of leather; so
called either from the tanner that made or sold leather here, or
rather for that this tenement consisteth _in quanto_ of a hide or skin
of land, viz. as much arable ground as one plough can cultivate in a
year, commonly reckoned about eighty statute acres. This barton was
formerly the lands of Roscarrock, by whom it was sold to Michael Hill,
Gent. by whose son, John Hill, Rector of St. Mabyn, it was sold to
Edward Hoblyn, Gent. attorney-at-law, a younger branch of the
Nanswhiddon family by the Hoblyns of Bodmin, now in possession
thereof. He is especially memorable for his saying, when first he
began to practice, “_that he would get an estate by the law_ one way
or other,” viz. right or wrong, and common fame saith he was as good
as his word, _in the worst[41] sense_. Whereupon, since his death,
by an unknown but arch hand, was fixed upon his grave in this parish
church this taunting epitaph:

  Here lies Ned,
  I am glad he’s dead,
  If there must be another,
  I wish ’twere his brother,
  And, for the good of the Nation,
  His whole relation.

Treg-leah, in this parish, i. e. the law town or dwelling, is the
lands of William Keckwitch, Gent. a younger branch of the Keckwitches
of Trehawke, and giveth for his arms, Argent, in bend two lions
passant Sable. It was since sold to Mr. Hoblyn.

In this parish is Castle Killy-biry, or Killy-biny, consisting of
about six acres of ground upon a well-advanced hill, within a treble
intrenchment of earth. Perhaps one of the castles possessed by that
arch-traitor the Pictish Mordred, slain by King Arthur, (see
DUNDAGELL,) from whence his soldiers were routed; for the circumstance
of this castle on the Alan river may agree with those verses mentioned
under Lentegles by Camelford, for the river Camel is properly called
the Alan river, as well as Camel.

Below Egles-hayle church (on the Alan river as aforesaid), where the
sea creek or cove of Padstow Haven makes its daily flux and reflux,
stands Ward Bridge, i. e. guard or watch bridge; otherwise, as Mr.
Carew says, called Wade Bridge, from a little ford near it, which
afforded, when the tide was out, a short but dangerous passage over
it. But where this little _vadum_, or ford, should be, I know not,
there being no other river to pass over from east to west but the Alan
river aforesaid. Which bridge, as an artificial ligament, fasteneth
the two parishes of Egles-hayle and St. Breock together, they being in
all other places separated by the river. It was built in the latter
end of Edward the Fourth’s reign, and beginning of Henry the
Seventh’s; not, as Leland says, at the county charge, but, as all
other works of this kind were, viz. by collections, and commutation of
penance for sins committed; for it was not made a county bridge till
the beginning of James the First’s reign. Now this licence of all
spiritual benedictions, collection, and commutation of penance,
throughout the counties of Cornwall and Devon, was there granted by
Dr. Peter Courtenay, Bishop of Exeter, to Thomas Longbound, then Vicar
of Egles-hayle, his chaplain or vicar, 1485, who raised a considerable
sum of money by that means, viz. of absolution, as also from
charitable and well-disposed Christians. The undertaker, that expert
mason John de Harlyn, and the treasurer Longbound, brought the
bridge’s building to that perfection as it now stands, consisting of
seventeen arches of stone of great height and magnitude, all built
with great cost and labour, through which (as aforesaid) the sea
passes up and down daily through the Alan river to Tagus, (i. e.
Goodwood,) a mile, and is navigable for boats, barges, and lighters,
to that place, which there bring sea sand, and other commodities, for
the country-people’s use.

On the lower side of the bridge, from Padstow Haven, ships and barks
laden with merchandise frequently arrive, of burthen from twenty to
sixty tons, from Bristol, Wales, Ireland, and other places, where
their commodities have better vent than at Padstow, two or three miles
below, nearer the main sea.

Leland, in his Itinerary, tells us, volume the second, that some of
the arches of this bridge were laid upon quicksand, which for some
time made the treasurer and undertaker despair of success, till they
projected the laying of packs of wool under the groundwork, which
proved such a useful expedient as carried on the fabric according to
their desire, and the same stands firm to this day.

After this bridge was erected, Longbound, the vicar, gave a small
parcel of land towards the repair thereof, now worth 20_l._ per annum,
and enfeoffed the twelve men of this parish, and their successors, in
trust with the same for ever. There are also other lands in St.
Breock, given by the Prior of Bodmin, and other well-affected
benefactors to the bridge, for the same purpose. At present this
bridge stock is about 300_l._ and is set at the yearly rent for about
10_l._ per annum. Lastly, this just and indefatigable benefactor
Longbound, after he had finished the bridge, with the moneys and
stones left, caused to be built the tower of Egles-hayle church, as it
now stands; over the belfry-door of which, in stone, on the north
side, are cut in an escutcheon his arms, viz. a human heart, and
superscribed Longbound. On the other side of the door aforesaid are
cut, impaled, a chevron between two falcons, and a chevron between
three ravens’ heads. Which first I take to be the arms of Kestell, and
the latter of Ravenscroft of Cheshire, his wife.

From this parish was denominated an old family of gentlemen surnamed
de Egles-hayle, of which family was Matheus de Egleshayle, Sheriff of
Devon from the 1st year of Edward the First to the 6th, who gave for
his arms, Argent, a cross Sable, and a fleur-de-lis in the first
quarter.


TONKIN.

In this parish stands the lordship and barton of Pencarrow, which name
may signify a deer-park. But I take the name of Pencarrow to be of a
much more ancient date than the first bringing of deer into this land,
and that the name is taken from the natural circumstances of the
place, as compounded of pen-car-ow, head-rock-ry, for in this place is
digged a quarry of bright clear freestone, that works with tool,
plane, or hammer, equal to any other in Cornwall, as may be seen by
the beautiful house Sir John Molesworth has built with it, and which
is not yet quite finished. And surely it may be said of this barton,
without disparagement to any other man’s lands, that for wood, water,
and stone, it may compare with, if not exceed, any other part of the
kingdom; neither do the lands come behind any in the neighbourhood for
fruitfulness. It is the seat of Sir John Molesworth, Knt. and Bart.
who was knighted by Charles the Second, and succeeded to the title of
baronet by the issueless decease of his younger brother, Sir Hender
Molesworth, Governor of Jamaica, who left him a considerable estate in
that island, and was the first baronet created by William the Third.
This family is a younger branch of the descendants of Sir Walter de
Molesworth, of Northamptonshire, who flourished in martial prowess in
the days of Edward the First, and went with him to the Holy Land. John
Molesworth, son of the above Sir John Molesworth, married the daughter
of ―――― Arscot, Esq. of Tetcot, in Devonshire.

Kestle. The very name implies that heretofore it was a fortified
place. Here liveth James Kestle, Esq. from thence denominated ever
since that John de Kestle, lord of this place in the time of Edward
the First, assumed that name; where his posterity, for about twenty
descents, have ever since flourished in good fame and reputation; and
give for their arms, Argent, a chevron Sable between three falcons
Proper, armed with tasses and bells Or. Their crest, a castle Gules.

Pendavy, the good promontory, is situated on a hill forming a
peninsula by the river Alan, on the west side, and a rivulet which has
two heads, one in St. Teath and the other in St. Mabyn, on the east
side. Here dwelleth Nathaniel Moyle, Esq. a younger brother of Sir
Walter Moyle, of Bake; to whom, by his marriage with Johan, the
daughter and heir of Thomas Kestle, of this place, Esq. the lordship
descended. Mr. Moyle having only one son, of the same name as himself,
by this marriage, that died unmarried about four years since, and
being something indebted, sold this lordship (which claimeth a royalty
over all the river, and the bushelage of all goods brought up to Wade
bridge) for a very considerable value (reserving his own and his
lady’s lives on the barton), in the year 1703, to Michael Ustick,
Gent. collector of Bideford, and second brother to Oliver Ustick, of
Lea, in St. Burian, Gent.

The Harbour of Padstow is navigable every tide up to this place, where
vessels of sixty or seventy tons carry and recarry their loading of
such commodities as the country needs, coal, salt, limestone, &c. and
here they find generally a better vent for their goods than at
Padstow, near the mouth of the river, which has occasioned the
building of some houses on each side of the bridge, but mostly on the
eastern, where are indifferent good quarters for travellers, who are
sometimes forced to stop here against their wills, there being no
passing over the bridge to the west in high spring tides, by reason
that the ground on the western side is very low, and at such times
overflowed with the sea.

Croan, the cross. Mr. Edward Hoblin built a good house at this place,
and left it to his eldest son, of the same name, who was sheriff of
Cornwall 8th George I. He married Barbara, the second daughter and
coheir of Henry Hawkins, of St. Austell, Gent. by whom he had only one
daughter, Damaris.


THE EDITOR.

Wade Bridge has a considerable number of houses on both sides of the
river; and I apprehend that no inconvenience is now experienced from
high tides on the western side. A toll has been levied for some years
past, in aid of the revenue left for its repair; and in this year
(1833) a railway, or tram road, is being constructed from thence to
Bodmin.

Pendavy was inhabited by Mr. Ustick, the son or successor of Mr.
Richard Ustick, who made the purchase. This gentleman married
Catherine Trewren, daughter of the Rev. Richard Trewren, of
Trewardreva, Rector of Withyell, and Catherine Davies, of St. Earth.

Mr. Ustick parted with Pendavy from a cause similar to that which
induced the former proprietor to sell it; and his widow, left without
a family, or much provision, resided at Padstow till her decease in
1791. Pendavy now belongs to Sir William Molesworth.

Crowan was given by the will of Mrs. Damaris Kirkham to her first
cousin, the Rev. Henry Hawkins Tremayne, and it is now the property of
his son, John Hearle Tremayne, Esq.

The church of this parish is situated in a manner very like to that of
St. Earth, on the river Hayle.

  Egles-hayle measures 4,250 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6757    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           622   14    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   781    |   954    |   1174   |  1335
    giving an increase of 71 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish lies parallel with that of St. Breock, on the opposite
side of the river Camel, and is composed of similar rocks.

Present Vicar, the Rev. Richard Corey, collated by the Bishop of
Exeter in 1804.


     [41] But whether in the first or last way who shall tell?




EGLES-KERRY.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north North
Petherwin; east, St. Thomas; south, Trewenn; west, St. Cleather. In
the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
Capella de Egleskerry in Decanatu de Major Trigshire xl_l._; after
which time, but before the statute of Richard the Second against the
total impropriation of vicarages, it was, by its patron and endower,
the Prior of Launceston, alias St. Stephen’s, wholly impropriated; so
that it is not named in Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and I take it
Tremayne vicarage was then as a daughter church consolidated into it
by the said Prior: whereby it is only a lectureship, the Vicar
subsisting on a small stipend.

In the Domesday Roll, 20 William I. (1087), this district was taxed
under the name of Pen-hall-an, now Penheale, then and still the voke
lands of a considerable manor. Soon after the Norman Conquest, if not
before, the De Boterells, alias De Botreauxes, were possessed of this
place; for in the time of Henry the Second and Richard the First,
Richard de Botreaux held 12 knights’ fees in Cornwall (Carew’s Survey
thereof, p. 49); one of which was held of the King in this place by
his posterity to the 3d Henry the Fourth; where we further read, p.
41: “William de Boteraux tenet dimid. part. feod. de Morton, in
Penhele, de Rege.” From the Botreauxes, for want of issue male, those
lands, by a daughter, with much other, were carried in marriage to
Hungerford; as Hungerfords’ heirs, in like manner, carried it to
Hastings. By Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, it was sold to George
Grenvill, Esq. that married Julyan, one of the daughters of William
Vyell, of Trevorder, who sold it to John Speccot, Esq. Sheriff of
Cornwall 20th James I. grandfather of my kind friend the Hon. John
Speccot, Esq. three times chosen Shire Knight for this county, temp.
William III. (in order to which the writer hereof and many of his
friends were his votes). He married the Lady Essex Robartes, daughter
of the Right Hon. John Earl of Radnor, who died without issue, and
settled those lands upon his kinsman Thomas Long, Esq. now in
possession thereof; and who giveth for his arms, Sable, a lion rampant
between eight cross-crosslets Argent: descended from the Longs of
Wiltshire.

John Speccot, Esq. gave by his last will and testament a thousand
pounds for the benefit of a mathematical school in the county of
Cornwall, where all children were to be taught gratis; the master to
have the interest of the 1,000_l._ This school was first opened at
Penryn, but is now at Looe.

Tre-lyn-ike, in this parish, i. e. the town of the lake, leate, or
bosom of waters, is the dwelling of Christopher Baron.

Since the writing hereof this gentleman is dead; and this place, for
want of issue, is descended to his sister’s son, Mr. Saltern, now in
possession thereof.


TONKIN.

This church is dedicated to St. Kyryasius, or Carisius, Bishop of
Ostia, in Italy, and who is said to have suffered martyrdom in the
year 226. But Moreri relates of this person, or of one similarly
named, that he pointed out to the Empress Helena the spot where the
true Cross had been concealed.

The Hon. John Speccot, three times Knight of the Shire, married the
Lady Essex Robartes, daughter of the Right Hon. John Earl of Radnor,
but on the very day subsequent to their marriage Mr. Speccot was
seized with the small-pox; and the lady experienced a fatal attack
from the same dreadful disease about a month afterwards, just as her
husband was getting well. His father married a daughter of John Eliot,
of Port Eliot, Esq. Mr. John Speccot died in August 1703, without
issue, and gave a great deal to charitable uses; but he devised the
bulk of his estate to the heirs of his aunt, and, after many lawsuits
and disputes, his first cousin, Thomas Long, came into possession of
Penhele. He was Sheriff of Cornwall In 1724, and left one son, John
Speccot Long, and three daughters. This gentleman died _sine prole_.
He was the last male heir, and the property went among his sisters.

The arms of Speccot are, on a bend Gules, three millrinds pierced
Argent. Penhele, or Penhale, is the head of the river.


THE EDITOR.

Of the three sisters of Mr. John Speccot Long, one remained single.
Another married Mr. Charles Phillipps, of Camelford, eldest son of Mr.
John Phillipps, attorney-at-law. This gentleman represented Camelford
in Parliament, and was Lieutenant-Colonel of the Cornwall Militia. He
survived his wife, and acquired through her a third part of the Long
property, which, with all his other possessions, he bequeathed in
equal portions to his two brothers, Mr. Jonathan Phillipps, a Captain
with him in the militia, and the Rev. William Phillipps, Rector of
Lanteglos, the parish including Camelford. These two brothers came to
some arrangement with the two sisters, by which this share of Penhale
at least reverted to them.

The third sister, Margaret Long, first married Mr. Charles Davie, of
the family settled at Orleigh, in Devonshire. He carried on, however,
some business in Bristol, and is said to have been in very bad
circumstances. He died after a few years, and in her old age the widow
was induced to marry Mr. John Bridlake Herring, a Major in the army,
who resorted to all possible methods for extorting money from the old
lady; one that will scarcely be credited, by terrifying her with
supposed apparitions. The three sisters are reputed to have excelled
in beauty of person, but to have been so utterly neglected in their
education, as scarcely to possess the common acquirement of reading.

The Editor remembers to have seen Penhale and the old lady in 1788.
Her appearance, then near eighty, justified the report respecting her
youth, and the house seemed to rank among the very finest specimens of
ancient buildings in Cornwall, as well for size as for architectural
decoration. Near the entrance stood a very curious dial, probably
placed there by Mr John Speccot, who founded a mathematical school.

The barton of Penhale is again divided; one portion belonging to a
grandson of Major Herring, who has taken the name of Cloberry, and
another to the Rev. Charles Sweet, of Kentisbury, in Devonshire.

  This parish measures 2,829 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 181            2195    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           301   17    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   307    |    395   |     436  |   537
    giving an increase of 74 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. John Serjeant, instituted in 1826.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Egles-Kerry is almost entirely situated on that extensive chain of
downs, which runs across the country from Launceston to the Bristol
Channel; composed of rocks which are very quartzose, but in many parts
appear to be almost entirely felspar, commonly, however, united with
some colouring material which stains them to a dark blue. This is
particularly the case near the church, where the rocks very strongly
resemble those at Rosecradock, and in other parts of St. Cleer.
Northward, these rocks appear to pass into the Dunstone; but it must
be confessed that their geological position is not yet elucidated;
for, like the compact rocks of King Arthur’s Castle in Tintagel, of
St. Stephen’s, and Pentire Points, on each side of Padstow Harbour,
and elsewhere, they yet require to be carefully and patiently
investigated.




ST. ENEDELLYAN, OR ST. DELYAN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Trigminor, and hath upon the north the
Irish Sea; east, St. Teth; south, St. Kewe; west, St. Minvor. This is
that Delian taxed in Domesday Roll, 20th William I. (1087,) and refers
to the name of the tutelar guardian and patron of this church, here
extant before the Norman Conquest, viz. St. Delian, or Telian, a
British saint, said to be made Bishop of Menevia, or Landaff, after
St. David’s death, anno Dom. 563, (see DAVIDSTOW,) (who was born in
Merionethshire, and had his education under St. Dubritius, Bishop of
Landaff, anno Dom. 520,) by whose instruction and piety he became a
learned and pious divine, and was furthered and confirmed therein by
St. David, afterwards Bishop of Landaff, alias Menevia.

This St. Delian accompanied St. David in pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to
visit the holy cross and sepulchre, from whence they safely returned
again into their own country; and finding the same greatly infected
with the plague, St. Delian, as was generally said, by his sincere and
fervent prayers soon delivered that country from the malignity of that
fatal disease, which long time before had destroyed great numbers of
its inhabitants. He is placed by Harpsfield and Campion in the Constat
of the Bishops of Landaff, and that he died about the year 570.

In this church of St. Delian, (now called Ene-Delian, or Ene-Dellian,)
soon after the Norman Conquest, some gentlemen, lords of tenements in
this parish, set up and endowed here a court, corporation, or college,
of six Prebends, or Canons Augustine, as council or assistants to the
Bishop, Dean, or Rector, viz. the Lord of the Barton of Trearike, now
Peter’s, and two others, who alternately are patrons of this church,
and present the rector thereto. The Prebend of Trearick was given by
Richardson to one Grey; the patronage of which is in the Earl of
Radnor.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, the
revenues of Ecclesia de Enedelian-ta, (id est, the church of the good
soul of Delian,) then a vicarage, were thus charged:

  1. Prebend. Dom. Paganus de Liske, in eadem, xl_s._
  2. Prebend. John Moderet, lx_s._
  3. Prebend. Henricus de Monkton, iiii_l._ ii_s._
  4. Prebend. Dominus Reginald Thick, iiii_l._ ii_s._
  5. Prebend. Magister Osberti, iiii. x_s._
  6. Prebend. Magister William de Wymondham, iiii_l._ x_s._
                        Vicarius ejusdem xx_s._
                          In all 23_l._ 4_s._

In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, this church of
Endelian is rated to First Fruits 10_l._ The Incumbent Wills; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, 180_l._

Within this district now stands the barton and manor of Ros-cur-ok,
rated as the voke lands of two manors or parishes in Domesday Roll,
20th William I. (1087.) The same, I suppose, mentioned in Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall, p. 47.

Tre-freke, alias Tre-vreke, alias Tre-frege, synonymous words in
British, (that is to say, the wife’s town, or a town pertaining to
some wife,) is the dwelling of John Hamly, Gent, that married
Treffreye.

Pen-nant, in this parish, (i. e. the head of the valley,) is the
dwelling of John Rawe, Gent. that married Kelly.

Tresongar, or Tresongadh, is the dwelling of John Matthews, Gent. that
married Vivian of Truan. The present possessor, Mr. Matthews, leaving
no issue male, his only daughter and heir is married to Henry Bond,
Gent. attorney-at-law, steward to the Earl of Radnor.

In this parish, as I take it, is situate the barton of Cheny (see St.
TETH).

It is now, I suppose, in possession of Mr. Danell.


TONKIN.

Roscarrake, in this parish, gave name and residence to the old and
famous family of gentlemen, from thence denominated De Roscarrake.

Richard de Roscarrack held in this place the fourth part of a knight’s
fee in the reign of Henry the Fourth, as appears from Carew’s Survey.

John Roscarrack was Sheriff of Cornwall in the 6th Henry VII. Richard
Roscarrack was Sheriff in 4th Edward VI. again 2d Elizabeth. And John
Roscarrack was Sheriff 17th Elizabeth.

They received great augmentation to their estate by the daughter and
heir of Pentire of Pentuan, who brought to them the whole patrimony of
that family: but, alas! so true is that saying, “Man doth not always
flourish,” the great estate of this family, by ill conduct, was much
wasted; and in the reign of Charles the Second, this very barton and
manor of Roscarrack was sold by Charles Roscarrack to Edward Boscowen,
Esq. in whose son and heir, Mr. Hugh Boscowen, of Tregothen, it now
resteth.

Trefreke now belongs to Mr. John Hemley, who giveth for his arms,
Argent, three hounds passant Azure.


THE EDITOR.

Port Isaac, a small town of the sea coast, with a harbour for boats
and sloops, is situated in this parish.

The church, standing on a high hill, is a landmark from the Bristol
Channel.

The rectory, and one of the prebends, are in the gift of the Crown.
Another of the prebends belongs to Mrs. Agar, the representative of
the Robartes. The third is in the presentation of Mr. Gray.

The north aile of the church is said to have been built by the
Roscarracks, and to have remained  their private property, with a
burial-place below it.

  This parish measures 3,083 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5215    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           745    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   727    |    950   |    1149  |  1218
    giving an increase of 67½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

St. Enedellyan has been long celebrated for its mines of antimony.
This metal occurs in the state of a sulphuret, associated with iron
pyrites, in quartz veins, which run east and west, traversing a blue
lamellar slate, very similar to that which frequently abounds in the
calcareous series, and to which, indeed, this slate belongs. Some
curious varieties of rocks in this series are found in St. Enedellyan,
one of which, in particular, abounds between the church and Port
Isaac, which was noticed by Sir Humphrey Davy in a decomposing state,
under the name of mandelstone. In this state it is a dull earthy
argillaceous rock, of an ochreous colour, full of small, roundish
cavities. In its perfect state this rock is a greenish-grey, glossy,
compact felspar, containing granules of flesh-coloured calcareous
spar, and minute prisms of hornblende. During decomposition, the
calcareous spar is dissolved, and washed away by the rainwater, which
produces the honeycomb appearance; and the ferruginous stain is
derived from the iron contained in the hornblende. This rock has been
described by Mr. Prideaux as occurring in Devon. It is very rare in
Cornwall.




ST. ENODOR.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pidre, and hath upon the north Little
Colon; east, St. Stephen’s and St. Denis; south, Ladoch; west,
Newland. In the Domesday Tax, 20th William I. (1087,) this district
was taxed under the names of Borthy and Resparva. And Berthy is still
the voke lands of a manor pertaining to Penrose, now Boscawen and
others. The 3d Henry IV. one Ralph de Borthy held in Dinbegh, in
Pidre, by the tenure of knight-service, a small knight’s fee. (Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall, p. 41.)

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish Benefices, (1294,) Ecclesia Enadori in Decanatu de
Pidre, is rated vii_l._ vi_s._ viii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xx_s._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition, and Valor Beneficiorum, Enador Vic. is valued at
26_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._; the patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who
endowed it; the Incumbent Martin; the Rectory, or sheaf, in possession
of Davy’s heirs; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax,
(1696,) 141_l._ 6_s._

Some of the inhabitants of this parish have told me that one St.
Athenodorus is the tutelar guardian of this church, from whom it is
denominated Enador. Athenodorus, the stoic philosopher of Athens, was
born before Christ Jesus, and was tutor to the Emperor Augustus, who
taught him that he should neither do or say any thing, but take
respite till he could say over the Greek alphabet, that so he might
neither say or do any thing through rashness or anger; for which
advice he is specially remembered.

Car-vin-ike, alias Car-fyn-ike, (i. e. the rock spring, fountain,
leat, or riveret of water, so called from the natural circumstances of
the place,) is the dwelling of Anthony Tanner, Gent. that married
Carthew; his father Arundell, by whom he had this place. Originally
descended from the Tanners, late of Court and Boderick, in St.
Stephen’s, and giveth the same arms.

Pen-coll, or Pen-cooth, in this parish, (i. e. the head-wood, a name
also of old taken from the ancient natural circumstances of the
place,) is the dwelling of Arthur Fortescue, Gent. that married
Verman; his father Elford, being of the Fortescues of Filleigh, in
Devon, and gives the same arms.

Gon-rounsan, in this parish, is the dwelling of John Flammock, Gent.
that married Coode, and giveth for his arms the same as the Flammocks
of Bodmin. This land is since sold to Philip Hawkins, Esq. son of Mr.
Hawkins of Creed.

Tre-wheler, in this parish, is the dwelling of Edward Hoblyn, Gent.
that married Williams; his father Cosowarth; a younger branch of
Nanswhiddon family, and giveth the same arms.

This parish of St. Enedor is the flattest or levellest parish of lands
in Cornwall, and, by consequence, the storehouse or preserver of
moisture, or water; and in testimony of the wateryness of this soil, I
do remember that in the latter end of the reign of King Charles the
Second, the tower of this church sunk in its foundation, so much that
the whole fabric fell to the ground, and greatly damnified the church
with its stones; which church and tower, by the Bishop of Exeter’s
grant of a collection throughout his diocese, are both again
well-built and repaired as it now stands.

This parish is enriched with lodes of tin and copper.

At Pen-hale, or haile, in this parish, that is to say, the head-river,
or the head of the river; and suitable to its name, in the low lands
thereof are the original fountains or springs of two notable rivers,
viz. that on the south side of those lands, making its current or flux
to Tresillian Bridge, in Merther, on the south part of this county;
that on the north side of Penhale lands, making its course to Lower
St. Colomb Port, on the north part of Cornwall; both which rivers
abound with fishes proper to the country in their seasons, as trouts,
eels, peal, and salmon, &c. before they empty themselves into the
North and South Seas of the British Channel, and the Irish or Atlantic
Ocean.


TONKIN.

I have to remark on this parish, that all the southern part is in the
hundred of Powder, although it is wholly rated to that of Pidar.

Athenodorus, to whom this church is dedicated, is a saint in the Roman
Calendar, and brother to Gregory Thaumaturgus, or the miracle-worker,
both natives of Neocæserea, in Pontus, or Cappadocia; of noble
extraction, very well skilled in the sciences, the knowledge of
tongues, and philosophy; who, hearing of the great fame of Origen,
came to hear him, and were by his learned lessons, and holy
exhortations, brought to leave the Pagan philosophy and all mundane
sciences, and to embrace the holy theology, in which they made so
great a progress in the space of five years, under so good a master,
that, although they were both very young, they were honoured with the
office of Bishops in the churches of Pontus. This St. Athenodorus
suffered martyrdom about the year 272, under Aurelian.


THE EDITOR.

In this parish are situated three villages, called Summercourt,
Penhale, and Fraddon, each of which had formerly the privilege of
holding an annual fair. All are now transferred to Somercourt. One
held on the 25th of September, is considered to be the most important
in Cornwall. The name is obviously modern, although the village itself
seems to be quite as ancient as any in the neighbourhood.

There is in this parish also another village, of considerable
importance up to the year 1832, called Michell, St. Michael, or
Modeshole.

This place, although never entitled, by the utmost stretch of
courtesy, to the appellation of a town, was privileged with sending
Members to Parliament in the time of King Edward the Sixth, probably
to increase the political power of the Lords Arundell, who then
possessed the paramount manor of Michel, together with an unrivalled
influence in that part of Cornwall.

Many of the small places in Cornwall received this privilege from the
Tudors, for the express purpose of becoming close or nomination
boroughs, withdrawn as they then were from public view or attention.

The system thus created has acted at different periods in various
ways. At first, many of the small Boroughs returned neighbouring
gentlemen to Parliament, the natural aristocracy of the country, and
practically the peers of other gentlemen holding hereditary seats, and
distinguished by the shadowy appellation of offices long since
extinct. These representatives formed the strongest bulwark of
national liberty in the subsequent reigns of the Stuarts. So that
Charles the Second, and his brother King James, endeavoured to smooth
the way for their progress towards despotism by invading chartered or
prescriptive rights; and thus the inviolability of these rights became
associated in men’s minds, after the Revolution, with the very idea of
liberty itself; and this union remained so permanently fixed and
strong at the distance of a century, as to dash in pieces the
otherwise powerful administration of Mr. Fox and Lord North, because
they proposed to interfere authoritatively with the Charter of the
East India Company. Times were, however, at that period completely
changed. The English Empire had extended itself into all parts of the
globe; an immense manufacturing and commercial interest had grown up;
and, of still greater consequence, the national debt had created a
vast monied capital, not subject to the laws of primogeniture, and
therefore inclined towards democracy. All these obtained
representatives through the small Boroughs, but tempered in most cases
by the media through which the seats were acquired. Statesmen by
profession, and many inclined to support the existing order of things
by their situation in life, and by their connection, obtained
admission also into Parliament in the same manner, and all these,
united with the representatives of counties, and of large towns,
formed an assembly, owing its existence, no doubt, to accidental
causes, but, in the opinion of many wise and experienced men, better
adapted to the government of a great country than any one that the
world had seen, or than could be established by systematic
arrangements.

That House of Commons has been swept away by the enactment of 1832;
and it remains to be proved by an experiment, at which bold men might
shrink, whether a more direct delegation will as effectually represent
all the varied materials of the State, and whether a body so powerful
may not ultimately absorb into its immediate superintendence the whole
legislative and executive functions.

Michell had to boast among its representatives of Sir Walter Ralegh,
of Mr. Carew, the historian of Cornwall, and of many distinguished
gentlemen of the county. It used to be said, that Colonel Clive spent
so much money in a contest for this place as to occasion his return to
India, where he gained the battle of Plassey, and established the
Eastern Empire.

The right of election seems to have been vague and undefined at
Michell, as it was in early times at almost all other places; but
repeated decisions of the House of Commons tended to ascertain, and
usually to abridge the right, as this was deemed most favourable to
the new Government; and finally, by Act of Parliament in 2d George II.
the last decision of the House of Commons on any right of voting
acquired the force and authority of law.

Such a decision took place with respect to Michell in the year 1700,
fixing the right of voting in the possessors of five burgage tenures,
here denominated mesne lordships, and in all resident payers of scot
and lot. Property within the limits of the borough being divided, and
each possessor of land wishing to multiply voters, they were raised to
the amount of sixty or eighty, till at last the whole property coming
into the hands of two Cornish gentlemen, they, in promotion of a
system which may yet be regretted, consolidated the land, let the
better houses on conditions, such as to prevent the occupiers from
appearing on the parish rates, and converted to farm shelters, or took
down, hovels that were originally constructed for election purposes.
Contests were thus avoided, and the borough rendered close; the two
proprietors having mutually pledged themselves in writing to support
each other in their equal shares.

One of the proprietors died, and his son continued to act on the
agreement. The other proprietor also died; and his brother having
verbally ratified the compact, continued also to act on it, and a
joint return was made in 1830. But a total change of men and measures
having taken place in the administration of Government, the Reform
Bill was introduced, and so powerful is the action of party feelings
on the most honourable minds, heightened as they were, on this
important occasion, by an honest conviction generally entertained on
all sides, of the real and permanent welfare of the country being
involved, that one of the proprietors thought himself absolved from
adhering to the contract, unless his associate would take the same
line of politics on this great subject as himself. A poll was
thereupon called for, and the numbers were, for Kenyon five, for Best
three, and Hawkins two; one voter having been got over by the
infringing party.

Pencoose is now the property of Mr. William Basset, having been
purchased from the Fortescues.

Trewhele belongs to Mr. John Basset, of this parish.

Treweere is held in joint tenantry by Mr. Retollock, son of Mr.
Retollock who resided at Michell as agent for the borough, and Sir
Richard Vyvyan, of Trelowarren. This place is considered to be a
barton; and it must formerly have been the residence of some
gentleman, although the place is now reduced to a common farm.

Gomronson, heretofore the property of the Flammocks, now belongs to
Hawkins.

Boswallow was purchased by Mr. John Stephens, of St. Ives, about the
middle of the last century, and now belongs to his grandson, Mr.
Samuel Stephens, of Tregenna.

The paramount manor of Michell has passed into various families, on
account of its political importance. Originally Arundell’s, it for
some time belonged to the Scawens, an ancient race of Cornish
gentlemen now extinct. One of the family held the honourable, and then
gratuitous, office of Vice Warden, on the Restoration of King Charles
the Second.[42] This manor was finally purchased by the late Sir
Christopher Hawkins, and belonged to his devisee at the period of the
general dissolution of close boroughs.

  St. Enodor measures 6,140 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           5303    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           399   12    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    869   |    881   |    833   |   1124
    giving an increase of 29⅓ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. S. M. Walker, collated by the Bishop of
    Exeter in 1828.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Its extreme eastern corner is situated on granite, where it meets with
the parishes of St. Columb Major and St. Dennis. The remainder of this
parish rests on rocks of the schistose group; the part next the
granite belonging to the porphyritic, and that more remote to the
calcareous series, conformably, in all respects, to the geology of St.
Colomb Major.


     [42] The last representative of this family resided in
     Surrey, and died about the year 1770.




ST. EARME, OR ST. HERME.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath upon the east Probus,
north Newland, west St. Allen, south Clements. As for the name it is
derived from St. Herme, the tutelar guardian saint of this church,
extant and endowed long before the Norman Conquest, by the Lord of the
Manor of Polsew or Polduh, taxed in Domesday Roll, and therefore the
Church again is taxed in Domesday Roll 20 William I. 1087, by the name
of Ermen-hen, i. e. old or ancient Herme. In the taxation of benefices
to the Popes in Cornwall, made by the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester 1294, Ecclesia de Hermita in Decanatus de Powdre is rated
at 6_l._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, and Valor Beneficiorum, by the
name of Erme 22_l._ 13_s._ 4_d._ The patronage in Lutterell, Lord of
the Manor of Polsew, aforesaid. The incumbent Carthew, and the parish
rated to the 4_s._ in the pound Land Tax, 1696, 120_l._

The following short account of the patron saint is substituted for six
or eight pages of uninteresting legend given by Mr. Hals.

St. Hermes or St. Ermes, the supposed patron saint of this parish, is
said to have suffered martyrdom at Rome in the persecution raised by
the Emperor Adrian, about the year 132. His tomb in the Salian Way was
ornamented by Pope Pelagius the Second, who filled the chair of St.
Peter from 577 to 590. The name of St. Hermes is much celebrated in
the ancient martyrologies.

In the Missale Romanum is the following prayer, to be used on the 28th
of August, the day consecrated to his memory:

     Deus, qui beatum Hermetem Martyrem tuum virtute constantiæ
     in passione roborasti, ex ejus nobis imitatione tribue, pro
     amore tuo, prospera mundi despicere, et nulla ejus adversa
     formidare. Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum filium tuum.

Tre-gasa, alias Tre-gaza, in this parish, id est, the wood town, to
prove which etymology there is still extant a considerable wood
adjoining to the town place thereof, was the dwelling of Thomas Coke,
Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 27 Charles I. that married Lance, his father
Herle. His grandfather John Coke, Gent. attorney at law, of Trerice,
in St. Allen, who first came into those parts temp. Elizabeth, from
St. Mary Ottery, in Devon, without money or goods, placed himself a
servant or steward under Sir Francis Godolphin, Knight, where he began
from, and with his inkhorn and pen, to turn all things that he touched
into gold (as King Gyges), and that by indirect arts and practices as
tradition saith; for that Sir Francis taking a great liking to him,
left the management of his estate and great tin works to him, his said
steward Coke. He accordingly took care that all such tin of his
master’s as was melted at the blowing-house into slabs or blocks, was
justly marked with the dolphin stamp, as is customarily done on those
gentlemen’s tin to this day. After some years, Mr. Coke remaining in
service as aforesaid, by his subtle arts and contrivances, out of Sir
Francis’ toll, and the shares of other adventurers, and the wages of
labouring tinners, he produced considerable quantities of his own
block tin, which, when melted at the blowing-house, as aforesaid, to
distinguish it from his master’s, he marked thereon the figure of a
cat; the same, it seems, being the coat armour of his family or
ancestors. At length, against coinage time there was more tin brought
by Mr. Coke to be coined at the coinage towns, marked with the cat,
than there was of his master’s marked with the dolphin.

Whereupon, Sir Francis’s Lady being informed of his ill practices, and
resolving by the next coinage to be better instructed in this mystery,
at such time as Godolphin blowing-house was at work, privately, with
one of her maids, in a morning, on foot, went to that place, where
according, as common fame reported, she found many more blocks or
slabs of tin marked with the cat than there were with the dolphin; the
one part pertaining to Sir Francis, the other to Mr. Coke. Whereupon,
abundantly satisfied, the returned to Godolphin House, but could not
be there timely enough against dinner; whereat Sir Francis was greatly
distasted, having at that time several strangers to dine with him. At
length the lady being arrived, she asked all their pardons for her
absence, and told them it did not proceed from any neglect or want of
respect, but from an absolute necessity of seeing a strange and
unheard-of piece of curiosity, which could not be seen at any other
time; viz. to see the cat eat the dolphin (indeed cats are great
lovers of fish elsewhere as experience shews) and then gave an account
of the premises, to their great wonder and admiration: whereupon, soon
after, Sir Francis dismissed him from his service. But by that time he
had gotten so much riches, that forthwith he purchased the little
barton and manor of Trerice, in St. Allen, and made that place his
habitation till he purchased this barton and manor of Tregasa, and
seated himself here; where, by parsimony and the inferior practice of
the law, he accumulated a very considerable estate in those parts.
But, maugre all his thrift and conduct in providing wealth for himself
and posterity, his grandson Thomas Coke, aforesaid, succeeding to his
estate, upon the issueless decease of his elder brother Christopher
Coke, and buying in his widow’s jointure at a dear rate, and also
undertaking the building of the present new and finely-contrived house
at Tregasa, though never finished, yet the said fabric was so costly
and chargeable to him, together with the vain extravagance of his wife
(Lance), that he was necessitated to sell divers parcels of lands, in
order to raise money for his necessary occasions; and finally to
mortgage this manor and barton of Tregasa, and all his other lands
that were before unsold, for about fourteen thousand pounds, to Hugh
Boscawen, of Tregothnan, Esq. and lastly, for that consideration and
others, did, by lease and release, fine and proclamation, convey the
same to the said Hugh Boscawen, his heirs and assigns, for ever, who
are now in possession thereof. Soon after this fact Mr. Coke fell into
great want and distress, together with his wife and children, and died
suddenly by a slip of his foot into a shallow pit, wherein he was
searching for tin, out of a conceited opinion he had that he should at
last raise his fortunes by tin, as his grandfather before him had
done.

The arms of Coke are, in a field Argent, upon a bend cotised Sable,
three cats Or, with a crescent for distinction of a second house.

Truth-an, in this parish, parcel of Cargoll manor, held of the Bishop
of Exeter, (that is to say, the trath or trudh-an, id est, the trout
fish,) is the dwelling of John Williams, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 4th
of Queen Anne, by lease, who married Courtney, of Tremeer; his father
Maunder; originally descended from that Williams, of Probus, mentioned
in Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, p. 140; and giveth for his arms,
Argent, within a bordure enurny and enaluron, a greyhound in full
course Sable.

Tre-worg-an, in this parish, was formerly the lands of Tencreek, by
whose heir it came in marriage to the Polwheles, and became their
seat, till John Polwhele, Esq. barrister-at-law, sold it to John
Collins, Gent. now in possession thereof, who married May, of Truro,
and giveth for his arms, Sable, a chevron gouté of blood Argent,
between three Cornish choughs Proper.

Tre-worg-an Vean, in this parish, parcel of the Duchy manor of Moris,
is the dwelling of Andrew Ley, Gent. First Lieutenant of her Majesty’s
ship the Medway, that married Gibbs, of St. Colomb; and Bourchier,
daughter of Henry Bourchier, Rector of Creed, his father Tonkyn, of
Trevawnas; his grandfather Bligh, and giveth for his arms, Argent,
three pine trees Vert.

Innis, in this parish, that is to say an island, viz. a fresh water
island, a place, as many others in Cornwall, so denominated, where two
rivers, whose original fountains are above such lands, form between
them, in their current towards the sea, a piece or promontory of land,
shaped in form of a corner, or triangle, at the meeting or confluence
of those two rivers beneath the same (as amnicus, and mediamnis in the
Latin), is the dwelling of Itai Jago, Gent. that married Bauden, his
father Tonkin; his grandfather Molesworth and Herle, who was steward
to Francis Buller, of Shillington, Esq. The arms of Jago are       .

As for the name Jago, whether it be derived from the Celtish, British,
Jago, and signifies James, or from Gago, or Jago, a spear, or military
tuck, I determine not, or from gages and pledges for battle; however,
this name was of ancient use in Britain; for Galfridus Monmouthensis
tells us of a king named Jago, before Julius Cæsar landed in Britain,
that reigned twenty-five years, and lies buried at York.

Trehane, in this parish, i. e. old or ancient town, is the dwelling of
William Courtney, Gent. a younger branch of Trethurfe family, that
married Seawen, his father Trevanion, of Tregarthyn, and giveth the
same arms as the Trethyrie Courtneys do.


TONKIN.

A part of this parish is within the manor of Cargaul, belonging to the
Bishop of Exeter, but long held by the Borlases, of Treladra, on a
lease for lives, and under them by the Jagos, a family of antient
standing in this parish. During the Civil Wars and the subsequent
usurpation, John Jago, of this parish, Esq. was a Justice of the
Peace, and a mighty sequestrator, so that he got into his possession
the greater part of Mr. Borlase’s estate, and drove his family to
great extremities. Mr. Jago died before the Restoration, leaving one
son by his first wife, a daughter of John Molesworth, Esq. of
Pencorrow; and three daughters by his second wife, a daughter of ――――
Herle, of Prideaux, Esq. and widow of Williams, of Truthon. His three
daughters were married to three Clergymen, to Mr. Charles Tremayne,
Vicar of St. Austell; to Mr. Carthew, Vicar of St. Erme; and to Mr.
Drinkwater, Vicar of Mevagissey. His son John Jago enjoyed this and
the rest of his father’s estate till the Restoration; when Mr. Borlase
got his own again, and among the rest this barton, the lease under him
having expired by the death of Mr. John Jago, sen. Mr. Borlase settled
Truthon on his son Humphry Borlase on marriage with a daughter of Sir
John Winter, of Sydney, in Gloucestershire, Bart. maid of honour to
Queen Henrietta Maria, but had not any children that survived their
infancy, except one son, Nicholas Borlase, who was taken off in the
flower of his youth. Mr. Borlase built here a very convenient new
house, and made it the place of his constant residence; but Mr.
Borlase being deeply engaged in the interest of the late King James,
and Sheriff during the two last years of his reign, sold his copyhold
lease of Truthon to the before-mentioned Mr. Williams, who was Sheriff
of Cornwall, in the 4th year of Queen Anne, 1705. He left four sons
and three daughters. His eldest son John Williams, Esq. now lives here
in the commission of the peace, and as yet unmarried.

The manor of Killigrew, which signifies the Eagle’s Grove, from Kelly,
a Grove, and Eriew or Erigrew, an Eagle, gave name to that ancient and
very eminent family of Kelligrew, whose seat it was for a long time;
till on their marriage with the heiress of Arwinick, they removed
thither, as being the more pleasant and convenient seat. This place,
however, continued in their possession till the reign of King James
the First, when Sir John Kelligrew first mortgaged it to his kinsman
―――― Mitchell, of Truro, and after that dismembered and sold it in
parcels. The barton and various high rents were purchased by the said
Mitchell, who sold them again about the year 1636, to the before
mentioned Mr. Jago, of Truthan, who left the barton to his son John
Jago, who on the recovery of Truthon, by Mr. Borlase, at the
Restoration, removed to a farm adjacent, which his father had
purchased with the barton.

Ennis or de Insula, which explains the meaning of the word, was
formerly the seat of the Opies, for here resided, in Queen Elizabeth’s
time, John Opie, sen. whose son Robert Opie, married Jane, the
daughter of Agnes Jago, of this parish, widow, and the said Robert or
his son sold the barton to John Jago. These Opies I take to be a
younger branch of the Opies of Towton, who give for their arms, Sable,
on a chevron, between three garbs Or, as many hurtleberries Proper.

The above named John Jago married, in 1664, Juliana, the second
daughter of Thomas Tonkin, of Trevawnance, by whom he had several
children; he survived her, and dying in the early part of this century
(i. e. 1700) left the two bartons of Killigrew and Ennis to his eldest
son Itai Jagoe, who married the daughter of John Bowden, of
Trelassick, in the parish of Ladock, who is still living, but has sold
the manor or manors to Robert Corker, of Falmouth, Esq. lately
deceased, reserving to himself the barton of Ennis, and a part of the
barton of Killigrew on lease. The arms of Jagoe are, Argent, a plough
Proper, between three fleurs-de-lis Azure (Mr. Lysons says, Or, a
chevron between three cross crosslets Sable.) Mr. Itai Jagoe has since
sold the fee of Ennis to John Stephens of St. Ives, Gent. reserving to
himself the lease for three lives; which Mr. Stephens, has this March,
1737, bought also the manor of Killigrew of Sir J. Molesworth and
Edmund Prideaux, Esq.

Polglase is not far from Killigrew, and was anciently a part of that
manor. It signifies the green pool, and was sold by the above-named
Sir John Killigrew to John Luxton, Gent. inter alia, in the 8th year
of King James the First, who, two years afterwards, sold it to John
Rosogan, sen. of the Rosogans of St. Stephen in Bronnel, who came to
live in this place, and left it to his son John Rosogan, of Lyon’s
Inn, Gent. This John Rosogan married in 1632 Elizabeth, the daughter
of John Haulsey, Esq. by whom he had one daughter, Elizabeth, married
to Edward Westbury, of Winston Westbury, in the County of Southampton,
Gent. and they joined in conveying this estate, January the 20th,
1660, to Thomas Tonkin, of Trevawnance, in whose posterity it still
continues.

The arms of Rosogan are, Argent, a chevron between three roses Gules,
bearded Proper, seeded Or.

To the south is Trevillon. This was the seat of a younger branch of
the Langhernes, for here, in the reign of Edward the First, lived
Thomas Langherne, Gent. and this place continued in his posterity till
the reign of Charles the Second.


THE EDITOR.

Cornwall is indebted to this parish for introducing the very
respectable family which now (1833) gives a member for the County.

The advowson has belonged in succession to the families of Luttrell
and Wynne. Doctor William Stackhouse is said to have acquired this
living by exchange, but it appears to be more probable, on account of
his connection with the patrons, that the presentation came
immediately from them. He was the brother of the Rev. Thomas
Stackhouse, Vicar of Benham, in Berkshire, author of the well known
History of the Bible, first published in 1732, in two volumes folio,
and of various other works.

Doctor William Stackhouse resided on his living, and there married the
heiress of the parish, Miss Williams, of Trehane. He had two sons,
William, who married and spent his life at Trehane, and lived till
June 1830, in his ninetieth year; and John, to whom Mrs. Perceval,
heiress of the Pendarveses, of Pendarves, in Cambourne gave her whole
estate. Mr. John Stackhouse married Miss Acton, of Acton Scot, near
Church Stretton, in Shropshire, and acquired with her a very extensive
property, which through the liberality of Mrs. Stackhouse (living in
1833) is possessed by hes second son, on whom the estate was settled
after her decease;[43] and through a similar act of liberality on the
part of his father, Mr. Edward William Stackhouse, the eldest son, had
the property in Cornwall placed in his possession on his marriage with
Miss Trist, an extensive heiress in Devonshire.

This gentleman has moreover derived a very considerable addition to
his fortune by the will of the Reverend Doctor Wynne, patron and some
time Rector of this parish, and in remembrance of the family of
Pendarves, and of the family of Wynne, to both of which he is related,
and from both of which he has obtained ample possessions, Mr.
Stackhouse has exchanged his original name for those of Wynne
Pendarves, under which he now represents the County in Parliament. Mr.
Pendarves has erected a monument to Dr. Wynne, on the western wall of
the cloisters of Westminster Abbey, with the following inscription:

                 Α ☧ Ω
          Lutterello Wynne, LL.D.
        Prosapia antiqua et generosa oriundo
        Coll. Omn. Anim. Oxon. olim Socio,
      Ecclesiæ de Sto Erme, in agro Cornub.
            Rectori et Patrono,
                  Viro
      litteris humanioribus et philosophiæ studiis
            feliciter imbuto,
    mira morum comitate, summa animi benevolentia,
        incorrupta fide, simplici pietate,
              spectatissimo.
  Obiit iii kal. Decembris, A. S. M.DCCCXIV. ætatis lxxvi.
        Hoc quale quale sit μνημοσυνον,
            optime de se merito,
                P. L. C.
      Edws Guls Wynne Pendarves, de Pendarves,
            in agro Cornub. Arm.
              cognatus et hæres.

The manor of Pelsew, or Peldu, in this parish, is said by Mr. Lysons
to have belonged to Robert Earl of Cornwall at the period of the
Domesday Survey; that it was forfeited by John Vere, Earl of Oxford,
to Edward the Fourth, in 1471; and that it passed through the families
of Mapowder and Luttrell to Doctor Wynne, conveying with it the
advowson of the church. Dr. Wynne held the rectory for many years on
his own presentation, deputing the care of his parish to the very
eminent scholar and preceptor Dr. Cardew; but when residence became
necessary for all incumbents, under the provisions of an act of
parliament, he bestowed the living on the distinguished individual who
had long been his curate. Dr. Cardew departed from this life in
December 1831, having advanced into his 84th year. A monument is
placed to his memory in St. Erme church, bearing an inscription
written by himself, which might otherwise have the unusual blame
imputed to it, of not sufficiently recording the merits of him whom it
is intended to praise:

                   H. S. E.
          Cornelius Cardew, S. T. P.
              Proba et innocua
          quamvis humili stirpe editus,
            benigno tamen Numine,
            ab anno M.DCCLXXXII.
        Ecclesiæ de Ewny Lelant Vicarius,
            Regiæ Celsitudini
        Georgio Walliæ Principi e Sacris,
          per annos triginta quatuor
      Scholæ Grammaticæ apud Truronenses
          præsidebat Archididasculus,
        Prætorio munere bis ibidem functus.
    Ab anno M.DCC.LXXI. ad annum M.DCCC.IV.
      in hac Ecclesia Sancto Ermeti dicata
        Rectoris Luttrell Wynne, LL.D.
              vicem supplebat;
                deinceps
        ejusdem jam patroni munificentia
              ipse Rector.
      Uxorem duxit primo Elizabetham Brutton,
        secundo Mariam Lukey Warren,
        quarum ex illa quatuor, ex hac novem
              suscepit liberos.
  Natus decimo tertio die Februarii, anno M.DCC.XLVIII.
      obiit decimo-octavo die mensis Septembris,
          anno Salutis M.DCCC.XXXI.
      vixit annos lxxxiii. menses viii. dies xviii.
                Qualis erat
            suprema indicabit dies,
              cui propitius sit
               DEUS OPT. MAX.!

The manor of Pelsew is a part of the property devised by Dr. Wynne to
Mr. Pendarves, who is in consequence patron of the church. Present
incumbent, Mr. Pomery.

Treworgan and Truthan are now the property of Mr. Edward Collins,
descendant in the fifth degree from Mr. John Collins, mentioned as
having purchased Treworgan.

Truthen, with the whole manor of Corgol, was acquired by the late Sir
Christopher Hawkins from the See of Exeter in 1805, under the act of
Parliament for redeeming land tax, and since his decease Mr. Collins
has purchased the freehold of Truthen, and resides there.

The manor of Killigrew, purchased by Mr. John Stephens, of St. Ives,
descended to his only surviving son, Mr. Samuel Stephens, Member for
St. Ives, about the year 1750, who built the house at Tregenna; and it
has passed from him, by will, to his second son, the late Samuel
Stephens, Esq. who also represented St. Ives, and who resided in the
house at Tregenna, which his father built. He died at Leamington, Feb.
25, 1834.

  This parish measures 4,155 statute acres.
  Annual Return of the Real Property, as    £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        2935    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                        232    8    0
  Population, { in 1800, | in 1810, | in 1820, | in 1830,
              {    358   |    431   |    561   |    586
    giving an increase of 63½ per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY.

Dr. Boase observes on this parish of St. Erme, that it is composed of
the same rocks as the adjoining parishes of St. Allen and St. Clement.


     [43] Mrs. Stackhouse died at Bath in the beginning of 1834.




ST. ERVAN, ST. ERUM, ALIAS ERBYN.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pyder, and hath upon the north St.
Merryan; east, Little Pedrick; west, St. Evall and Mawgan; south, St.
Colomb. For the modern name, if it be not taken up in memory of Gerint
ab Erbin, one of King Arthur’s admirals at sea, slain by the Saxons at
London, (see DUNDAGELL,) the same is derived from the divine service
or worship of God performed in this church, for Ervan, Ervyn, in the
British tongue signifies a humble request or supplication, and
properly signifies at the holy Litany, as Litania in Latin. In the
Domesday Book or Roll, 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Trewinock, now Trewinicke, that is, the beloved lake,
or spring of waters, running to the sea; still the voke lands of a
manor. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester,
1294, Ecclesia Sancti Ervanis, in Decanatu de Bolton, was valued at
c_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, it was rated 19_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._;
the patronage formerly in the Prior of Bodmin, who endowed it, now
Morice. The incumbent Vivian, and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per
pound Land Tax, 1696, 100_l._ 8_s._

Trembleigh, Trembleth, alias Trembleith, alias Tremblot, (see
TREMBLETHICK, in St. Mabyn) synonymous terms, signifies the wolf’s
town.

From this place was denominated an ancient family of gentlemen,
surnamed De Trembleth; who, suitable to their name, gave the wolf for
their arms; whose sole inheretrix, about Henry the Second’s time, was
married to John de Arundel, ancestor of the Arundels of Lanherne; who,
out of respect and grateful remembrance of the great benefit they had
by this match, ever since gave the wolf for their crest, the proper
arms of Trembleth.

In this town they had their domestic chapel and burying place, now
totally gone to decay, since those Arundels removed from hence to
Lanherne. This manor was anciently held of the manor of Payton, by the
tenure of knight’s service. And here John de Arundel held a knight’s
fee (Morton, 3d Henry IV.) as I am informed. In digging up the grounds
of this old chapel and burial-place not long since, was found an urn,
wherein were contained certain pieces of bones, ashes, and coals. The
remains of some human creature, that after death had his body burnt,
and committed to that kind of burial; which must be at least 1500
years past.

Tre-ranall, alias Tre-ranell, alias Tre-renell, (synonymous words,) in
this parish, is the dwelling of George Beare, Gent. that married
Lanyon; his father Arundel of Lanherne; his grandfather Keate; and
giveth for his arms, after the English, in allusion to his name, in a
field ―――― a bear ――――.

The barton of Trembleigh aforesaid is exempt and free from paying
tithe, either great or small, to the rector, by reason, as tradition
saith, there was a bargain or compact made betwixt the Trembleiths or
Arundels, lords thereof, the Prior of Bodmin, and the Rector of the
said church, at such time as it was first endowed, that the possessors
or owners of the said barton’s land should for ever annually pay upon
the high altar, to the said Rector, the full sum of ten shillings.


TONKIN.

At Treravall, in this parish, lived George Bere, the representative of
a very ancient family. There was formerly in the hundred of West a
family of the same name, of great wealth and account in Henry the
Eighth’s days; but whether or not related to this family, I cannot
resolve. Their great estate went with a daughter and heiress to John
Bevill, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 16th Eliz. and was no small advancer
of that gentleman’s estate, at that time much impaired, by the elder
brother’s daughter. Their arms are to be seen in the windows and seats
of Leskeard church, where they had much lands.

In this parish is a manor called Trenowith, or the new town; and on it
resided for many generations the family of Hare, who give for their
arms, Azure, on a bend Argent three Torteauxes.


THE EDITOR.

  This parish measures 3,034 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2812    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           263   11    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    358   |    331   |    422   |    453
    giving an increase of about 26½ per cent in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. W. Molesworth, instituted in 1817.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The southern part is a barren down, a continuation of that of St.
Breock, with which this parish is parallel, and has a similar
geological structure. The northern part is fertile, gradually passing
into the calcareous series.




ST. EVALL.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Pider, and has upon the north St.
George’s Channel, or the Irish Sea; west, Mawgan; south and east, St.
Ervyn and St. Colomb Major. In the Domesday Tax it was rated by the
name of Avalde. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester (1294,) Ecclesia de Avello, in Decanatu de Polton, was
valued to first fruits vi_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._ Vicar ejusdem xx_s._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition, (1521,) rated at the same value; the
patronage in the Bishop of Exon, who endowed it; the incumbent
Bagwell: the rectory, or sheaf, in Hawkins; the parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, (1696,) 82_l._ 15_s._ 6_d._ The sheaf, or
rectory, pays an annuity of 20_l._ per annum as an augmentation yearly
to the vicar incumbent for ever, by virtue of an act of parliament.
Probably the tutelar guardian and patron of this church is St. Ewalld
or St. Evalld, from whence it obtained the appellation of St. Evall,
or Avalld; who, as Malmesbury, in his Chronicle, and Herbert, in his
Festivity of the Saints, tell us, was the son of Ethelbert the Second,
martyred by the Danes, anno Dom. 749, brother to St. Edmund, king of
the Saxon East Angles, who also was martyred by those people, and had
his country wasted by them, till reduced by the West Saxon king,
Edward the Elder; and though, after the death of St. Edmund, his
brother Ewalld had right and title to the crown, and was requested by
the people to take it upon him, yet he told them in answer that he
preferred a religious and solitary life before all the kingdoms in the
world, and therefore retired to Dorchester, in Oxfordshire, to a
monastery called Cornehouse, where in great piety and holiness he
lived, and died anno Dom. 850, and was interred, and held in great
veneration for many _supernatural facts_ done there after his death,
whereby he obtained the reputation of a saint.

Trethewoll, Trethvall, in this parish, was the seat of John Nanfan,
Sheriff of Cornwall 7th Henry VI. who at first, as tradition saith,
was a servant to one of the Eriseys, temp. Henry V. and in that
prince’s wars with the French was by them promoted to a captain’s post
in that expedition, wherein he behaved himself with such valour and
conduct, always attended with success, that he was highly rewarded by
that prince, with much lands in England and France; upon which
foundation, and by his thrift and good conduct, he laid up a very
great estate in lands, and particularly was the purchaser of this
manor and barton of Trethvall, and Tregenyn in Padstow, where he
seated himself. He was again, because of his great advancement by his
prince’s bounty, made Sheriff of Cornwall 15th Hen. VI. Again, his son
John, 29th Hen. VI. Again 35th Hen. VI. by the name of John Nanfan,
Esq. who is the first gentleman, on the Records of the Pipe Office for
Cornish Sheriffs, distinguished by the name of an Esquire, which
appellation or terminative distinction in Cornwall, was not given
generally to those officers till about the middle of Henry the
Eighth’s reign. He was also made Sheriff of Wiltshire 30th Henry VI.
He had issue Richard Nanfan, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 20th Edward IV.
also 4th Henry VII. who dying without issue male, in grateful
remembrance of Mr. Erisey’s kindness and favour to his grandfather, he
gave this barton and manor, and Tregerryn also, to James Erisey, Esq.
Sheriff of Cornwall 4th Henry VIII. by some of whose posterity it was
sold to Grenvill; and by the Grenvills to Smith of Exeter; and by the
Smiths to Leach, father of Sir Simon Leach, Knt. of the Bath, temp.
Charles II. who married Vivian of Truan; his father Gully; and giveth
for his arms, Party per fess engrailed Gules and Ermine, in chief
three ducal crowns Or. The arms of Nanfan were, Sable, three martlets,
3, 2, 1, and Argent.


TONKIN.

Mr. Tonkin has nothing of the least consequence different from Mr.
Hals.


THE EDITOR.

  This parish measures 2,707 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           2399    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           175    6    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    288   |    309   |    323   |    354
    giving an increase of about 23 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Walter Kitson, collated by the Bishop of
    Exeter in 1803.


GEOLOGY.

Doctor Boase observes that this parish is composed of the same rocks
as the adjoining parish of St. Ervan.




ST. EVE, OR ST. IVONIS.


HALS.

Is situate in the hundred of Eastwellshire, and hath upon the north
Northill; south, Quethiock; west Menhynyet; east, St. Mellyn. For the
modern name of this parish, it is taken from the tutelar guardian of
the church, not St. Eve, that is to say, life or living, the first
woman created by God, whose history is to be seen in the third chapter
of Genesis; but, as the parishioners tell us, St. Eve is a corruption
of St. Ivonis, in British St. John, viz. St. John Baptist, to whom the
same is dedicated. And suitably in the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, this church is called Ecclesia Sancti
Ivonis in Decanatu de Eastwellshire, and valued to First Fruits
iiii_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition and Valor
Beneficiorum 26_l._ The patronage heretofore belonged to the preceptor
of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John Baptist, at Jerusalem, who
endowed it; now to Coryton. The incumbent Holden; and the parish rated
to the 4_s._ in the pound Land Tax, by the name of St. Ive, 1696, that
is to say, St. Ivonis or John, 170_l._ 8_s._ 8_d._

At the time of the Domesday Tax, 20 William I. 1087, this district was
taxed under the jurisdiction of Bicketone, id est, little town, then
and long before, by prescription, the voke lands of a manor, barton,
and court leet; the same now extant by the name of Tre-bighe, or
Tre-bicke, that is town little; but not so little but that it was a
kind of franchise royal, exempted and privileged in some respects
against the common law, and within its precincts held pleas of debt
and damages before the steward thereof, life, land, and limb,
excepted, and had its prison and bailiff for the public service, as
the hundred courts have. Now the writ to remove an action at law
depending in this court must be thus directed: Senescallo et Ballivo
Manerii sui de Trebiche, alias Trebighe, in comitatu Cornubiæ salutem.

This lordship was either by King Stephen or King Henry II. given to
the Knights Hospitallers of St. John Baptist of Jerusalem, about the
year 1150; (who endowed this church as aforesaid), where they had
their preceptory or commandery, a corporation under a preceptor or
commander, who took care of all their revenues, lands, and tenements,
churches, chapels, and tithes; and those, their churches, were wholly
appropriated to them, though they were not in holy orders, to preach
or administer the Sacraments. These followed the rules of Augustine
and Bernard.

This order originated in the time of the first Crusade, about the year
1100, when the members were called Knights of the Military Hospital of
St. John Baptist of Jerusalem. They were most amply endowed throughout
Christendom, and especially from the spoils of the Knights’ Templars.
The prior of the order for England, had his residence in St.
John-street, London, and was accounted the first Baron of the land.

When the Franks were driven from Jerusalem and the whole of Palestine,
this order of monastic warriors took refuge in the Isle of Rhodes,
where it continued to rule till the Turks expelled them in 1523. The
Island of Malta was then given to them by the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, where they have remained as Knights of Malta, opposing an
impenetrable barrier against the progress of the Turks.

In the 31st year of Henry the Eighth, all the possessions of the
Knights of Malta in England were seized, together with all other
monastic property; and the last prior of the English, William Weston,
is said to have died from grief.

This lordship of Trebich, or Trebigh, passed from Henry the Eighth to
John Wrey, Esq., and from him to John Wrey, Esq. Sheriff of Cornwall
28th of Elizabeth, that married Killigrew, and had issue by her
William Wrey, Esq. afterwards knighted, that married Courtney of
Powderham, Sheriff of Cornwall 41st of Elizabeth; and had issue
William Wrey, Esq. created the 209th Baronet of England, that married
and had issue Sir William or Sir Chichester Wrey, Bart. that married
Frances daughter of Richard Bourchier, the fifth Earl of Bath, who by
her had issue Sir Bourchier Wrey, Bart. that married Rolle of
Stephenston, now in possession thereof; who also, for that his uncle,
Henry Bourchier, sixth Earl of Bath, died without issue, in right of
his mother is become one of his heirs. The arms of Wrey are, Sable, a
fess between three hatchets Argent.


TONKIN.

Hay, in this parish, is the residence of Thomas Dodson, Esq. a
commissioner for the peace and taxes, and burgess in this parliament
(1702) for Liskeard. He married a daughter of John Buller, of Morvell,
Esq.; his father a daughter of Lidley. Originally from the Dodsons of
London. Their arms, Argent, a bend engrailed Azure, between two birds
Sable; quartering, Argent, an etoile Gules.

The parish is so called from St. Ivo, or Ives, a Persian bishop, as
says Mr. Camden; who, they write, about the year 600, travelled over
England with a great reputation of sanctity, all the way carefully
preaching the Gospel, and left his name to this place, where he left
his body too, meaning St. Ive’s, in Huntingdonshire. Perhaps in his
peregrination, though _vix credo_, he might take this place in his
way.

Trebigh manor had formerly lords of its own name, from whom is
descended the Hon. George Treby, of Plymston, in Devonshire, Master of
his Majesty’s Household, and some time Secretary at War, only son of
the late Lord Chief Justice Treby. He bears, Sable, a lion rampant
Argent, armed and langued Gules, three Plates in chief.

The manor of Bickton was one of the 288 manors in this county given by
the Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton with the Earldom of Cornwall.
Under him, I suppose, it was held by a family of the same name,
Bickton, who gave for their arms, Gules, a fess Or between four
fleurs-de-lis Argent in chief, and three annulets in base of the
Second.


THE EDITOR.

The town and parish of St. Ives, in Penwith, are universally believed
to have for their patroness a female missionary from Ireland. The
ruins of an old fortress is there called Dinas Iva; and various other
circumstances tend to confirm the tradition. It seems to be much more
likely, therefore, that another parish in Cornwall should be dedicated
to the same person, than to a Persian bishop, of whose pilgrimage to
England there can be little assurance.

The church stands on the top of a hill; and the tower is remarkable
from the circumstance of having the two buttresses at each corner, as
well as the corner itself, terminated by a pinnacle, making twelve in
all. The patronage is in the Duke of Cornwall.

  This parish measures 5,085 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3767    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           404    3    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    486   |    535   |    602   |    656
    giving an increase of 35 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. J. Jope, presented by the King in 1806.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The southern part of this parish touches on the great eastern patch of
granite. Its rocks are similar to the rocks of St. Cleer, with the
exception of those in the southern part, which contain a portion of
calcareous spar.




ST. EWE.


HALS.

Alias Hewa, or Hevh, is situate in the hundred of Powdre, and hath
upon the north and east, St. Mewan and Mevagissey; south, Geran; west,
Cuby, and St. Michael Caryhayes.

At the time of the Norman Conquest, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Goran, Caryhayes; or is rather that Nantvat mentioned
in Cornwall in the Domesday Book, 1087, which signifies in Cornish at
the side of the valley, near some high lands, as perhaps this church
is situate.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294,
into the value of Cornish benefices, Ecclesia de Sancti Ewe in
Decanatu de Powdre, was valued viii_l._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521,
by the name of Ewa, 21_l._ The patronage formerly, I take it, in the
Prior of Tywardreth; now in St. Aubyn, Tredinham, et aliis. The
Incumbent, May or Pineck; and the parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound
Land Tax for one year, 1696, 279_l._ 16_s._ But, when all that is
said or done in this matter, St. Tue may be a corruption of St. Hugh,
the tutelar guardian and patron of this church’s name; who, in all
probability, was either St. Hugh, the twenty-sixth Bishop of Lincoln,
1186, who died 1203, or St. Hugh who was also born and lived at
Lincoln, as Copgrave out of Matthew Paris informs us; who was stolen
from his parents at nine years old by the barbarous and bloody Jews
(first brought and tolerated in England by William the Conqueror),
who, in derision of Christ and Christianity, in a private place, was
by them inhumanly crucified, the 7th of July, 1255. Nevertheless, this
fact was not so secretly performed but that at length it came to the
magistrates’ ears, who thereupon apprehended the malefactors, and so
ordered their indictment that severe justice was done upon all those
offenders, that could be discovered to have had a hand in shedding the
blood of this innocent youth. But, alas! this punishment of part of
them did neither fully content or satisfy the prince or people at that
time; for soon after King Henry the Third, by proclamation, set out
all Jews in his dominions at a certain rent to such as would poll and
rifle them, and amongst others to his brother Richard King of the
Romans; who, after he had plundered their estates, committed their
bodies as his slaves, to labour in his tin-mines of Cornwall; the
memory of whose workings is still preserved in the names of several
tin-works, called Towle Sarasin, and corruptly Attall Saracen, i. e.
the refuse or outcast of the Saracens; that is to say, of those Jews
descended from Sarah and Abraham. Other works were called Whele
Etherson, the Jews’ Works, or Unbelievers’ Works, in Cornish.

But, alas! this matter did not rest here; for King Edward the First,
out of an abhorrence of them for the aforesaid crime, and for that
they were accused of clipping and corrupting the sterling money of the
kingdom, caused two hundred and ninety-seven of them to be executed on
the gallows, and the remainder of them by public proclamation banished
out of this land, and all their goods and chattels confiscated to his
use, after they had been in England two-hundred and twenty-three
years. Lastly, Copgrave further assures us, who lived tempore Edward
the Fourth, that at the shrine of this St. Hugh at Lincoln, divers
supernatural facts or miracles were done; for which reason he was put
into the Catalogue of Roman Saints. Hugh, ugh, in British-Cornish, is
a matter or thing high, large, and lofty.

In this parish is the barton and manor of Lan-hadarn, alias
Lanhaddarne, alias Lanhadden, alias Lansladarne, the thieves’ or
robbers’ place.

Which place gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen, from
thence surnamed de Lanhaddarne; of which family was Serlo de
Lanhaddarne, called by writ of summons to Parliament as a Baron
tempore Edward the First or Second: of whose posterity Serlo de
Lanhaddarne, 3 Henry IV. held in this place Guran and Lantine, by the
tenure of knight service, one fee and a half of lands; whose issue
male failing in Henry the Sixth’s days, he left only two daughters,
that became his heirs, the one married to Sir John Arundel, of
Lanherne, Knight, the other to Sir John Arundel, Knight, of Trerice;
in whose issue the name, blood, and estate of those gentlemen is
terminated; which was no small augmentation of the wealth and revenues
of those Arundels; and as the present possessor of this lordship, Sir
John Arundel, of Lanherne, Knight, hath for many years made of his
toll-tin out of the wastrel lands thereof at Tolgoath above fifteen
hundred pounds per annum; so in like manner the Lord Arundel of
Trerice, out of the manor of Allett in Kenwen, at a place called the
Garrows, parcel of those Lanhaddarns’ lands, hath had considerable
benefit from an ancient lead-mine there, out of which divers thousand
pounds’ worth of lead and silver have been extracted. (See KENWEN.)

Treg-on-an, in this parish, i. e. the dwelling on the valley or on the
level valley, is the seat of Sir Joseph Tredinham, Knight, that
married the daughter of Sir Edward Seymour, of Berry Pomeroye, in
Devon, Bart. His father, an attorney-at-law, married the daughter of
Molesworth, of Pencarrow, Esq.

Sir Joseph Tredingham succeeded to his estate, upon the issueless
decease of his elder brother, Sir William Tredingham, Knight; and had
issue by ―――― Seymour, John Tredinham, Esq. Member of Parliament for
St. Mawes, that married ―――― Jones, of Wales, as I take it, but died
without issue by a fall from his coachbox; and also two daughters, the
eldest married to John Nicholls, of Trewane, Esq. the other to Francis
Scobell, Esq. Member of Parliament for Mitchell, now in possession of
this lordship, and all other Sir Joseph’s lands, greatly encumbered
with debts.

Hal-liggon, in this parish, is the dwelling of Sir John Tremayne,
Knight, serjeant-at-law, who married, but died without issue. His
father, Colonel Lewis Tremayne, married ―――― Carew, of Penwarne, by
whom also he had issue ―――― Tremayne, Clerk, Vicar of St. Austell,
whose son by ―――― Jagoe, ―――― Tremayne, Esq. is now in possession of
this barton and manor, who married Clotworthy’s heir. Originally this
family was descended from the Tremaynes of Collacomb, in Devon (for
which see MABE).

Tre-vethick, alias Trevithick, in this parish, i. e. the farmer,
rustic, or husbandman’s town, is the dwelling of John Hickes, Esq.
Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes, and sometime Member of
Parliament for Fowey, who married ――――; his father an attorney-at-law.

This gentleman’s father came to an untimely death by means of an
unskilful nurse that attended him in his sickness, who being
prescribed a medicine by the physician, wherein was to be compounded,
amongst others, (the herb) mercury, which the woman not understanding,
bought of the apothecary the poisonous drug mercury, or crocus
metolorum, instead thereof, which being administered to him soon
caused his death.

In like manner a son of his, named Stephen Hickes, a youth of about
eighteen years of age, at school with Mr. Halsey at Merther, carrying
about a birding-gun charged with powder and shot in his hand, the gun
accidentally went off at such time as the mouth thereof was opposite
to his body, which shot him dead through the breast and heart, to the
grief of all that knew him.

Tre-luick, alias Tre-luige, in this parish, signifies the lake or
river of water town, or the town whose lands are situate upon some
river or bosom of waters, is the dwelling of John Archer, Gent. that
married Addis; his father ―――― Archer, Clerk, Vicar of Manaccan,
married Sweet.

This I take to be that place taxed in the Domesday Book, 1087, as the
voke lands of some manor, by the name of Treluwe, or else Treluick, in
St. Allen parish.


TONKIN.

This parish is dedicated to St. Eva or Ewe, not from our grandmother
Eve. It is a rectory, and in the gift of Sir John St. Aubyn and Dr.
John Hawkins, from the Tredinhams.

Various manors are situated in this parish. Pelrew, i. e. the black
park, includes two bartons, distinguished by the names of Trevelisick
Wartha and Trevalisick Wallas, that is, the higher and lower, and
belong to William Seccombe, Gent. who gives for his arms, Argent, a
fess Gules between three lions rampant Sable.

Adjoining to these lands is Trelisick; for the meaning of which see
St. Erth, a part of the said manor, but the property of Mr. Tremayne.

The manor of Precays. This being part of the possessions of Sir Henry
Bodrigan, was on his attainder _inter alia_ given by Henry the Seventh
to Sir Richard Edgecumbe, Comptroller of his household, in whose
posterity it now continues; the Hon. Richard Edgecumbe being the
present lord of this manor.

To speak now of the most noted places, the first we come to, and which
joins with Trelisick in Tregonan, that is, the town on the downs,
formerly the property of the Tredenhams; but on the death of John
Tredenham, Esq. at Westminster, December the 25th, 1710, a gentleman
of very bright parts and of great loyalty, which he often shewed in
Parliament, this barton came to his second sister, Mary, the wife of
Francis Scobell, esq. who makes this place his residence.

Next the manor of Treworick, that is, the town on the river, called in
Domesday Book Treworoc, was one of the manors given by William the
Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton. This was also a part of the
property forfeited by Sir Henry Bodrigan, and given to Sir Richard
Edgecumbe.

The manor of St. Ewe or Eva, so called from the name of the parish.
The church and glebe being taken out of it, and the advowson being
still appurtenant, was anciently the inheritance of the family of
Coleshul. Sir John Coleshul, slain at the battle of Agincourt, left a
son of the same name, Sir John Coleshul, Sheriff of Cornwall the 17th
Henry VI. and the 7th Edward IV. who dying without issue his sister
Joan, married to Sir Remfry Arundel, became his heir.

Sir John St. Aubyn possesses one fifth and one sixtieth, or thirteen
sixtieths of this property; the remaining parts came through different
hands at last to Sir John Tredenham of Tregoran, and were sold, with
the greatest part of the Tredenham estates, to Francis Scobell, Esq.
in 1727; so that John Hawkins, of Pennemer, D.D. and Sir John St.
Aubyn, are the actual proprietors.

Not far from the church, as the name signifies, a tenement called
Lanewa, lately the seat, under the said lords, of George Slade, Gent.
till he removed to Trevisick, in St. Austell.

The manor of Heligon was anciently the inheritance of the Whitleighs,
of Efford, in Devonshire. Richard Whitleigh, Esq. had two daughters
and heirs, Joanna, married to Richard Hals, of Kenedon, in Devonshire,
Esq. and Margaret to Roger Granville, Esq. of Stow, between whom this
and many more manors were divided. Roger and Margaret Granville gave
their part of this manor to their third son, Degorie Granville, of
Penheale, Esq. and in the 28th year of Henry the Eighth John Hals, of
Efford, and his son Richard Hals, sold their half of the manor to
Sampson Tremayne, senior, of St. Ewe: and, on the 8th of May, in the
10th year of Queen Elizabeth, Richard Granville, of Penhele, sold the
other half to the said Sampson Tremayne, and the whole is now enjoyed
by his descendant John Tremayne, who married in 1735 Grace, the
youngest daughter, and in a manner sole heiress, of Henry Hawkins, of
St. Austel, attorney-at-law.

Sir John Tremayne, serjeant-at-law, built the present house, in
addition to some rooms of an old house in the same place. Those
places, called Kestell, that is, castle, belong to the manor. Kestell
Wartha, the Middle Castle, and Kestel Wallas, but why so named I
cannot learn, there not being the least remains of any fortification.
Kestell Wartha, or the higher castle, was for a time the residence of
Lewis Tremayne, Esq. during the life of his father. This gentleman,
great-grandfather of Mr. John Tremayne, the present possessor, was
then a lieutenant-colonel under King Charles the First, and a very
stout honest man.

The manor of Coran is now become a part of the manor of Pentnar, in
Mevassary, the lord of which is the Hon. John Roberts.

Lanhedrar, the seat of thieves, belonged to Robert Earl of Morton.
Serlo de Lanhedrar, of this place, had summons as a Baron, and also to
attend the King beyond the seas, 25th Edward the First.

Lower Lanhedrar was the seat by lease under the Arundels, of Thomas
Maunder, Gent. who left three daughters his coheirs: Mary married to
Henwood, Priscilla to John Wolridge, of Gorminick, the third to John
Williams, who lived at Tregenna.

To the northward of Lanhedrar, is Trelean, memorable, or rather
infamous, for having been the birthplace of that trumpeter of
rebellion Hugh Peters, as the late Mr. Lewis Tremayne has often
assured me.

Next to this is Rosecorla, that is, the valley of the sheepfold,
lately the seat, in lease too from the Arundels, of Edward Maunder,
Gent.

Next is Trelewick. This seems to have been anciently a manor of
itself, although long since disfranchised. It is now the seat of
William Archer, a minor. His father, John Archer, Esq. married ――――
Adis, of Plymouth. The arms of Archer are, Sable, a chevron engrailed
between three sheens (i. e. spear-heads) Or.

The manor of Tregian gave name to the noted family of Tregian, and was
their chief seat till they removed to Golden in Probus, when the
ancient seat fell into decay, so that no traces are now left. This,
with the rest of Mr. Tregian’s great estate, was forfeited, as will be
stated under Probus.

Pensiquillis, the head of the dry copes, or the dry hill of wood, was
the last seat of the Penkevills, in this county; where they retired
after they had sold off the greatest of their considerable estates
therein. The last heir-male of this ancient family, Benjamin
Penkivill, Esq. died here unmarried, of the smallpox, the 21st of
November, 1699, leaving his six sisters co-heirs.

To the north of this place is Lithony, commonly Luny, and is the
modern seat of the Mohuns. Warwick Mohun, Esq. on his marriage with
――――, daughter of ―――― Adis, Esq. built a house here in his father’s
lifetime, where he resided till his death, which happened on the road
to London in October 1736.

To the south is Borew, the bleak dwelling, but why so called I cannot
guess. This was formerly the seat of Cruffs, on lease from the
Arundels.

And next to that is Tregenno, the town of the mouth or entrance, as I
believe from the situation of its chief place just by the downs. This
manor was for several generations the seat, on lease under the
Arundels, of the family of Robins; the last of which, Stephen Robins,
resided for the most part in St. Winnow. It has since been the
dwelling of Richard Randyl, Gent. whose arms are, Gules, on a cross
Argent, three mullets pierced Sable.

Further south lies Levalra, where lived Hugh Henwood, Gent.; but, on
his decease in 1733, the place was sold.

To the north of Tregenno is the manor of Penstruan, that is, the head
of the springs. This was a part of Sir Henry Rodrigan’s forfeited
estate, and came by grant to the Edgecumbes.

I now come to the church of St. Ewe, which consists of a nave, a south
aile, a vestry to the north, and a cross aile, At the western end is a
square tower, with a steeple on the top, in which are three bells.
Some of the windows have painted glass; in one, an angel holds in his
hands an escutcheon, charged, Azure, on a fess Sable, three chevronels
sideways of the Field. The church plate is very handsome. On the
flaggon is inscribed:

  Jacobus Robins, de Tregennoe, Arm.
          nuper expirans
          ex voto legavit.

  On the cover: St Ewe.

  On the cup: Εις Ευχαρισταν.

In the north-west corner of the churchyard is a rough altar tomb,
without an inscription visible at present, but tradition says it had
formerly the following:

  Here lies Parson Hugh,
  The famous Atwell, Rector of St. Ewe.

The church is built low, and at one end of the parish. It had formerly
but a low wooden cover for two bells; but the parishioners have taken
that down, and are this present year, 1732, erecting a handsome square
tower, at their own sole charge, wherein they design to have a ring of
three bells.

In the nave, against the wall, is a small monument with this
inscription:

              M’æ Sm.
          Roberti Quarme, Gen^osi,
        ob. xi^mo Ap. anno Dom^i M.DCCVIII.
            ætatis suæ LXXII.
  Patri suo charissimo filius natu et amore maximus
  Gualterus, apud Falm^o in hoc Com^tu postea residens,
            sibiq. vivo, et suis
            ponendum curavit.

       *     *     *     *     *

          Ad Lectorem Monitio.
  Non omnibus omnes placuere.
  Non Ambrosius, non Augustinus, non Johanes Chrysostomus,
  Nec Petrus, nec Paulus, nec facundus Apollos,[44]
  Nec Divus ipse noster Salvator Jesus:
  Num tu Viator omnibus?
  Deo placere cura, et valeto.

Arms, Barry lozengy Argent and Gules, Counterchanged. Crest, a tiger
passant Proper.


THE EDITOR.

St. Ewe has to lament the loss of all the gentlemen’s families, with
the exception of one, which are stated to have resided there in former
times; but that one may well compensate for the absence of all the
others.

Mr. John Tremayne, who married Grace, the youngest daughter of Mr.
Henry Hawkins, of St. Austell, had two sons, and a daughter married to
Mr. Charles Rashleigh, of Desporth, as has been noticed under St.
Austel. The eldest son, Lewis, died in the prime of life, when the
second son, who had taken orders, became the heir of his family.

The Rev. Henry Hawkins Tremayne married Harriet, daughter and coheir
of John Hearle, Esq. of Penryn, and of her mother heiress of the
Paynters of St. Erth. They have left an only son, John Hearle
Tremayne, married to Caroline, daughter of the late Sir William Lemon.

It is impossible to say too much in praise of the late Mr. Henry
Hawkins Tremayne: possessed of good abilities, of a sound
understanding, of practical knowledge of business, and of the utmost
kindness of heart, he became the father of his neighbourhood,
reconciling all disputes, adjusting all differences, and tempering the
administration of justice with lenity and forbearance. So high and so
extensive was the reputation of Mr. Tremayne throughout the whole
county, that his son, buoyant on the father’s virtues, and before
opportunities were afforded for displaying his own, passed by an
unanimous election into the high station of representative for
Cornwall; but experience soon proved that Mr. John Hearle Tremayne
wanted no assistance from hereditary claims to make him worthy of
that, or of any other distinction. And the Editor takes this
opportunity of repeating what he had the honour of addressing to a
county meeting, previously to Mr. Tremayne’s declaration of not
allowing himself to be elected for the sixth time, to avoid the
embroilment of a contest:

     “_I have had the happiness of witnessing Mr. Tremayne’s
     conduct in Parliament for twenty years; and knowing the high
     estimation in which he is held by all parties, and by all
     sides of the House of Commons, I venture to assert that
     Cornwall would fall in public opinion if Mr. Tremayne were
     not again returned, let his successor be who he may._”

  The parish of St. Ewe measures 5,085 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.   _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          4,685    0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1211    8    0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {    1176  |    1125  |   1663   |   1699
    giving an increase of 44½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. John Cregoe, instituted in 1785.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Dr. Boase observes on the geology of this parish, that it has the same
geological structure as the contiguous parishes of Creed and Cornelly.

On the parish of Cornelly Dr. Boase states that the prevailing rock is
a fissile blue slate; that it probably contains beds of massive
lamellar rocks; and that all belong to the calcareous series.

       *     *     *     *     *

P.S. It should have been noticed that the late Mr. Tremayne greatly
improved the house built at Heligon by Serjeant Tremayne; that his son
has carried the improvements still further, and rendered the whole
place one of the finest in Cornwall.


     [44] Acts of the Apostles, ch. xviii. v. 24.




  INDEX


  Abbat, derivation of, ii. 61
  ―――― of St. German’s, ii. 59
  Abbe Tone, or abbey town, ii. 59
  Abbitown, now St. German’s, i. 32
  Abbot, Mr. i. 125
  Abbytone, ii. 62
  Abchurch, St. Mary, rectory, London, i. 72
  Aberdeen, i. 247
  Abergavenny, Lord, i. 87
  Abernethy, now St. Andrew’s, iv. 105
  Abingdon abbey, i. 342
  Abraham, i. 414
  Acacia armata, iv. 181
  ―――― dealbata, iv. 183
  ―――― lopantha, iv. 183
  Achaia in Greece, iv. 161
  Achelous, the river god, ii. 161
  Achym, William, monument to, iii. 292.――Thomas, family arms, and
    etymology of the name, iv. 23
  Acland, Sir John, iii. 271. Sir Thomas, 42, 274. Sir T. D. 271.――Of
    Killerton, iv. 16. Colonel, 185.――Family, ii. 416
  Acre, comparison of the Cornish, Saxon, and Norman, iii. 388
  Acres, the number of in Cornwall, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Act of Parliament for improving Truro, iv. 80
  Acton castle, iii. 311
  Acton of Acton Scot, i. 400
  Addis, i. 417.――John and William, iii. 38
  Adelredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adelstowe, iii. 277, 278 _bis_
  Adis of Plymouth, i. 420
  Adlington, John, iv. 77
  Admiralty, Nicholas Trevanion, commissioner of the, iv. 116
  Adobed, Reginald, i. 134
  Adour, river, iv. 159
  Adredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adrian, Emperor, i. 393――iv. 117
  Adrian, Pope, ii. 212
  Adriatic sea, iv. 172
  Adulphus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Advent, alias St. Anne parish, i. 62, 129, 132――ii. 401 _bis_,
    408――iii. 222
  ADVENT parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, boundaries,
    etymology of name, saint, church patron, land tax, i. 1. By
    Tonkin, name, Trethym. By Whitaker, etymology, saint’s history 2.
    By Lysons, villages, manor of Trelagoe. By the Editor, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 3
  Adwen, St. history of, i. 2
  Æschylus, iii. 34
  Africa, iii. 187 _bis_
  Agapanthus umbellatus, iv. 181
  Agar, Mrs. i. 384.――Hon. C. B. ii. 381. Mr. 57. Mrs. 197, 258,
    348.――Mr. iv. 44
  Agincourt, battle of, iii. 316
  Agnes, St. iii. 312, 313
  ―――― St. church, iii. 176
  ―――― St. island, ii. 358――iv. 173, 174. By Leland, Appendix, 266.
    Its extent 175.――Lighthouse upon, ii. 358――iv. 175. Its latitude
    and longitude, and time of high water 175
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 234, 235, 317, 402――iii. 380
  AGNES, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, land tax,
    church, i. 4. Saint’s history 5. Feast, Carne Buryanacht, St.
    Agnes ball 6. Manors and seats, Mithian 7. Trevellis, Trevawnance
    8. By Tonkin, etymology of Pider, Kyvere Ankou, Trevannence; the
    same from Lysons, Breanis, description and productions 10. By
    Lysons, harbour at Trevannence Porth 11. Market, Porth Chapel,
    Chapel at Mola, almshouses and schools 12. By the Editor, remarks
    on the Tonkin family, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 13. The
    beacon 14
  Agnes’ St. ball or plague, i. 6
  ―――― St. beacon, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― St. well, i. 12
  Agonal, iii. 434
  Agricola, Tacitus’s Life of, iii. 162
  Agricolaus, i. 52
  Ahab, King, i. 329
  Aikin, Miss, ii. 77
  Ailmer, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73――iii. 462
  Ainton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Aire, a farm of Mr. Stephens’s where he and his family shut
    themselves up from the plague and escaped, ii. 271
  Alan River, i. 74, 94, 115, 153, 367, 371, 372 _ter._, 373, 375――ii.
    402 _ter._――iii. 277, 334
  Albalanda family, ii. 300, 302, 303 _bis_, 305――iii. 213
  Alban, St. the Briton, ii. 64, 75. His Shrine 74
  Alban’s, St. town, why named, general council of British clergy at,
    St. German preached at, ii. 64. St. German’s chapel at 65
  ―――― St. battle of, ii. 260――iii. 234
  Albemarle, Duke of, ii. 27, 28, 94. His letter of thanks to Capt.
    Penrose 28
  Albigenses, i. 311
  Albiniaco, Philip de, ii. 428
  Alderscombe, account of, ii. 347, 351
  Aldestowe, iii. 278 _bis_
  Aldwinick, ii. 77
  Aldwyn, Bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 290 _bis_
  Alein, by Leland, iv. 262
  Alexander, John, ii. 160
  ―――― the Third, Pope, iii. 115
  Alexandria, ii. 81――iii. 187 _bis_.――St. Catharine born at, ii. 37
  Alfred, King, i. 290 _ter._――ii. 155――iii. 74, 241, 262. The Great,
    visited St. Neot, who appeared to him after death 262. Founded
    Oxford by his advice 263
  Alfridus or Alfricus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alfwaldus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algar, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73 _bis_, 74, 94 _bis_, 95――iii. 462
  Algarus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algerine pirates stranded in Mount’s Bay, iii. 97
  Algiers, governor of, ii. 100
  Alien priories, their origin, iv. 99. Suppression 101
  All Saints’ day, ii. 150, 287
  All Souls’ college, Oxford, ii. 147, 227, 228――iii. 123, 155, 252, 344
  Allan family, ii. 286
  Allan, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Allanson, Rev. George, of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  Allen, Ralph, history of, i. 56
  ―――― Mr. of Bath, ii. 33. Thomas 233
  ―――― St. iv. 24, 75
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202, 393, 404, 417――ii. 315, 318――iii. 267, 313.
    Living of 300
  ALLEN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, i. 15.
    Endowment, first fruits, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land
    tax, Gwarnike 16. Etymology 17. Treonike, tale of a stolen child,
    families originating from church offices, Tretheris chapel 18. By
    Tonkin, Gwairnick, Boswellick, Nancarrow 19. Gwerick, Trerice,
    Trefronick, Talcarne. By Lysons, Villages of Lane and Zela 20. By
    the Editor, name and feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 21
  Allett, i. 415
  Allin, John, iv. 18
  Allington, South, manor, iii. 436
  Allworthy, Fielding’s, i. 57
  Almes Pool Meadow, ii. 41
  Alonzo, King of Castille, i. 311
  Aloysoa citra odora, iv. 181
  Alps, iii. 121, 186.――Miniature model of, ii. 150
  Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  Alric, Earl, stole the body of St. Neot, iii. 263
  Als, John de, i. 144
  Als manor in Buryan, ii. 118
  Alse, i. 144. De Alse of Lelant ibid.
  Alsius, Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, iii. 415
  Altar cloth, curious, i. 157
  Altarnun parish, i. 62, 129, 159, 167, 174, 196, 197, 201, 257, 304,
    308, 317――ii. 36――iv. 48, 68, 69, 70 Altarnunæ, Alternun, iii. 36,
    39, 260, 335.――Alternunn, ii. 229, 377
  ALTARNUN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 21. Ancient
    state, first fruits, patron, incumbent, land tax, etymology,
    nunnery 22. Trelawny, Peter Jowle 23. Instances of longevity 24.
    By Tonkin, etymology. By the Editor, St. Nun, St. Nun’s well 24.
    St. Nun’s day, extent, villages, fairs, church-tower, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 25. Stone quarry, Endsleigh cottage 26
  Alured, Col. iv. 186
  Alvacot village, iv. 41
  Alverton manor, ii. 282――iii. 78, 90, 91, 92, 426. Account of 79,
    90.――Lord of, ii. 130
  Alvorton, iv. 164
  Alwalfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alwolfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Amadis, John, of Plymouth, i. 348
  Amall manor, iv. 52
  Amalphy in Naples, St. Andrew’s body at, iv. 101
  Amaneth, ii. 203, 211
  Amator, St. Bishop of Auxerre, ii. 73 _bis_
  Ambrose, St. ii. 279
  ―――― Well, i. 247
  Ambrosius, Aurelius, i. 326
  Amellibrea belongs to the Editor, ancient buildings there, iv. 54
  America, iii. 183.――Packets for, receive their despatches at
    Falmouth, ii. 11. Separated from England 245. War with 245,
    267.――No heaths in, iii. 173
  ―――― South, i. 164――iii. 205
  Ammonian harmony, iii. 408
  Amorites, Kings of, ii. 285
  “Amorous Fantasme, a Tragi-Comedy,” iv. 98
  Amural, ii. 367
  Amy, Cotton, of Botreaux Castle, Anne, Grace, and Mr. i.
    134.――Edward and Rev. James, ii. 49.――Cotton, iii. 235, 236.
    Edward 232. Grace 235, 236. Rev. James 232, 235, 236. Mr.
    235.――Family, iv. 62
  Amye, sister of King Arthur, i. 332
  Amyll manor, iv. 55
  Amys, of Botreaux castle, the coheir of, iv. 45
  Anabaptists, iv. 73
  Andegavia, now Angiers, i. 335 _ter._
  Andrew, Anne, and John, ii. 253.――Richard, iii. 387
  ―――― of Trevellance, Jane or Anne, John, iii. 326, 333
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 189――iii. 387.――Mr. ii. 354
  Andrew, St. the Apostle, his history, iv. 100. Occasion of his
    adoption as patron of Scotland 105
  ―――― St. church in Stratton, ii. 427
  ―――― St. church, Holborn, ii. 267
  ―――― St. monastery, university, and city, iv. 105
  ―――― St. priory, i. 167
  Andromache, iii. 420
  Anecdotes of Heraldry by a Lady, iii. 137
  Angarder chapel, iii. 314
  Angarrack, iii. 343
  Ange, Rev. Mr. ii. 24
  Angelo, St., Marq. of, in Spain, descended from the Tregians, iii. 381
  Angiers in France, iv. 100, 144
  Anglesey, i. 295 _bis_
  Angove, iv. 128
  ―――― family, ii. 236, 241 _bis_. Abel 241. Reginald 236, 240.
    Etymology 236.――Richard, iii. 387
  Anhele Nunnery, Truro, ii. 315
  An Marogeth Arvowed, account of, iii. 430
  Anhell, iv. 73
  Anjou, Angiers the capital of, iv. 105
  “Annals, Firbisse’s,” iv. 146
  Anne, Princess, called Anne Eat-all, said to have died from
    overeating, ii. 15
  ―――― Queen, ii. 98――iii. 62 _bis_, 145, 176, 201, 249, 297
    _ter._――iv. 21 _bis_, 23, 116.――The Pitt diamond offered to, i.
    68.――Her last Parliament, ii. 98, 287, 348
  ――――’s, Queen, bounty, ii. 93
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. parish, _see Advent_
  Annual celebrations natural, ii. 288
  Annunciation, i. 157
  Ansbury, diocese of, ii. 81
  Anson, Commodore, iii. 205
  Anthology of Greek Epigrams, iv. 87
  Anthony family, ii. 275
  Anthony parish, ii. 250――iii. 436
  ―――― East manor, i. 33――ii. 252 _ter._――Description of, i. 37
  ―――― East parish, ii. 252――iii. 101
  ―――― St. iii. 113. The patron of fishermen 91
  ―――― St. of Egypt, history of, i. 28, 29. Festival 31
  ―――― St. of Padua, history of, i. 29. Festival 31
  ―――― manor, iii. 209
  ―――― parish, ii. 1, 2, 17, 50 _bis_, 319――iii. 110 _bis_, 128, 380, 456
  ANTHONY ST., in Kerrier parish, feast, i. 31. Boundaries, situation,
    ancient state, first fruits, incumbent 32. Land tax, East Anthony,
    and family of Carew 33. Intsworth 36. By Tonkin, East Anthony. By
    Editor, Rt. Hon. Reginald Pole Carew, statistics 37. Church
    monuments, population, incumbent, Geology 38
  ―――― in Kerrier Parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, i. 38. Incumbent, land tax, Saint, Trewothike,
    Roscruge, Denis and Great Denis 39. By Tonkin, Little Dinas, the
    last place that held out for Charles 1st. By Editor, statistics,
    antiquities, Geology 40
  ―――― in Powder parish, ii. 275, 281――iii. 395. Rocks similar to
    those in Gerans, ii. 58
  ―――― in Powder parish, situation, boundaries, i. 26. Ancient state,
    history, Rules of Canons Augustine 27. First fruits, patron, land
    tax, saint’s history and name, Plase, St. Anthony Point 28. By
    Tonkin, Boswartha, Porth. By the Editor, history of St. Anthony of
    Egypt, and of St. Anthony of Padua 29. Legend of the latter, by
    Dr. Darwin 30. Feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 31
  ―――― Point, i. 28
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 51 _bis_. Priory 277
  Anthyllis hermannia, iv. 181
  Anticiodorum, St. German, Bishop of, ii. 59
  Antiocheis, i. 342
  Antiochesis, i. 325
  Antiquarian Society, communication of Mr. Arundell upon Theodore
    Paleologus to, ii. 365
  “Antiquities of Cornwall,” ii. 338――iv. 30
  Antirrhinum monspessulanum, iii. 63
  Antis, John, i. 319
  Antonies, St. by Leland, iv. 270, 289
  Antron, account of, iii. 445
  ―――― of Antron, family, iii. 445
  Antwerp, iii. 67. Nuns from, received at Lanhearne 150
  Antyer Deweth, iii. 431
  Anvilla, Robert de Edune, iv. 77, 82
  Anwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Apeley, i. 223
  Apennines, ii. 213
  Apollo, i. 295
  Apparition, treasure discovered by, i. 162
  Aquitaine, i. 335――iv. 145
  Arabia, iii. 187
  Arcedekne, Thomas de, i. 340.――Alice, John and Thomas, Lords, of
    Warine Family, iii. 405
  Archæologia, iii. 244
  Archdeacon of East Anthony, Thomas, Walter, and arms, i. 33. And of
    Haccomb, Philippa, and Sir Warren 33, 64, 262
  Arche, Sir Richard, i. 168
  Archedecon family, iii. 44. Thomas, Lord de 405
  Archer of Trelaske, N. S. ii. 243――iii. 38 _bis_. Mr. and his
    brother 338. Family and their monuments 37
  ―――― of Trelowick, John, i. 417. John 420. Rev. Mr. 417. William,
    arms 420
  Arcturus, i. 342
  Ardent, a 64 gun ship taken by the French and Spanish combined
    fleets in Plymouth Sound, ii. 246
  Ardeverauian, by Leland, iv. 266
  Ardevermeur, by Leland, iv. 273
  Ardevon parish, ii. 208
  Ardfert, diocese of, iii. 434
  Argand lamps in the Lizard Lighthouses, ii. 359
  Arian clergy, i. 338
  ―――― heresy, iii. 59
  Arianism, i. 115, 252――iii. 64. St. Dye opposed to, ii. 131
  Arians, i. 294――ii. 63. St. Hilary, a violent opponent of 168, 169.
    Furious hostility of St. Ambrose against 279.――St. Martin opposed
    them, iii. 122
  Aristolochia sempervirens, iv. 181
  Aristophanes, ii. 265
  Aristotle, ii. 408
  Arius, i. 305.――His heresy, ii. 63
  Armagh, St., Malachy Archbishop of, ii. 225
  Armes in Castle Cairden, iv. 262
  Armorica, i. 115――iii. 336 _bis_.――Or Little Britain, iv. 157
  Armorican tongue, iii. 114
  Arms of Achym, iv. 23
  ―――― Albalonda, ii. 303
  ―――― Arcedekne, i. 33――iii. 405
  ―――― Archer, i. 420
  ―――― Arthur, King, i. 336
  ―――― Arundell, i. 162, 405――iii. 142, 149, 270 _bis_――iv.
    72.――Crest, i. 405
  ―――― Baldwin, iii. 66
  ―――― Barret, ii. 89
  ―――― Basset, ii. 239
  ―――― Bastard, i. 320
  ―――― Beare, i. 405――iv. 22
  ―――― Beauchamp, ii. 130 _bis_
  ―――― Beel, ii. 252
  ―――― Bellot, i. 302
  ―――― Bennet, iii. 3
  ―――― Berkeley, ii. 11――iv. 14
  ―――― Betenson, iii. 23
  ―――― Bevill, i. 17――iv. 22, 72
  ―――― Bickton, i. 412
  ―――― Billing, iv. 95
  ―――― Blewet, i. 210 _bis_――iv. 95
  ―――― Bochym, ii. 131, 302
  ―――― Bodrigan, ii. 107 _bis_――iii. 119
  ―――― Boggan, ii. 320
  ―――― Bone, ii. 353
  ―――― Bonithon, i. 302――iii. 226
  ―――― Borlase, i. 18――iii. 84
  ―――― Boscawen, i. 140
  ―――― Bosistow, iii. 35
  ―――― Bowden, ii. 303
  ―――― Bray, ii. 311
  ―――― Budeoxhed, i. 348
  ―――― Buller, iii. 249
  ―――― Caddock, Earl of Cornw., i. 203
  ―――― Call, i. 162
  ―――― Camelford borough, ii. 404
  ―――― Carlyon, i. 54
  ―――― Carmenow, iii. 129――iv. 72
  ―――― Carne, i. 10
  ―――― Carnsew, ii. 337
  ―――― Carrow, i. 35
  ―――― Carter, i. 223
  ―――― Carverth, ii. 94, 337
  ―――― Cavall, ii. 335 _bis_
  ―――― Chamond, ii. 414
  ―――― Champernown, ii. 254 _quat._
  ―――― Cheyney, iv. 43
  ―――― Chynoweth, i. 292
  ―――― Coke, i. 395, 396
  ―――― Coplestone, ii. 293
  ―――― Coren, iii. 3
  ―――― Coryton, iii. 162
  ―――― Coswarth, i. 211
  ―――― Cottell, ii. 352
  ―――― Courtenay, iv. 96
  ―――― Crane, iii. 387
  ―――― Damerell, iii. 61
  ―――― D’Angers, iii. 226
  ―――― Davies, i. 361
  ―――― Davis, i. 144
  ―――― Dawnay, iii. 437, 438
  ―――― Dinham, i. 170
  ―――― Dodson, i. 412
  ―――― Dundagell borough, i. 323
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 103――iv. 72
  ―――― Egleshayle, i. 374
  ―――― Erisey, ii. 116――iii. 419
  ―――― Ferrers, iii. 134
  ―――― Fitzroy, ii. 11
  ―――― Fitz-William, ii. 410
  ―――― Flammock, i. 85
  ―――― Fowey town, ii. 38
  ―――― German’s, St. priory, ii. 63
  ―――― Glynn, i. 172――ii. 142
  ―――― Godolphin, i. 124――ii. 335
  ―――― Grosse, iii. 249
  ―――― Hare, i. 406
  ―――― Harris, ii. 122
  ―――― Hawes, ii. 300, 316
  ―――― Hawkins, i. 45
  ―――― Heale, i. 107
  ―――― Heart, ii. 152
  ―――― Hele, iv. 152
  ―――― Helston borough, ii. 156
  ―――― Hemley, i. 384
  ―――― Hext, i. 44
  ―――― Hill, ii. 136――iii. 191
  ―――― Hobbs, ii. 54
  ―――― Hoblyn, i. 223
  ―――― Hooker, iii. 203
  ―――― Howeis, ii. 304
  ―――― Ives, St. borough, ii. 258
  ―――― Ives, St. town, ii. 271
  ―――― Keate, i. 224
  ―――― Kekewich, i. 372――ii. 410
  ―――― Kelliow, ii. 399
  ―――― Kellyow, i. 320
  ―――― Kemell, i. 265
  ―――― Kempe, ii. 54
  ―――― Kendall, i. 319
  ―――― Kestell, iii. 112, 113
  ―――― Killigrew, ii. 7
  ―――― Killiton borough, ii. 310
  ―――― King, i. 204
  ―――― King John, iv. 71
  ―――― Lambron, iii. 316
  ―――― Lamellin, ii. 411
  ―――― Lanyon, ii. 142, 143
  ―――― Laughairne, ii. 316
  ―――― Leveale, i. 143
  ―――― Ley, i. 396
  ―――― Littleton, iii. 227
  ―――― Long, i. 378
  ―――― Looe, West, borough, iv. 21
  ―――― Manaton, ii. 231
  ―――― Marney, iii. 65
  ―――― Matthew, ii. 337
  ―――― Mawe’s, St. borough, ii. 276
  ―――― Mawgan, iii. 148
  ―――― Megara bishopric, i. 75, 94
  ―――― Milliton, i. 125
  ―――― Mohun, i. 351――iv. 96
  ―――― Molesworth, i. 370
  ―――― Morton, iv. 3
  ―――― Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― Murth, iv. 25
  ―――― Mydhop, i. 320
  ―――― Nance, ii. 239――iv. 129
  ―――― Nanfan, i. 408
  ―――― Nanskevall, or Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Nansperian, i. 349
  ―――― Neville, cognizance, ii. 38
  ―――― Nicholls, ii. 339
  ―――― Noye, iii. 145, 151 _bis_
  ―――― Opie, i. 399
  ―――― Oxford, i. 58.――City, ii. 404
  ―――― Paleolagus, ii. 365
  ―――― Parker, i. 136――ii. 12 _bis_
  ―――― Parkings, iv. 140
  ―――― Payne, ii. 198
  ―――― Paynter, i. 349, 350
  ―――― Pendarves, i. 161――ii. 93, 98
  ―――― Pendre, i. 143
  ―――― Penkivell, i. 297
  ―――― Penrose, iii. 443
  ―――― Penwarne, iii. 75, 77
  ―――― Peter, iii. 176
  ―――― Peverell, i. 368
  ―――― Polkinghorne, ii. 142
  ―――― Polwhele, i. 205
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297
  ―――― Porter, iii. 66
  ―――― Prideaux, ii. 242――iii. 56, 279
  ―――― Prout, iii. 66
  ―――― Pye, iii. 449
  ―――― Quarme, i. 256, 422
  ―――― Rame, iii. 374
  ―――― Randyll, i. 421――ii. 353
  ―――― Rashleigh, i. 43
  ―――― Ravenscroft, i. 374
  ―――― Renaudin, iii. 303
  ―――― Reskymer, iii. 133――iv. 96
  ―――― Richard, King of the Romans, ii. 8――iii. 169
  ―――― Robarts, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380
  ―――― Robins, iv. 117
  ―――― Robinson, iii. 422
  ―――― Rogers, iii. 76
  ―――― Romans, _see Richard_
  ―――― Roscrow, ii. 337
  ―――― Rosogan, i. 400
  ―――― Rous, i. 313
  ―――― Sandys, iii. 158 _bis_
  ―――― Sargeaux, ii. 395
  ―――― Scawen, ii. 68
  ―――― Scobell, i. 44
  ―――― Scobhall, i. 44
  ―――― Scrope, iii. 129, 130
  ―――― Searle, i. 37
  ―――― Seccombe, i. 417
  ―――― Serischall, iii. 225
  ―――― Seriseaux, iii. 225
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Silly, iii. 237
  ―――― Slanning, iii. 76
  ―――― Smith, i. 250
  ―――― Speccott, i. 379
  ―――― Spour, ii. 227
  ―――― Sprye, i. 28
  ―――― Tencreek, i. 255
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 337――iii. 326
  ―――― Thoms, iii. 125
  ―――― Tonkin, i. 9, 13――iii. 315
  ―――― Treago, i. 249
  ―――― Treby, i. 412
  ―――― Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― Tredenham, iii. 361 _bis_
  ―――― Tredinick, i. 116――iv. 95
  ―――― Treffreye, ii. 43
  ―――― Trefusis, iii. 318, 227
  ―――― Tregagle, iii. 265
  ―――― Tregarthyn, ii. 110
  ―――― Tregeare, i. 263, 264
  ―――― Tregian, iii. 357
  ―――― Tregonell, i. 247
  ―――― Tregony borough, i. 296
  ―――― Tregoze, i. 39
  ―――― Trehaire, iii. 355
  ―――― Trehawke, iii. 169
  ―――― Trelawder, iv. 95
  ―――― Trelawney, i. 23――iii. 169, 295――iv. 96
  ―――― Trembleth, iii. 405
  ―――― Tremere, ii. 385
  ―――― Trenance, iv. 161
  ―――― Trencreek, i. 256
  ―――― Trengove, iv. 129
  ―――― Trenowith, ii. 107
  ―――― Trenowth, iv. 72
  ―――― Trenwith, ii. 259
  ―――― Trethurfe, ii. 353
  ―――― Trevanion, iii. 200
  ―――― Trevillian, i. 198
  ―――― Trevisa, i. 314
  ―――― Trewhythenick, i. 207
  ―――― Trewinard, i. 136, 346
  ―――― Trewolla, ii. 110
  ―――― Trewoofe, i. 142
  ―――― Trewoolla, i. 206
  ―――― Treworthen, iii. 269
  ―――― Trewren, i. 237
  ―――― Tripcony, ii. 124
  ―――― Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Uter Pendragon, i. 326
  ―――― Vaughan, i. 39
  ―――― Vere, ii. 185
  ―――― Vincent, i. 205――ii. 227 _bis_
  ―――― Vivian, i. 76, 94, 222
  ―――― Vyvyan, iii. 135
  ―――― Walesborough, iii. 116
  ―――― Wayte, i. 244
  ―――― Webber, ii. 336
  ―――― William, i. 53, 396
  ―――― Williams, iii. 145 _bis_, 355 _bis_, 356
  ―――― Winter, ii. 304
  ―――― Woolridge, i. 256
  ―――― Worth, iii. 60
  ―――― Wrey, i. 411
  ―――― Yeo, ii. 87
  Army, argument upon, ii. 76
  Arrish Mow, ii. 57
  Arscott, Denis, iv. 157. Tristram 41. Mrs. 157. Family 127, 157
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 336
  ―――― Mevagissey, Rev. John, iii. 195
  ―――― Tetcot, i. 370, 375
  Arsenic, process of extracting, iii. 305
  Arthur, Francis, i. 282
  ―――― King, i. 305, 323, 339 _ter._, 341, 372, 404――ii. 50, 214, 259,
    308, 403 _bis_.――His parentage, i. 326, 331. Birth 332. History
    333. Death 337. His arms 336. Lines upon him 325. Merlin’s
    prophecy of him 333. His tomb, and finding of his body 337. Lord
    Bacon’s opinion of him 340.――The British Hector, slain near
    Camelford, in battle against Mordred, verses upon, ii. 402. Born
    on the same shore. Stone bearing his name 403――The spot where he
    received his death wound marked by a stone, iii. 236
  ―――― King, acts of, iii. 163
  ―――― Prince, Romance of, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of Brittany, heir of Richard’s crown, ii. 178
  ――――’s admirals, i. 338
  ―――― castle, i. 343
  ―――― round table, i. 338
  ―――― stone, account of, i. 220
  ―――― table and tressels of gold, i. 338
  Artificial reef, iii. 379
  Artire river, iii. 457
  Artocarpus, or breadfruit tree, iv. 45
  Arun river, iii. 206
  Arundell, or Arundale in Sussex, iii. 206
  ―――― i. 113, 121, 125, 167, 198, 210, 213, 298, 317 _quat._, 318,
    319, 386, 392, 420, 421 _bis_. Humphrey 301. John de 405. Sir John
    213. Sir John 218. Margery 38. Renphry 125, 418. Sir Renphry
    213.――Family, ii. 128, 354, 415. Their property in Cornwall, sale
    of 147. Rev. F. V. J. 140, 365. Rector of Landulph 387. General
    192, 193, 196, 197. Geffery 195. Humphrey, Governor of St.
    Michael’s Mount 198. Humphrey the rebel 326. Jane 124. John 9.
    Lord, sale of his property 128. Richard Lord, governor of
    Pendennis castle 14. William 123. Mr. 123, 124.――Sir John, iii.
    332, 396. Richard 267. Thomas 141. Lord 343, 344. Miss 80, 369.
    Mr. 201. Family 83, 85, 137, 240, 269, 333, 343, 445. Arms 142.
    Monuments to 151. Origin of name 142, 150. Property 353.――Sir
    John, iv. 153. Lord 106. Miss 116. A younger branch of the family
    16. Arms 72
  ―――― of Caryhayes, heir of, iii. 202
  ―――― Clifton family, ii. 372. Lived at Clifton ibid. Alexander, Sir
    John, Mary 375. Thomas, Sir Thomas 371, 373. William 375
  ―――― St. Colomb Major, Elizabeth, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas ibid.
  ―――― Gloucestershire, iii. 142
  ―――― Lanherne, i. 218, 223, 405 _ter._ Edmond 121 _bis_. John,
    Bishop of Exeter 218. Sir John 415. Sir John or Renfry 120. Lord
    170. Renfry 218. Crest 405.――Humphrey, ii. 191, 192. Sir John 145,
    146 _ter._ Family 127, 147, 148, 149.――Sir Edmund, iii. 316.
    Edward 318. Elizabeth 140, 316 _bis_, 317. John 140 _quater_. Sir
    John, _bis_. Sir John, Sheriff 141. John, Bishop of Litchfield and
    Coventry, memoir of, ib. Sir John, the last possessor 142, 150.
    Sir John 143 _bis_, 148, 196, 201, 316 _bis_, 339. John de 269.
    Ralph 268, 269 _bis_. Renfry and Renfry 141. Sir Renfry 316 _bis_.
    Renfry 316. Richard B. 141. Miss 141. Mr. 140, 357. Family 104,
    140, 145, 268, 274, 391. Character of 150. Arms 149, 270. Lines on
    149. Name 142. Called “The Great Arundells” 140, 149,
    150.――Family, iv. 3, 103, 106, 161
  ―――― Lanheme and Wardour family, iv. 154
  ―――― Menadarva, i. 161, _ter._ John ib. Arms 162.――Family, iii. 85
  ―――― Sythney, i. 65
  ―――― Talverne, i. 222. John 65. Sir John 123. Sir Thomas 346,
    356.――Tolverne Grace, iii. 183. Sir John ib. 325 _ter._ Family
    104, 142, 149――ii. 256, 257, 276 _bis_, 279, 280, 336. Sir John,
    obtained a pardon for Lady Killigrew 6. Sir Thomas 170
  ―――― Tregarthin and Caryhayes, iv. 116
  ―――― Trembleth, i. 213, 405.――Mr. ii. 146.――In St. Ervan, Sir R.
    iii. 149. Family 140
  ―――― Tremodart in Duloe, Thomas, iv. 34 _ter._ Family 34 _bis_
  ―――― Trerice, i. 17, 19, 20 _bis_, 210, 211, 319. John 161. Sir John
    415. Lord 415.――John, father of Richard, called John of Tilbury,
    governor of Pendennis castle, besieged there by parliament forces,
    ii. 13. Sir John 185. Sent to reduce the Earl of Oxford at St.
    Michael’s Mount 183. Stormed it, killed, and his troops repulsed,
    his fortune told 184. Richard, his marriage 13.――Anne, iii. 199,
    201. John 199, 201, 269. Sir John 213. Sir John, story of 274. Sir
    John, called “The Tilbury” and “John for the King” 270, 274. John
    Lord 267, 325. Monument to Margaret his wife 271. Ralph 270. Sir
    Richard first Lord, and his grandson 274. Miss 141. Family 104.
    Arms and vault 270.――Family, iv. 13, 16
  ―――― Trethall, John and Prudence, ii. 320
  ―――― Trevethick family, iii. 142, 149.――Or Trevithick, Thomas, i.
    223 _bis_. Family 223
  ―――― Wardour, Lords, iii. 142, 149, 150 _bis_. Lord 352 _bis_. Henry
    8th Lord, sold his Cornish property 151
  Arundell castle, iii. 142 _bis_.
  ―――― Ederick, Saxon Earl of, iii. 142
  ―――― town, iii. 142 _bis_.
  Arundo aremaria, iii. 6
  Arwennak, by Leland, iv. 270
  Arwinick, i. 398――iii. 75.――Manor, etymology, ii. 4, 17.
    Inhabitants, house built by Sir John Killigrew 5. Present
    possessor 6
  Arwinike, i. 136, 137
  Arworthal manor, account of, iii. 302
  Asa, William, ii. 192
  Asan, brother-in-law of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 367
  Asaph, St. Jeffery of Monmouth, Bishop of, i. 342
  Asche, by Leland, iv. 281
  Ashburnham, Lord, iv. 14
  Ashmolean museum, i. 300――iii. 50, 52
  Asia, the Lesser, iv. 172
  ―――― Minor, the castles of, ii. 423
  Asparagus officinalis, iii. 260
  Asperville, Oliver de, iv. 28
  Asshe, by Leland, iv. 291
  Assium, or Assissum, i. 80, 81, 174
  Aster argophyllus, iv. 181
  Astle, Thomas, ancient MS. in his library, iv. 190
  Astley, ii. 186
  Astronomer royal, ii. 222, 223
  Atery, ii. 418
  Athanasian Creed, i. 252
  Athelstan, Bishop of Cornwall, his see, iii. 415. His successors
    ibid.
  ―――― the 2nd Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  ―――― King, i. 139, 240――ii. 59, 60, 61, 69, 158――iii. 277, 278
    _bis_, 322 _bis_, 430, 433, 462――iv. 40. Separated Devon from
    Cornwall 104
  Athenodorus, St. History of, i. 386, 388
  Atlantic Ocean, i. 388――ii. 283――iii. 98, 426, 429, 430
  Attall Saracen, i. 414
  Attica, iv. 161
  Atticus, a Greek geographer, ii. 172
  Attornies, Cornish, ii. 253
  Atwell, Rev. Hugh, i. 421.――John, ii. 189
  Auburne, Nicholas, ii. 189
  Aubyn, St., family, i. 32, 93――iv. 54, _see Seynt Aubyn_
  Audley, James Touchet, Lord, i. 86, beheaded 87
  Augmentation office, ii. 412, 425――iii. 286, 293――iv. 113.――Copy
    from, ii. 429. Roll preserved in 87
  Augo, William de, Archdeacon of Cornwall, ii. 426
  Augustine, i. 410
  ―――― St. i. 312.――Relates miracles of St. Hilary, ii. 169
  ―――― black monks of, iii. 111
  ―――― bull, iv. 100
  ―――― canons, i. 27, 73 _bis_――iii. 456. College of in St. Colomb
    141. Priory of 458
  ―――― friars, i. 83
  Augustinum, iv. 117, or Autun 121
  Augustus, Emperor, i. 386
  ―――― title of, assumed by the Emperor Charles VIII. 369
  Auld Lang Syne, iii. 298
  Aulerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  ―――― Branovices, ib.
  ―――― Cenomanni, now Mans, ib.
  ―――― Diablentres, ib.
  ―――― Eburorices, in Normandy, ib.
  Auncell, Richard, ii. 209
  Aurelian, Emperor, i. 214 _bis_, 236, 388
  Aurivale, ii. 428
  Austell, William de, and his arms, i. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 52 _bis_, 59, 106, 128, 152, 416, 418, 423――ii.
    314――iii. 47, 55, 58 _bis_, 198, 253, 391, 394, 395, 450, 455――iv.
    54, 104, 110
  AUSTELL, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    etymology, history of church, patronage, incumbent, i. 41.
    Impropriation, value of Benefice, land tax, divisions, Treverbyn
    42. Penrice, Menagwins 43. Roseundle, Roscorla, Trenaran, Merther,
    story of Mr. Laa 44. Hawkins family, Towington, Upcott family 45.
    By Norden, Polruddon. By Tonkin, Tewington 46. Pentwan, Pelniddon,
    Trenorren. By the Editor, rise owing to mines and china clay 47.
    Villages, church and tower, font, almshouse 48. Antiquities,
    statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 49. Elvan courses,
    streamworks 50
  Austell, St. river, i. 47
  ―――― town, i. 41, 45, 48――ii. 47――iii. 121, 190, 195, 196.――Market
    and fairs, i. 42. Formerly a village, great road through, export,
    harbour at Seaporth 47. Railroad finished 1832, 48.――Road to Fowey
    from, iv. 109
  Austelles, St. by Leland, iv. 274
  Austen, J. T. representative of the Treffrye family, a spirited and
    judicious miner, ii. 46
  ―――― place in Fowey, J. T. iii. 348 _bis_.
  Austin canons, cell of in Lancell’s parish, ii. 415 _bis_.
  ―――― St. iii. 167, 284, 285.――Bishop of Rochester, ii. 279, 287, 288
    _bis_.
  ―――― Abbey, Canterbury, iii. 114, 115
  Austol’s, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Austria, Leopold Archduke of, made Richard 1st prisoner, ii. 178
  Auvergne, ii. 86
  Auxerre, diocese of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. Amator, Bishop of, ii. 73 _bis_.
  ―――― St. German, Bishop of, ii. 63, 64
  ―――― oratory of St. Morice at, ii. 75
  Auxona, R. ii. 64
  Avalde, i. 407
  Avallon, i. 337 _bis_.
  Avant, i. 223
  Ave, etymology, i. 182
  Ave-Mary lane, ib.
  Avery family, i. 204 _bis_, 224.――Captain, a celebrated buccaneer,
    supposed to have buried treasure, ii. 128.――Mr. iii. 235
    _bis_.――William, iv. 77
  Avoh beacon, iii. 394, 401
  Avon river, in Somersetshire, ii. 292, 293
  Avranches, Augustine, Bishop of, ii. 208
  Axceolanum, or Hexham, the see of, iv. 42
  Axminster, i. 328
  ―――― hundred, iv. 15
  Aylesbury, i. 258
  Ayleworth, Captain, iii. 183
  Ayre, St. iii. 55
  Ayscough, Sir George, his engagement with the Dutch, ii. 25.
    Entertained at Le Feock by Captain Penrose 26. Sailed to the Sound 27
  Ayscough’s Catalogue, iii. 154
  Ayssheby, ii. 430

  Babb of Tingraze, Devon, iv. 95
  Babylon, iii. 434
  Babylonish captivity, iii. 69
  Bacchus and Sergius, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iv. 99, 105. Their
    history 100
  Bacon, Lord Chancellor, i. 340. His History of Henry VII. 87
  ―――― Sir Nicholas, Lord Chancellor, married a daughter of Sir
    Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Badcock, Henry, iii. 86 _bis_. Rev. Henry 117. Margery and Mrs. 86
  Badgall village, ii. 377
  Bagg, James, iii. 358
  Bagge, Fisart, a sea captain, ii. 36. Sir James, of Plymouth 13
  Bagwell, i. 209, 407
  Baines, Mr. ii. 124.――Captain, iii. 91
  Bake, ii. 76. Account of 67
  Baker, Nicholas, ii. 423.――The Chronicler, iii. 163, 182.――His
    Chronicle, ii. 60, 182, 342――iii. 144.――Family, iv. 109
  Baldue mine, account of, ii. 309
  Baldwin of Colquite, arms of, iii. 66
  ―――― Exceter, iv. 111
  Bale, i. 295――iii. 277――iv. 111, 145.――His writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Balfour, Sir William, iv. 188
  Baliol College, Oxford, i. 318 _bis_――ii. 147――iii. 97, 344
  Ballachise, iv. 146
  Balls, Mary, ii. 365. Mary, wife of Theodore Paleolagus 372.
    William, her father ib. William 365. No traces of the family
    remaining 372
  Baltic sea, iv. 21
  Bampfield, ii. 293
  Banbury, Richard, iii. 382
  ―――― borough, Mr. Praed, M.P. for, iii. 10
  Banda, in the East Indies, capture of, ii. 216
  Bandy, Rev. Daniel, of Warleggon, iv. 129
  Banfield, Mr. iii. 125
  Bangor, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― monastery, i. 289
  Bankes, Anne, F. and Henry, iii. 220
  Bant, William, iii. 42
  Baptist, St. John, iii. 82
  Baragwaneth, John, iv. 55
  Barbadoes, iii. 183.――Colonel Kendall, governor of, iv. 23
  Barbiague, i. 153
  Bards, druidical, i. 192
  ―――― verses on Arthur’s sepulchre, i. 337
  Barham, Dr. iii. 11, 100
  Baring, Alexander, i. 151――ii. 314
  Barnet heath, anecdote of the battle of, ii. 182
  Barnewell, George, iii. 102
  Barnstaple, iv. 107
  Baron, family, Jasper, Mr. iii. 377
  Baron of Lestwithiel, Mr. iii. 24
  ―――― of Trelynike, Christopher, i. 379
  Baronius, i. 206, 214.――His agonal, iii. 434
  Barret family, John, ii. 89. Roger 192. Mr. and arms 89
  Barrett, Mr. ii. 89
  Barrow, an ancient, i. 187
  ―――― John, ii. 192
  Barrows, the five, iv. 32
  Barry, ii. 119 _bis_.
  Bartholomew hospital cased with Bath stone, i. 58
  Bartholomew, “De Propriet. Rerum,” i. 163
  ―――― St. his feast, ii. 220――iii. 324.――Act of Uniformity to be
    professed before, ii. 220. Two thousand clergy deprived of their
    benefices upon, in 1662, 307
  Bartine castle, i. 230
  Barton, etymology of, ii. 152, 153
  ―――― Charles, iii. 154
  Basil, Emperor, his menology, ii. 36
  ―――― St. his Sermon in praise of St. Julyot, ii. 274
  Basill, account of, i. 198. Etymology 199
  Basingstoke hundred, ii. 208
  ―――― manor, ii. 208
  Baskeville, i. 206
  Basset, i. 160, 266. Sir Francis 114.――Francis, ii. 413. Sir
    Francis, ordered to defend St. Michael’s mount, the mount granted
    to him 213. His cup, given to the corporation of St. Ives 259,
    271. Thomas, William 428.――Richard, iv. 28. Sir Thomas 187
  Basset of Pencoose, William, i. 391
  ―――― Trewhele, John, i. 391
  ―――― of Tyhiddy, Sir Francis, i. 163 _ter._ John 86. J. P.
    259.――Family, ii. 199, 234, 235, 238 _bis_, 239, 241, 242. Hon.
    Frances 250. Francis 98, 235, 242 _bis_, 243 _ter._ Sir Francis
    235 _ter._, 236, 243 _bis_, 245, 246, 247, 248 _ter._ Baron 249.
    George 239. John 188, 235 _ter._, 243. John P 239, 242, 244. Sir
    John 239. Lady 240. Lucy 243. William 235 _bis_. Mr. 236. Rev. Mr.
    234. Mrs. 242. Arms 239.――Francis, iii. 38 _ter._, 229, 381, 445.
    Francis, Lord De Dunstanville 239, 271. John 239. J. P. 380.
    Margaret 445. William 381. Lady 390. Miss 8. Mr. 133, 381 _bis_.
    Seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Mrs. heir of the Pendarves family 303.
    Family 384, 390.――John, iv. 152, 154 _bis_. Family 154
  ―――― Umberleigh, i. 368.――Sir John, ii. 239
  ―――― signature to Magna Charta, ii. 242
  Bassett, ii. 176
  Bastard, i. 319. Sir William 319. Arms 320
  Baswedneck manor, iv. 166
  Bate, Sarah, i. 355
  Bath, i. 56――ii. 215, 295――iii. 123, 252
  ―――― Battle of Lansdowne, near, ii. 349
  ―――― John, Earl of, i. 104.――Earl of, governor of Pendennis castle,
    ii. 14. John, Earl of 6. Bought St. Mawe’s castle 277. Sir John
    Grenville, created Earl of 345. John Grenville, Earl of 339, 340.
    His iniquitous proceedings to recover property sold by his father
    333. Earls of 340
  ―――― three brothers named, iv. 3
  ―――― oolite, a house at Truro, built of, ii. 33
  ―――― and Wells, Thomas Ken, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  ―――― stone transported to Truro and London, and St. Bartholomew
    hospital cased with, i. 58
  Bathsheba, i. 329
  Bathurst, Allen and Jane, iii. 249
  Batten, John, character of, and of Rev. J. H. iii. 95. Family 94 and 95
  Battin, account of, ii. 227
  ―――― of Battin family, Miss, ii. 227
  Battle Abbey Roll, iii. 142
  ―――― deanery of, i. 147
  Bauden, i. 247, 397
  ―――― of Gudden, Reginald, strange story of, ii. 300
  Baudree, i. 243
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 182
  Bavi, in Italy, iv. 172
  Bawden, i. 8――ii. 316
  ―――― of Looe, Mr. iv. 32
  Bawdry, Rev. Daniel, of Quethiock and Worlegan, iii. 372
  Baxter, etymology of, iv. 8 _quin._
  Bay of Biscay, ii. 246
  Bayley, Rev. J. vicar of St. Mervyn, iii. 179
  Bayliff family, ii. 259, 260
  ―――― of Blackmore, iii. 213
  Bayton parish, iii. 118
  Beachey head, iii. 10. High water at 98
  Beacon, a Danish intrenchment, ii. 56
  ―――― etymology and purpose of, iii. 394
  Beale, Matthew, i. 2――iv. 44
  ―――― of St. Teath, i. 2
  Bealtine, in Cornwall, fires on May day, in honour of the sun, iv. 8
  Bear, i. 224
  ―――― Grace, William, ii. 396
  Beare, Mr. ii. 261.――Thomas, iv. 22. William 22 _bis_. Miss, Mr. and
    arms 22
  ―――― of Killigarth, iv. 161
  ―――― Trenarall, George, and his arms, i. 405
  Bearford, ii. 256
  Beauchamp family, ii. 130 _quat._ Guy 130. John 123, 133. Joseph
    133. Stephen 130. William 130 _bis_. Arms 130.――Lord, and his
    nephew, iv. 186
  ―――― monument at Gwennap, ii. 135
  ―――― of Bletsho, ii. 130
  ―――― of Chyton, Luke and Peter, iii. 315
  ―――― of Hatch, ii. 130
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, arms, ii. 130
  ―――― of Trevince, Peter, iii. 303
  Beauford, John, i. 216
  ―――― of Lantegles, i. 105
  ―――― James, i. 222
  ―――― John, Duke of Somerset, John his father, and Margaret, iii. 65
  Beaulieu or Bewley abbey, Hants, ii. 190, 191, 327. King John’s
    reasons for founding it, Latin 327. English 328. Afforded
    sanctuary to Queen Margaret and Perkin Warbeck 329
  Beaumont, ii. 119 _bis_. William 195. William Lord 185.――Mrs.
    Dorothy and her daughter, iii. 38
  Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Beavill of Guarnack or Killygarth, ii. 332 _bis_.
  Becagh, Thomas, iv. 146
  Becanus, Goropius, i. 192
  Becher, the introducer of reverberatory furnaces, iii. 343
  Becker, i. 366
  Becket, St. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 177.――His day
    177, 179. His death 177. His church in St. Mervyn 177. One of his
    murderers 246
  ―――― of Curturtholl, iii. 170 _bis_. Arms 170
  Bedack or Bessake manor, account of, ii. 353, 354 _bis_.
  Beddoes, Dr. iii. 94. His life, chemical experiments, and character 251
  Bede, the Venerable, iii. 167, 364――iv. 42, 43.――Has preserved a
    letter of Pope Gregory in his Ecclesiastical History, ii. 288
  Bedeverus, i. 335
  Bedford, i. 294――ii. 76
  ―――― Earl of, i. 65. Francis Russell, Earl of 65. Duke of 26
  ―――― Daniel, ii. 160.――Rev. Mr. 276. Miss, iii. 196.――Rev. John of
    St. Wenn, iv. 137, 140
  Bedfordshire, i. 369――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. The Cornwalls 22
    times sheriffs of 449
  Bedingfield, Sir Robert, iii. 140
  Bedoke or Besake in Lasake, iii. 359
  Beel arms, ii. 252
  Beer, Mr. ii. 259
  Beere, Mr. iii. 65
  Bees, St. in Cumberland, iii. 158
  Beiltine in Ireland, _see Bealtine_
  Belfour, i. 113
  Belimaur, father of Cassibelan, i. 10
  Bell rock, near the Forth, lighthouse upon, iii. 378
  Belloprato, Rodolphus de, ii. 107
  Bellot 301, 302. Anne, Christopher 349. Francis 356. Renatus 302,
    303. Arms 302.――Rev. Mr. of Maddern, iii. 78. Family 423
  ―――― of Bochim, i. 357. Of Bochym 356――ii. 227
  Bells, ceremony of christening, iii. 210
  Benalleck chapel, i. 242
  Benedict’s, St. monks, i. 73
  Benedictine abbey, ii. 81
  ―――― monastery, i. 341
  ―――― monks, iv. 25.――Priory of, on St. Michael’s mount, ii. 174,
    176.――Walter de Exeter said to be one, iv. 111
  ―――― nuns, i. 73, 176.――Monastery of, in France, iii. 141
  ―――― rule, iv. 100
  Benedictines, priory of, at West Conworthy, iii. 103
  Benedictus Abbas, i. 96
  Benett’s, barton, iv. 152, 154
  ―――― St. in Lanyvet, iii. 111
  Bengal, iii. 188
  Benham, Lord, i. 124
  Beni, i. 77
  Benin, bight of, iv. 90
  Bennet, Rev. Joseph, ii. 338. His father 339. Richard 192.――R. G.
    iii. 274.――Adam and Anne, iv. 75. Rev. John 40
  ―――― of Renton, Devon, John, iv. 75 _ter._
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Edward, iii. 2 _bis_, 3; Honor and Richard 3.
    Family 2. Arms 3
  ―――― St. Monastery in Lanivet, ii. 338 _bis_. Interesting remains,
    history involved in obscurity, attached to Bodmin priory 386. Made
    defence in civil war, modern vicissitudes 387.――Pider, an alien
    priory, iv. 101
  Bennett, i. 276――ii. 212
  ―――― George, ii. 377
  Benthamia passifera, iv. 181
  Bere, George, i. 406
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 406
  ―――― Alston, Devon, ii. 118
  Berengarius of Angiers, i. 110, 111
  Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  ―――― St. Winnox or Winoe, iv. 157
  Beriman, George, iv. 55
  Berimus, St., Bishop of Dorchester, ii. 60
  Berkeley, James Lord, i. 313.――Charles, Viscount Falmouth, ii. 11.
    Lord Berkeley of Stratton 23, 117. Sophia, his daughter 23, 117.
    Viscount Falmouth’s arms 11. Barbara, iii. 201. Thomas, Lord 163.
    William, Lord B. of Stratton 201. Judge 144. Family 90.――Sir John,
    iv. 14 _quat._ Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and arms 14. Family, ii.
    192――iv. 139
  Berkley, of Bruton, Somersetshire, Sir Maurice, iv. 14
  Berkshire, ii. 139
  Bernard, i. 410
  ―――― St. ii. 225
  Bernard of Bodmin, Benedict and John, iii. 324
  Bernevas, iv. 160
  Berriman, Henry, i. 273, 276
  Berry, John, ii. 196
  ―――― court, Barton, account of, ii. 232
  ―――― park, iv. 31 _bis_, 32
  Berrycomb, i. 93
  Berryhill, i. 93
  Bertin, St. Abbot of Sithian, iv. 157
  Berwick, ii. 76
  ―――― John de, iii. 2
  Berwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60
  Bespalfan chapel, i. 225
  Best, i. 391
  ―――― of St. Wenn, Edward, his booty at Penzance, iii. 82
  Betenson, family and arms, iii. 23
  Betham, Sir William, iv. 144
  Bethsaida, St. Andrew born at, iv. 100
  Bettesworth, John, LL.D. and John, iii. 205
  ―――― of Clithurst, Thomas, iii. 206
  ―――― of Fyning, in Rogate parish, Sussex, Thomas, iii. 205. Family
    206. Nine descents 205
  Bettison, Richard, iii. 358
  Beverley, i. 141
  Bevill, John, i. 406. Sir Richard 16. John 17. Descent of the family
    16. Arms 17.――Elizabeth, iv. 22, 162. John 22. Peter, Philip, and
    Sir William 22, 162. Arms 22, 72
  ―――― of Gwarnack family, iv. 22, 162
  ―――― family, monument to one of them, iv. 36
  ―――― of Killigarth, in Talland, ii. 343
  Bewes of Carnedon, Thomas, iii. 459
  Beyworthye, ii. 430
  Bicketon, account of, i. 410
  Bickford, i. 223, 349
  ―――― of Deansland, Devon, Arscott, iv. 130
  Bickton, account of, i. 412
  ―――― of Bickton, arms, i. 412
  Biddulph, Sir Theophilus, of Westcombe, Kent, iii. 162
  Bideford, ii. 221
  ―――― bridge, erection of, ii. 341
  Bigberry of Bigberry, Sir William, i. 346
  Bignonia grandiflora, iv. 181
  Bikesleya, Osbert, ii. 427
  Billett, ii. 212
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 171
  Billing of Hengar, family and heir of, iv. 94, 95. Gentlemen of
    blood and arms, their marriages and arms, Tredinick gave the same,
    iv. 95
  Billinge, Sir Richard, iii. 140. Richard 141, 150
  Bilson, iii. 206
  Bindon or Bindown hill, iii. 250, 253――iv. 32
  Binerton, ii. 260
  Binks, Philip, ii. 189
  Binmerton, chapel at, i. 288
  Binony manor, iv. 16 _bis_.
  Biny, i. 329
  Birch of Pembrokeshire, Sir Robert, and his daughter, iii. 326
  Bird, Mr. monument to, and Mr. of Devon, iii. 426
  Birge, Berty, i. 149
  Birkhead, Mr. i. 8
  Birne, Patrick, iv. 146
  Birthdays, celebration of, ii. 228
  Bishop, Rev. Mr. i. 224. Family 213.――Rev. Mr. ii. 130.――Mr.
    memoir of, iii. 143
  Bishop’s book, iii. 380
  ―――― jurisdiction, Temple parish lies out of, iv. 149
  ―――― Tawter, iii. 415
  Bishops, committal of seven to the Tower, iii. 297, 298. Feelings
    excited by it 298. List of their names 299. Song on the subject 298
  Blacaler, John, ii. 195
  Black, Ensign, i. 267, 275
  ―――― Book of the Archbishops of Dublin, iv. 146
  ―――― canons, i. 73 _ter._
  ―――― friars mendicant, i. 83
  ―――― Haye, iv. 161
  Black jack, ii. 310
  ―――― monks, iii. 232
  ―――― prince, ii. 155, 176――iii. 239
  ―――― rock, ii. 1, 2
  ―――― island, iv. 72, 230
  Blackburn, i. 153
  Blackheath, Kent, iii. 388.――Rebel camp at, i. 87
  Blackston, i. 109. Of London 204
  Blake family, ii. 362. General 26. His defeat of Van Tromp and De
    Witt, and his own defeat by Van Tromp 25. Entertained by Captain
    Penrose, illiterate 26. His origin 27
  Blake of Ford castle, Northumberland, Anne, and Sir Francis, iii.
    200, 201
  Blakiston, Sir M. Bart., iii. 138
  Blanchard manor, ii. 304. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 302.
    Tin-mines in 302
  Blandinberg, ii. 127
  Blase, St. by Leland, iv. 275
  ―――― St. church, iii. 372 _bis_.
  Blatchford, Mr. iii. 14
  Blathwayte, i. 221. William 221
  Blayble farm, ii. 256
  Blaze, St. i. 41
  ―――― History of, by Hals, i. 52. By the Editor, Patron of cloth
    manufacture 55, and of Ragusa 55. His feast 53
  Blazey, St. bay, iv. 124
  ―――― bridge, i. 60――iii. 57, 59
  ―――― highway, i. 56
  ―――― parish, i. 41, 152――ii. 314, 393, 398――iii. 55, 58 ――iv. 99
  BLAZEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint’s history, i.
    52. Fair, Rosilian, principal inhabitants 53. By Tonkin, Roselian,
    Trenawick, Trengreene 54. By the Editor, saint’s history,
    broadcloth manufacture 55. Birthplace of Ralph Allen, Esq., his
    history 56. Statistics and Geology by Dr. Boase 59
  Blekennock town, iv. 229
  Blencowe, Mr. Justice, iii. 417
  Bletius, Prince of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Blewet of Colon, Miss, and arms, iv. 95, _see Bluet_
  ―――― of Cornwall, i. 210. Colon 210. Robert 210 _bis_. Arms 210
  ―――― of Hampshire, arms, i. 210
  Blewet of Holcomb Rogus, i. 210
  Blewett, George, iv. 214, 215 _bis_. John 215, 216. Mr. 216, 219.
    His large property 219. Family monuments 219
  Blewett of Marazion, George, ii. 83
  Bligh, John, i. 216. Family 78, 396.――Captain William, of the
    Bounty, iv. 45. Family 139
  ―――― of Botadon, i. 237
  ―――― of Botathon, William, ii. 304
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Blissland, i. 103, 129, 167, 174――ii. 56, 151
  ―――― church, robbery of, i. 61
  ―――― manor, jurisdiction and possessors, i. 61
  ―――― parish (or Bliston) in Trigshire, iii. 125, 224――iv. 48, 49, 50
  BLISSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 60.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, ancient state,
    jurisdiction of manor, possessors, tin-mines 61. By Tonkin,
    etymology 61. By the Editor, statistics, two incumbents in 115
    years, Geology 62
  Blockhead, ii. 331
  Bloflemmen parish, iii. 463
  Blois of Penryn, John, Roger, and family, iii. 62
  Bloughan Pille, by Leland, iv. 277
  Blount, Elizabeth, i. 64
  Blount’s Tenures, i. 153――iii. 442――iv. 7
  Bloyse, Mr. ii. 97
  Bluet, Edward, i. 316
  ―――― of Little Colan, Colan, iii. 318. Elizabeth 319. Richard 318
    _bis_, 319
  Bluett, Mrs. i. 315.――Mr. ii. 375――Rev. T. L. of Mullion, iii. 258
  Bluisdale, St. Patrick born at, ii. 65
  Boaden, ii. 130
  Boar of Cornwall, i. 333
  Boase, Dr. ii. 340, 352.――Mr. iii. 95. Dr. H. S. secretary to the
    Geological Society 95, 100, 110 _bis_, 118. His Geology of
    Cornwall 371. Family 94
  Boats with paddle wheels, iv. 17
  Bocarne, i. 369. Etymology 85
  Bocconia cordata, iv. 181
  Bochym, i. 356. Account of 301, 303
  ―――― arms, ii. 131
  ―――― of Bochym, John, i. 301. Arms 302.――Robert, ii. 192
  ―――― in Cury, ii. 139
  Boconnoc, i. 112 _bis_, 113
  ―――― downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 186, 188
  ―――― parish, ii. 397――iii. 347――iv. 159, 184.――Living of, iii. 67, 451
  ―――― or Boconnock manor, iii. 437.――By Hals, possessors from Edward
    III., i. 63. By Tonkin, etymology 67. By the Editor, finest seat
    in Cornwall, and description 68. Governor Pitt’s purchase of 68
  BOCONNOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    antiquity as a manor, no endowed church 1294, patronage, land tax,
    i. 63. Statistics, poor rate, and Geology 72
  Bocunyan, ii. 151
  Bodanan tenement, iv. 43
  Bodcuike, iii. 449
  Boddenham, i. 91
  Bodecastle, iii. 233
  Bodenek, and trajectus, by Leland, iv. 279, 280, 290
  Bodenick, ii. 411. Account of 410
  Bodeworgy, i. 213
  Bodilly Vean, ii. 137
  ―――― Veor, ii. 137
  Bodleat castle, iv. 229
  Bodley, John, ii. 196
  Bodman or Bodmin bishopric, i. 73――ii. 95.――Bishop of, i. 231,
    250――ii. 299――iv. 116
  ―――― borough, i. 367, 368――iv. 46.――Boyer, mayor of, ii. 198. George
    Hunt, M.P. for 381.――William Peter, M.P. for, iii. 333. S. T.
    Spry, M.P. for, ii. 35――iii. 446
  ―――― Martin, Canon of, i. 97, 98
  ―――― church of St. Peter at, i. 74, 76. Steeple 75
  ―――― downs, ii. 187
  ―――― manor, iii. 238. With Keyland in Bodman and Lostwithiel
    parishes 359
  ―――― market, iii. 16
  ―――― parish, i. 133, 167, 174――ii. 60, 379, 384――iii. 58
  BODMIN parish, situation, boundaries, ancient name, etymology, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, school-house, secular
    church, now in ruins, i. 76. Bonehouse, British entrenchment 77.
    Court leet, Crown rent 78. Franciscan friary of St. Nicholas, to
    what uses converted 79. Its font, founder, his history 80.
    Miracles 82. History of the order 82. Lancar 83. Suicide of Mr.
    Mount Stephens 84. Bocarne 85. Flammock’s rebellion 86. Bodmin,
    the rendezvous of Perkin Warbeck’s forces, and of Arundell’s
    rebels 88. By Tonkin, etymology 91. By Whitaker, church, school
    91. Market, Grey Friars, bones found there 92. Chapels and
    almshouses of St. Anthony and St. George 93. Priory church, and
    Vivian’s tomb 94. By the Editor, church and monastery of St.
    Petroc 95. Histories by Whitaker and Wallis, story from Benedictus
    Abbas 96. Translated 98. By Wallis, benefice and patron,
    dimensions and history of church, destroyed by lightning,
    pinnacles dangerous, chapel of St. Thomas, tower at Berry, church
    and churchyard 100. Prior Vivian’s tomb, donation of organ. By the
    Editor, carving in the church 101. Painted window, statistics, and
    Geology 102
  ―――― priory of St. Peter or St. Petroc, i. 73, 116, 232――ii. 332,
    382, 386――iii. 24, 238, 277, 279――iv. 137, 162.――Dissolved its
    property and royalty, i. 74.――Documents relating to, Appendix XI.
    iv. 337.――House, i. 74
  ―――― Prior of, i. 74, 230, 231 _ter._, 246, 250, 289, 294, 371, 373,
    405――ii. 62, 151――iii. 175, 237, 279――iv. 137, 138, 160.――Roger, i.
    97, 98. List of priors 75.――Thomas Vivian, iii. 279
  ―――― races, ii. 35
  ―――― railroad to, from Wade bridge, i. 376
  ―――― road, ii. 390
  ―――― stone, iii. 21
  ―――― town, ii. 51, 151, 154 _bis_, 187, 188 _bis_, 192, 193 _bis_,
    195――iii. 26, 189, 278――iv. 187.――Erected into a coinage town,
    wholesale market, borough writs, principal inhabitants, precept
    for elections, i. 78. Importance, weekly market, fairs, number of
    churches 79. Decay 93. Record and council rooms, floor giving way
    100. Discovery of records 101.――Burnt by the Danes, ii. 60. County
    gaol built at 431. Two brothers left for London to seek their
    fortunes 34. John Robarts, Viscount of 379. Robert Robarts,
    Viscount of 379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles II. 380.――A Bishop’s
    see, iii. 408. See transferred there 267. Bishop of 456. St.
    Petroc’s church in 277. Monastery at 278
  Bodmyn by Leland, iv. 261
  Bodregen of Trengreene, i. 55
  Bodrigan, Sir Henry, i. 417, 418, 421
  ―――― family, ii. 106, 114. Variances with the Haleps 109. Arms 107.
    Sir Henry 115, 317. His escape from Bosworth field, and wonderful
    leap, Sir Richard Edgecumbe’s escape from him 108. His history by
    the Editor, his property divided between Edgecumbe and Trevanian,
    attacked near his own house 115. His manor of Newton given to
    Trevanian 318. Isabel 398. Otho 107 _quat._ William 398. Arms of
    William 107.――Sir Henry, iii. 294. Mr. 393. Family 190, 203, 293.
    Struggle with the Edgecumbes for each other’s property, lost
    theirs at Bosworth 204.――Family, iv. 21, 71
  ―――― de, family, monument to, iii. 292
  ―――― of Restronget, Wm. de, and family, attainted, iii. 226
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 106, 114
  ―――― leap, ii. 108
  Bodrigge in Kellark, ii. 143
  Bodrigy, account of, ii. 343
  Bodrugan, Henry de, family, ii. 363.――Arms, iii. 119
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 274
  Bodrugons, ii. 100
  Bodville, Charles, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Bodwanick village, ii. 355
  Body, Mr. ii. 192
  Boerhaave, iii. 49
  Boggan, Zacharias, Mayor of Totness, his arms, ii. 320
  Boggans, ii. 320
  Bohelland farm, story of a melancholy and dreadful murder at, ii. 100
  Bohemia, John of Luxemburg, King of, ii. 72
  Bohun, Humphrey de, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Margaret, i. 63
  Bohurra manor, ii. 276――iii. 209
  Boia, i. 107
  Boii, i. 107
  Bojil village, ii. 81
  Bokelby in St. Kew, iii. 61
  Bokelly, account of, ii. 335
  Bokiddick village, ii. 385
  Bolerium, supposed to be Land’s End, ii. 21
  ―――― cove, iii. 259
  Boligh family, John, ii. 398. William 398
  Bolitho, Messrs. ii. 125.――Family, iv. 67
  Bollandists, iii. 33
  Bolleit, i. 141. Geoffrey de 142
  Bolton, Duke of, ii. 257, 363――iii. 46, 118. Henry the last Duke
    47.――His heirs, iv. 58
  Bolytho, Alexander, ii. 160
  Bombay, iii. 188
  Bonaventure, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82. His Hymns 82. His Life of St.
    Francis 81
  ―――― Thomasine, her history, name, birth, iv. 132. Went to London,
    married her master, a rich widow twice 133. Thirdly, her death,
    founded many works of piety and charity 134
  Bond, ii. 256――iii. 246 _bis_, 250 _ter._, 252,  293, 378――iv. 25,
    37, 38.――His History of Looe, iii. 378.――His Topographical
    Sketches, i. 178, 321――ii. 295 _ter._――iii. 45, 120, 121――iv.
    25.――Henry, i. 383
  ―――― of earth, ii. 101
  ―――― of Looe, Thomas, iii. 348
  Bone, Richard, ii. 353 _bis_, 354. Arms 353.――Family, iv. 161 _bis_.
  Bonealvy, ii. 430
  Boniface, his life, iv. 126. The name 127
  ―――― Pope, ii. 288
  Bonifant, John, ii. 189
  Bonithan of Kertleowe, Alice, iv. 107
  Bonithon of Bonithon, Jane, iii. 225, 228. Her character 225.
    Richard 225, and Richard 225 _bis_. Simon 225 _bis_. Family arms
    226 _bis_. Monument at Milor 228
  ―――― James, of Grampound, iii. 229
  Bonvill, ii. 71, 292
  ―――― of Killygarth, ii. 341
  Bonville, Sir William, Lord Bonville, iii. 294, 295, 350 _ter._
    Taken at the battle of St. Alban’s and beheaded 294. Sir William
    his son, and William his grandson, Lord Harrington, both killed at
    the battle of Wakefield 294.――Family, iv. 107
  Bonython, account of, i. 302. Etymology 303
  ―――― family, i. 125.――Charles, ii. 120. Family took the name of
    Carclew 337.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Bonython, i. 302. Charles, M.P. 302 _bis_. His suicide 303.
    John 302. John, Dr. John 303. Richard, his suicide, Roskymer 303.
    Thomas, arms 302
  ―――― of Carclew, i. 143, 302
  ―――― John, Richard, and the heiress, iii. 303
  Booth, John, Bishop of Exon, i. 218.――Henry, ii. 196
  Bordeny abbey, i. 200
  Borel, i. 192
  Borew, account of, i. 420
  Borlase, i. 16, 141 _bis_, 198, 398 _quater_.
  ―――― Dr. historian of Cornwall, i. 180, 184, 228 _bis_, 229 _quat._,
    341, 360 _bis_――iii. 84, 89, 137, 196, 244, 309 _bis_, 323, 324,
    329 _bis_, 340, 366 _bis_――iv. 29, 30, 31, 175. Rev. William,
    LL.D. ii. 218, 219, 285, 361. Vicar of St. Just 386
    _ter._――Biographical notices of, iii. 51.――His Antiquities, ii.
    285, 424――iii. 31, 80, 89, 244, 365, 386. His Collections 373. His
    diploma 50. His speculations on the Druids 31. His estimation
    among his countrymen 408. His MSS. 232. His Natural History of
    Cornwall 329, 366, 386. Pope’s letter to him 53. His works 49, 52.
    Their effects 49. His death 54. His sons 53, 54. His son 196.――His
    account of a Celtic superstition, ii. 206, and of St. Kebius
    338.――His Map, iv. 24. His Natural History 30
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 398. John 59. Nicholas 398. James 18. Arms
    18.――Ann, ii. 218 _bis_. Rev. Geo. 219. J. B. 218. Rev. Walter
    218. LL.D. 302. Vice-warden of the Stannaries 285. Rev. Mr. 299.
    Family 282, 285, 286.――Humphrey, iii. 317. Nicholas 358. Samuel
    88, 90. Dr. Walter 54. Vicar of Madden 82. His biography 84. Built
    the house at Castle Hornech 84. Dr. William, Rector of Ludgvan 49.
    Family 83, 88, 90, 94. Arms 84.――Family, iv. 141
  Borlase of Borlase in St. Wenn, ii. 282
  ―――― of Newland, ii. 282
  ―――― of Pendene, John, ii. 282. John, M. P. 285. Arms 282. Of
    Pendeen in St. Just, John father of the two doctors, iii. 84, 88
  ―――― of Sythney, ii. 282
  ―――― of Treludderin, Nicholas, i. 199
  ―――― of Treludra, i. 20, 397 _bis_.
  ―――― of Treludrow, Humphrey, iii. 238, 268. Memoir of 268. Family
    property 271 _bis_.
  ―――― manor, iv. 140
  ―――― Pippin, iii. 268――iv. 141
  ―――― Varth manor, iv. 139
  Borough system, i. 389
  Borthy, i. 386 _bis_. Ralph de 386
  Bosawsen, iii. 322
  Boscastel, by Leland, iv. 257
  Boscastle, iii. 234
  ―――― harbour, ii. 50
  Boscawen, Admiral, i. 148. Edward 384. Hugh 58. Hugh, Hugh 297. Hugh
    Viscount Falmouth 141. Right Honourable Hugh 294. John de,
    Lawrence 140. Nicholas 113. William 297. Arms 140. Family 145,
    386. Admiral, ii. 285. Bridget 68. Hugh 68. Hugh kept a school 32.
    Hugh created Viscount Falmouth 11. Right Hon. Hugh 277. P. C. to
    William, III. 54. Family 136, 255, 303, 304, 357.――Hugh, iv. 77.
    Colonel Nicholas 188. Family 1 _bis_
  ―――― of Boscawen Rose, i. 254. Lawrence 254.――St. Burian, fam. iii.
    213. Their marriages 213, 216
  ―――― of Nansavallen, Charles, ii. 299. Charles, M.P. 303
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Bridget, Hugh, i. 205. Hugh 249. Hugh 384. Hugh
    395, 396. Hugh, ii. 137. Right Hon. Hugh 299, 302, 303 _bis_. John
    302. Nicholas 304.――Bridget and her great dowry, iii. 216. Admiral
    Edward, memoir of 218. Elected for Cornwall 219. Edward, his death
    219. Edward Earl of Falmouth 220. Has rebuilt the house at
    Tregothnan 221. Lord Boscawen Rose took the first class degree at
    Oxford 221. G. E. third Viscount 220. Hugh 209, 212, 213 _ter._,
    214, 215, 236, 397, 464 _bis_. Hugh 216. Supported Wm. III. 216.
    Arrested James’s adherents 217. Raised to the peerage 217. V.
    Falmouth 397. Hugh, second Viscount, and his character 217.
    Nicholas 213. Colonel Nicholas, in the rebel army 183. Richard
    213. W. G., his death 219. Dr. Walcot’s verses on 220. Family 61,
    208, 258, 305, 419. Antiquity 215, name 215, obtained Tregothnan
    215. Benefactors of their neighbourhood, their part in the Civil
    War and in the Revolution 216. Family 305, 419
  ―――― of Trevellick, i. 254
  ―――― downs, i. 141
  ―――― Ros, i. 140. Etymology and possessors 145.――Rose, in St.
    Burian, iii. 215
  ―――― Rose, Lord, son of the Earl of Falmouth, iii. 221
  ―――― Un, i. 141 _bis_
  Bosence, account of, i. 360
  Bosinney borough, iv. 20
  Bosistow, account of, iii. 35
  ―――― Mr. of Treadreath, family and arms, iii. 35
  Bosithney, i. 323 _ter._
  Boskednan, i. 141
  Boskenna, i. 148 _bis_
  Boskenso manor, iii. 77
  Bosquet’s Book, i. 214
  Bossiney, account of, i. 340.――Or Bosinny by Leland, iv. 258
  ―――― cove, i. 343
  ―――― manor exchanged for Wining Winington, ii. 128
  Bostock, Edward, iv. 26
  Boston, America, iii. 72 _bis_. The people ungrateful to Mr. Peters 73
  Bostowda, ii. 330
  Bosvigo, ii. 318
  Boswallow, account of, i. 392
  Boswaydel, etymology, ii. 353
  Boswellick, i. 19
  Bosworgy, account of, i. 224
  Bosworth field, ii. 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_――iii. 206
  Boswortha, i. 29
  Botallack mine, and garnets at, ii. 291
  Botallock, account of, mines valuable, ii. 285. Produce copper below
    the tin 286
  Botelett manor, ii. 397
  Botolph’s, St. passage, iv. 185
  Botowne, iv. 111
  Botreaux, iv. 48
  ―――― castle, iii. 39, 234, 235 _bis_.――iv. 228.――Port of, iii. 235, 236
  ―――― William de, i. 340. Family 368.――Lord and family, ii.
    397.――William de, iii. 232. William 353.――Lord, iv. 138. His heir
    138, 139
  ―――― of Botreaux, William Lord B. and his daughter, iii. 234. Family 234
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378. Richard, William 378
  ―――― honor of, iii. 234, 235
  Botusfleming parish, i. 162――ii. 361, 363, 364
  BOTUSFLEMING, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 103.
    Ancient state, value of benefice, land tax, Muttenham, i. 104.
    Father Peter’s rhymes, etymology by Tonkin, by Editor, singular
    occurrence 105. Statistics, rector, Geology 106
  Bouchier, Foulk, of Tavistock Lord Fitzwarren, i. 170. Lady Frances
    411. Henry, sixth Earl of Bath 411. Rev. Henry, and his daughter
    396. Richard, fifth Earl of Bath 411.――Jane and Captain Richard,
    iii. 187
  Bourdeaux, Joseph of Exeter, Archbishop of, i. 325
  Bouvardia tryphilla, iv. 181
  Bowden family, Reginald and arms, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trelisick, John, i. 399
  ―――― marks, i. 11
  Bower, Rev. J. of Lostwithiel, iii. 29
  Bowles, P. P. iii. 279
  Boy Bishop, monument of, in Salisbury Cathedral, ii. 313
  Boyeer, i. 88
  Boyer, Mayor of Bodmin, ii. 198
  Boyle, Edmund Earl of Cork, ii. 385. Family 354. Their share of the
    Courtenay property 385
  Boyle’s Biographical Dictionary, iv. 87
  Boyton, Robert de, ii. 412
  ―――― parish, ii. 234, 417, 429 _bis_――iv. 39, 40, 42, 61, 153
  BOYTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, land tax, etymology, Bradridge, i. 107. Northcott, history
    of Agnes Prest 108. Mount Calvary, a Cornish poem 109. Doctrine of
    transubstantiation, etymology by Tonkin 110. By the Editor, place of
    Agnes Prest’s martyrdom, statistics, vicar, Geology 111
  Brabyn family, i. 223, 225.――Mr. executed, iii. 184
  Braciano, Duke of, ii. 371
  Braddock or Bradock parish, iii. 59, 347. Living of 451.――Rectory,
    i. 72
  Braddon, Henry, and Captain William, ii. 87. Mrs. 338. Family,
    account, of 87.――Mr. iii. 252.――Lieut. Colonel, iv. 188
  ―――― of Treglith, William, iv. 62. Mr. 62
  Brades, Barton of, ii. 153
  Bradford, ii. 429
  ―――― Rev. Mr. i. 292. Family 289
  Bradley, Dr. life of, ii. 376
  Bradoak or Bradock downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 185, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― parish, i. 167――iv. 129, 155
  BRADOCK St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, endowment, land tax, i. 112. By Tonkin, patron,
    incumbent, manor 112. By the Editor, living consolidated, residence
    removed, patron 112. Bradock down, the scene of a royal victory in
    1623, and of Lord Essex’s escape in 1644, 113. Exasperation of the
    royalists, expulsion of rebels from Cornwall, King’s farewell to the
    sheriff 114. Statistics, and Geology 115
  Bradridge, i. 107
  Bradryche, ii. 429
  Brady, Dr. iii. 27――iv. 81.――His Treatise on Boroughs, ii. 200――iv.
    81 _bis_, 83, 84 _bis_
  Braghan or Brechanus, St. King of Wales, built the town of
    Brecknock, was father of St. Keyne, St. Canock, and St. Cadock,
    ii. 292. Had 24 daughters and 2 sons, all Saints 294
  Bralton Clovelly, living, iii. 67
  Bramer, Elizabeth W. and John, iii. 86
  Bramford, Earl of, a Royal Commissioner, iv. 189
  Branell or Brannell manor, ii. 100, 109 _bis_――iii. 195, 448 _ter._,
    451. Etymology 452. Extent 451
  Brannel forest, iii. 451, 452
  Brannell’s, Lady, tomb, ii. 114
  Branscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, _see Brounscomb_
  Branston, Judge, iii. 144
  Bray, account of, iii. 250
  Bray, Reginald, i. 87.――Francis de, ii. 118. Lord 282, 311. Mary
    118. Ralph, Sheriff of Hants 310. Family 282, 284 _bis_
  ―――― of Bray in France, ii. 311
  ―――― of Bray in St. Just, ii. 310, 311
  ―――― of Cornwall, family, ii. 237
  ―――― of Killington, Sir Edward, ii. 310. Sir Reginald, arms 311
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 282
  ―――― in Morvall, ii. 283
  Braydon, Captain, iii. 184
  Braye, de, family, i. 163 _bis_
  Brazen-nose College, Oxford, ii. 33
  Brazilwood, iii. 186
  Breaca, St. Life of, iv. 263
  Breadfruit tree, the Bounty went out to fetch plants of, iv. 45
  Breage, St. i. 263――ii. 353――iii. 431
  ―――― St. Church, iii. 285, 444
  ―――― St. parish, i. 115, 310, 344, 355――ii. 80――iii. 442.――Register,
    ii. 81. People of 82. Great Work mine at 83. Geology of, similar
    to Germow 85
  ―――― stone, i. 128
  Breath’s cattle, iv. 35
  Breca, St. iii. 342
  Brechan, St. painting of in St. Neot’s Church, ii. 298
  Brecknock, derivation of its name, i. 2. Built by King Braghan, ii. 292
  Breda, iii. 454. Lord Hollis, ambassador at 148
  Brend, George, iii. 387
  Brendon, William, iii. 163
  Brentford, Middlesex, i. 68――iii. 144
  Brenton, Henry, i. 24
  Breock, St. his history, i. 115
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 177
  Breock, St. parish, i. 301, 372, 373, 377, 406――ii. 80, 89, 253
    _bis_, 256, 257――iii. 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
  BREOCK, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    saint’s history, value of benefice, i. 115. Ancient state, Pelton
    manor, Hurston, Tredinick 116. Trevordei, by Tonkin, Etymology of
    Dunveth, by the Editor, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 117
  BREOCK, St. in Kerrier parish, or Breage, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, daughter churches, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, ancient state, i. 118. Pengelly, Godolphin
    119. Carew and Sammes on its etymology 120. Pengarwick 124. By
    Tonkin, a Cornish distich 124. King Germoe’s throne 125. By the
    Editor, Earl of Godolphin, stanza upon his pedigree 126. Parish
    covered with mines, Whele Vor Mine, first steam engine in
    Cornwall, Pengelly, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 128
  Brereton, Mr. Trelawney, i. 358
  Brest, ii. 127
  ―――― haven, ii. 171. A formidable combined fleet harbours in 247
  Bretagne, iv. 145
  Breton, Cape, iii. 218
  ―――― millers more hardy than Cornish, ii. 24
  Bretons, iii. 336
  Brett, captain, iv. 188. Charged the parliament army under Skippon,
    knighted on the field 188
  Brewar, or Brewer, William, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 75――iii. 182
  ―――― St. Breward, or Brewer parish, i. 62, 103, 174 _bis_, 254――iii.
    222, 223, 224――iv. 48, 49, 93, 95 Breward, St. or Simon Ward
    district, iv. 97. Porphyritic rocks in 99
  BREWARD, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, land-tax, founder of church, i. 129. His
    history, benefactions, impropriation of this benefice 130. By
    Tonkin, name of Simon-Ward 130. By the Editor, Lank Major, Lank
    Minor, Swallock, Hamethy, Roughtor, and Brown Willy 131.
    Statistics, vicar, patrons, Geology by Dr. Boase, sterility,
    loneliness of church, west fertile 132
  Brewer, i. 1, 60. William, Lord Brewer 129. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 129, 130 _bis_
  Bricot, i. 331 _bis_, 332
  Briddon, Lieut.-col. i. 113
  Bridge place, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 80
  ―――― end meadow, iv. 31
  Bridgerule church, i. 133
  ―――― parish, ii. 413, 430――iii. 114――iv. 152 _bis_
  BRIDGERULE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church in Devon,
    value of benefice, ancient state, by Tonkin, etymology, i. 133.
    Tackbere 134. By Editor, Tacabre, pedigree of Gilbert 134.
    Statistics, vicar 135
  Bridges, ii. 292
  Bridget, St. chapel at Landew, iii. 42
  Bridgewater, ii. 76. St. James’s hospital at, properly St. John’s
    412――iv. 254 _bis_
  Bridgman, Edward, ii. 196.――Sir Orlando, iii. 159
  Brigantes, i. 256
  Brightley, chapel at, ii. 348
  Brinn in Cornwall, ii. 348
  Brismar, ii. 208
  Bristol, i. 113, 373――ii. 76 _bis_――iii. 76, 89, 129.――Jonathan,
    Bishop of, i. 84.――St. James’s priory at, ii. 147.――Battle before,
    iii. 200, 204. Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Bishop of 296, 297 _ter._
    298 _quint._ One of the seven 296, 299. John Lake, Bishop of 296.
    Sir R. R. Vvyyan, M. P. for 137.――Henry Combe, mayor of, iv. 90.
    Mr. Coster, M. P. for 89
  ―――― channel, i. 381, 384――iii. 240
  ―――― waters, iii. 94
  ―――― John de, iii. 354
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25
  Britain, i. 335, 336 _bis_――ii. 1, 66, 75――iv. 116.――Churches of, i.
    294.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65. Various places
    dedicated to him in 75. Pelagians of 73. Pelagius, an inhabitant
    of 63.――Its Celtic inhabitants, iii. 49. St. Sennan came to 434
  ―――― Edmund of Hadham, Earl of, iii. 65
  Britany, i. 115――ii. 90, 123, 127――iii. 102, 281,
    285.――Pronunciation in, ii. 128
  ―――― Alan, Earl of, ii. 147
  British barrows, iii. 319
  ―――― camp, i. 369――iii. 111, 319
  ―――― channel, i. 26, 38, 41, 52, 135, 388――ii. 26, 36, 39, 50, 59,
    105, 106, 126, 171, 250, 319, 378――iii. 11, 102, 118, 129, 190,
    240, 257, 283, 421, 423, 429, 430, 436, 441, 442――iv. 19, 21, 23, 99
  ―――― Critic, iii. 407
  ―――― intrenchments, iv. 53, 94, 140
  ―――― minerals, greatest number of specimens from St. Just parish,
    ii. 291
  ―――― monarch, ii. 66
  ―――― Museum, i. 283, 300――iii. 154, 233, 408――iv. 33
  ―――― music, remnant of, ii. 166
  ―――― ocean, ii. 1 _bis_, 174, 237, 283――iii. 74 _bis_, 128, 198
  ―――― ornaments found, iii. 290
  ―――― tongue, iii. 114
  Britnall, John, ii. 196
  Brito, a poet, his lines on Arundell, iii. 149
  Britons, i. 295, 334――ii. 206, 261. Ancient, iii. 52, 365――iv. 168.
    their manner of writing. Religious ceremonies, and notion of the
    Deity, i. 193.――Believed in the appearance of St. Michael on their
    shore, ii. 172. Geruncius, King of 50.――Their names, iii. 130.
    Cadwallo, King of 284.――Inhabited one side of the Tamar, iv. 40
  Britton’s Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Britwyn, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Broadgate hall, Oxford, now Pembroke college, iii. 233
  Broadoak parish, iii. 348――iv. 159
  BROADOAK parish, additional sheet, by Hals, App. 4. Communicated by
    Mr. Polwhele; and supposed to be separated from the work in the
    bookseller’s hands. Situation, boundaries, etymology, iv. 184.
    Value of benefice, incumbent, and land-tax, Essex’s march to raise
    the siege of Plymouth, Sir Richard Grenville removes, Essex
    follows him, and encamps on Bradock downs, King Charles marches to
    Grenville’s assistance 185, and also encamps there, his overtures
    for peace, rejected by Essex, skirmishes, remarkable challenge
    186, and combat, related to Hals by several eye-witnesses, Essex
    obliged to retire 187. A battle 188. Treaty 189
  Brockland advowson in Kent, iii. 115
  Bromley of Lefeock, iii. 188
  Brook, Sir John, i. 87.――York herald, ii. 155
  Brook’s catalogue of Earls of Devon iii. 436
  Brounscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 209.――Founded a college,
    ii. 96. His death 97. Admonished in sleep to build Glasney college 341
  Brown, Anne and Rev. James, iii. 301. Dr. William, of Tavistock
    184.――James, iv. 4
  ―――― Walley, i. 201
  ―――― Willey, i. 131, 132, 188, 310――iii. 44
  Browne, George, of Bodmin, iii. 353, 459. G. F. C. 459. M. A. Lord
    Montague 231. William 153.――George of Bodmin, iv. 41
  Bruce, Edward, of Edinburgh, and his daughter, iv. 74
  Bruges in Flanders, iv. 14
  Brugmansia suaveolens, iv. 181
  Brune, Rev. C. Prideaux, i. 17――iii. 279
  Brunion, iii. 7
  Brutton, Elizabeth, i. 403
  Bryant of Bushill, John, and family, iii. 351
  Bryher island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  Bryn, iv. 161, 162.――Barton of, ii. 94, 332, 335
  Buck, L. W. ii. 416
  Buckhurst, Lord, ii. 9
  Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, ii. 382.――Duke of, iii. 183
  ―――― of Probus family, iv. 161
  ―――― palace, iii. 205
  Buckinghamshire, i. 353.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. Mr. Praed, M. P.
    for 11
  ―――― Earl of, ii. 265, 268, 270――iii. 406
  Bucknam, John, ii. 189
  Buckwell, Miss, of Tyringham, iii. 10
  Buclawranbucke, ii. 429
  Bucton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Bude bay, iii. 349――iv. 12, 13
  ―――― village, iv. 17. A watering place 18
  Budeox, i. 348
  Budeoxhed of Budeoxhed, Agnes, i. 348. Elizabeth 348. Philip, Thomas
    348. Thomas 347. Winifred 348. Arms 348
  Budeoxhed church, i. 348
  Buderkvam, i. 242
  Budge, ii. 54
  Budock church, ii. 3
  ―――― parish, i. 236――ii. 1 _bis_, 2, 3, 92 _bis_, 94, 96――iii. 74,
    77.――Rev. G. Allen, vicar of, iv. 95
  BUDOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, i. 135. Killigrew
    monuments, Arwinick, Rosmeran, Trescobays, death of Sir R. Vyvyan,
    Treon 136. By Tonkin, Swan pool, Trewoon 137. By the Editor,
    Penwenis, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 137. Export of
    granite, heave at Swan pool, bricks 138
  Budock, St. ii. 127, 128
  Budocus, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Budok, St. by Leland, iv. 283
  Buggin, Robert, ii. 319
  Bull, Rev. J. of Lezant, iii. 43
  Buller, Adm. Sir Edward, i. 321. Family 74, 221, 230, 246,
    266.――John, ii. 397. John T. 394. Family 170.――Francis, monument
    to, iii. 292. Colonel F. W. 293. James 361. J. F. 291, 383.
    William, Bishop of Exeter 301. Mr. 253, 361. Family 148 _bis_,
    390, 462. Edward, brother of the judge, and Mrs. iv. 37
  ―――― of Downs, James W. iii. 249. Mr. 249, 427
  ―――― Rev. John, of St. Just in Penwith, and of Perran Zabuloe, iii. 333
  ―――― of Lillesdon, Somersetshire, family, iii. 463
  ―――― of Morval, i. 317 _bis_. John 250. John 411.――John, ii. 85. Mr.
    396.――Anthony, iii. 230. Edward, Francis 249. James 229, 248, 249.
    Jane 229, 249. John 230, 248, 249 _bis_. John 249, 293, 297, 381
    _bis_, 463. J. F. 248 _bis_. Arms 249.――Elizabeth and John, iv.
    25. Mr. 22
  Buller, of Portlooe, Edward, the judge, iii. 333, 117
  ―――― of Shillingham, Francis, iii. 212, 215, 248, 381, 463. Francis,
    story of 463. James 248. John 463, 464. Richard 463. Sir Richard
    463 _ter._ Family 212
  ―――― of Shillington, Francis, i. 396
  Bullock, i. 28, 44, 78, 84.――Philip, ii. 189
  Bullœum, or Buelt, in Brecknockshire, iv. 8
  Bullsworthy, Barton, account of, iii. 3
  Bulteel, ii. 151, 319.――Miss, iii. 134
  Bunerdake, in St. Ives, iii. 359
  Bungay, Friar, supposed to have, by magic, raised a mist at the
    battle of Barnet, ii. 182
  Bungred, King of Mercia, i. 49
  Burdett, Sir Francis, chief promoter of the Reform Bill, and Miss,
    iii. 205
  Burgess, Mr. ii. 157.――Thomas and Thomas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Truro, i. 225
  Burgh, etymology of, i. 77
  ―――― Hubert de, Earl of Kent, iii. 349
  Burghert, married to Grenville, ii. 341
  Burgoigne, i. 177.――William, recorder of Exeter, ii. 189
  Burgundian court, ii. 188
  Burgundy, i. 107, 335――ii. 75――iv. 117
  ―――― Margaret Duchess of, ii. 188
  Burgus manor, ii. 253
  Burian, St. church, i. 149 _bis_――iii. 30, 431
  ―――― deanery, i. 147――iii. 30
  ―――― parish, i. 141――ii. 60, 265.――Etymology, i. 142
  ―――― St. parish, i. 146, 321
  ―――― or Burien, or Buryan, St. parish, iii. 30, 36, 283, 290, 322,
    425 _bis_, 428 _quat._
  BURIAN parish, by Hals, situation, antiquity, etymology, by Camden,
    i. 138. Founder, a regal peculiar, college, Pope’s usurpation 139.
    Boscawen Ros, Boscawen family 140. Boscawen downs, Dance meyns,
    and other ancient remains 141. Bolleit’s stone, Trove 142.
    Entrenchment there 143. Subterranean vault, royalists concealed
    there in civil wars, Pendrea 143. Burnewall, lake, aloe 144. By
    Tonkin, parish extensive, climate warm 144. Improvements of Mr.
    Paynter, Leigha, Boscawen Rose 145. By Editor, etymology, deanery
    146. Ecclesiastical abuses, non-residence, Pendrea, curious
    shellwork at Burnuhall 147. Shells at Porth Kernow, Boskenna,
    Vyvyans of Trelovornow, recluses at Boskenna 148. Church,
    trigonometrical survey, statistics, rector 149. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, and by Editor 150
  Burien’s, St. college, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Burke, Lady Dorothy, ii. 93
  Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, i. 341. Mr. ii. 302
  Burlington, Earl of, ii. 326
  Burncoose, porphyry found near, ii. 136
  Burne, captain, ii. 25
  Burnell, Robert, iv. 146
  Burnevas, iv. 161
  Burnewall, etymology of, i. 144
  Burngullo, manor and village, iii. 197
  Burnuhall, curious shell-work at, i. 147
  Buroughs, of Ward bridge, i. 225
  Burrow Bel-les opened, description of, ii. 301
  Burthog, iv. 157
  Burveton, Walter de, iii. 2
  Burwaldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415 _bis_
  Bury, St. Edmund, iii. 85
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 296
  Buryan parish, ii. 48, 282 _bis_――iv. 2
  Buryana, St. i. 138
  Buryas bridge, iii. 99
  Buryen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Busvargus, account of, ii. 86
  ―――― of Busvargus family, ii. 265, 286 _bis_
  Bute, Lord, ii. 245
  Butler, Simon, Lord of Lanherne, ii. 145 _bis_. Rev. Mr. 394
  ―――― Symon, iii. 139. Dr. 385, 434.――His Lives of the Saints, i;
    146――iii. 330, 332.――Colonel, iv. 189
  Bynany Castle, iv. 228
  Byron, Admiral John, his marriage, and “Narrative,” iii. 205.
    Grandfather of Lord Byron the Poet 205. Captain, his duel 152, 156
  Byzantine palace, ii. 366

  Cabellan, iv. 128
  Cabulian, i. 168 _bis_――iii. 89
  Cadbury, i. 337
  Cadd, Henry, iv. 18
  ―――― or Cadock, Earl of Cornwall, iii. 82, 462. His history, and
    arms, i. 203. Agnes or Beatrix, his daughter, iii. 463
  ―――― St. ii. 292
  Cadgwith, ii. 117, 331, 360――iii. 259, 424. Account of by Hals 421.
    By Editor 423
  Cadix, St. iv. 113
  Cadiz, iii. 98, 287
  Cadwallo, King of the Britons, iii. 284
  Caeling manor, iii. 267
  Caen in Normandy, university of, iv. 144, 145.――Michael Tregury, its
    governor, iv. 138, 144, 145
  Caer Brane, i. 230
  ―――― Broas, iii. 129
  ―――― Byan, iii. 129
  ―――― Cuby, i. 295
  ―――― Iske, i. 328 _ter._, 342
  ―――― Kief, iii. 316, 317 _bis_
  ―――― Kynock, account of, iii. 369
  ―――― Segont, i. 326
  ―――― Voza, iii. 366
  ―――― Went, in Wales, iv. 44
  Caerton, i. 261.――In Crowan, ii. 141
  Cæsar, i. 107, 323, 334――ii. 3――iii. 185 _ter._――Julius, i. 397. His
    Commentaries 193――ii. 237――iv. 116
  Cæsars, iii. 369
  Cagar quarry, ii. 117
  Cainham, in Holderness, Yorkshire, ii. 292
  Cair Kinan, by Leland, iv. 264
  Cairdine, by Leland, iv. 264
  Caitfala, i. 257
  Caius, St. Pope, and kinsman of Dioclesian, ii. 302
  Calais, i. 169 _bis_.――The siege of, ii. 159. Foy men assisted at
    39, 45
  Calamagrestis arenaria, iii. 6
  Calavega in Spain, i. 311
  Calceolaria, iv. 181
  Calenack, smelting house at, ii. 317
  Calendula tragus, iv. 181
  Calestock Rule, ii. 173
  ―――― Veor, ii. 173
  Calf, British-Cornish for, ii. 335
  Caliburne, i. 334
  Caligula, Caius, Emperor of Rome, iii. 184
  Calimontana, i. 206
  Call, family and arms, i. 162.――Sir William, ii. 231.――George, iv.
    41. Sir George 9, 41. Memoir of 9. Sir John 136. Sir William P. 11
  Callington borough, John Call, M.P. for, iv. 10
  ―――― manor, its possessors, ii. 313
  ―――― parish, i. 159, 316――ii. 231
  CALLINGTON parish, by the Editor, appendage to Southill, situation,
    boundaries, members of parliament, markets and fairs, manor, i.
    151. Church and town, monuments, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 152
  Callmady, ii. 136
  Calstock parish, i. 151, 159, 310, 316――iii. 101――iv. 6, 7.――Chapel
    at 322
  CALSTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, founder,
    patron, first-fruits, incumbent, land-tax, free-fishing granted,
    salmon wear, i. 153. Cuthele, by the Editor, extensive mines,
    Cotehele 154. Description of 155. View of the chapel 156. Visit of
    George III. and Queen Charlotte 157. Garden chapel 157. Battle of
    Bosworth, Harewood, Sandhill 158. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 159. Canal 160
  ―――― Ruol, etymology, iii. 325
  ―――― Veor, iii. 321
  Calvin, iii. 188
  Calway, John, iii. 261
  Camber island, iv. 238
  Camborne or Cambourne parish, i. 128――ii. 56, 250 _bis_, 337――iii.
    248, 367, 387, 389, 390――iv. 5
  CAMBOURNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    holywell, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    Pendarves, i. 160. Menadarva, story of Mr. Arundell 161. Roswarne,
    apparition, crane, Treswithan 162. By the Editor, rapid rise of
    the town, church tower, market, Pendarves 163. Menadarva,
    Roswarne, Crane, Mr. R. Trevithick, statistics 164. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Delcoath, and Cock’s kitchen mines 165. Soil good near the
    town, barren further north 166
  Cambræa, ii. 225
  Cambrensis, Giraldus, iv. 113
  Cambridge, i. 72――ii. 76, 104
  ―――― university, iii. 72, 454――iii. 270
  Cambridgeshire, ii. 97.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Camburne de, i. 359. John and John 348
  ―――― parish, i. 261――ii. 136, 141 _bis_, 144, 234, 239 _bis_
  Camden, the antiquary, i. 85, 138, 146, 168, 178, 179――ii. 65, 172
    _ter._, 173, 237, 257, 258, 283, 293, 402, 403, 418――iii. 1, 24
    _bis_, 25 _ter._, 129, 149, 313, 336, 357――iv. 8, 44, 75, 79.――His
    Britannia, i. 120, 213, 220, 257, 325――iii. 430.――His history
    lecture at Oxford, ii. 233.――His annals of Queen Elizabeth, iii.
    368. His Editor 226
  ―――― Lady, i. 72
  Camel river, i. 117, 132, 372 _ter._, 377.――A winding channel, ii.
    40. Ran with blood 40
  Camelford borough, i. 74, 94, 117, 337, 340――ii. 154, 236, 338――iii.
    81, 89, 136, 235――iv. 20.――An adjective, ii. 171.――Battle at, iii.
    322. Roman road through 324.――The mayor of, ii. 236. Charles
    Phillipps, M. P. for 399――iv. 45
  ―――― Thomas Pitt, Lord, ii. 405.――Thomas Pitt, first Lord, i. 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas Pitt, second Lord, his birth and
    christening, education, history, and character 70. Death 71
  ―――― manor, iii. 27
  ―――― town, etymology, name, ii. 402. Market and a fair, not a fair
      town, borough, had its first charter from Richard, Earl of
      Cornwall 403. Revenue, arms, rent paid to the Duke 404. Dr.
      Lombard passing through afterwards died at 406
  Camellia Japonica, iv. 181
  Camellot, i. 337
  Camp, vestiges of, at St. Syth’s, ii. 405
  “Campaign in the West Indies,” iii. 160
  Campion, i. 382
  Camps, two ancient, i. 39
  Canada, subjugation of, iii. 218
  Canarditone, ii. 145
  Candlemas day, iii. 7
  Canedon priory, ii. 429
  Canna bicolor, iv. 181. Indica 181
  Cannall Lydgye, account of, ii. 254
  Canock, St. ii. 292
  Canon of the mass, i. 198
  Canons Augustine, i. 73 _ter._, 168, 209, 217, 382――ii. 61
  ―――― monastery of, ii. 2
  ―――― priory of, at St. Germans, dissolved, ii. 62
  ―――― of St. Augustine at Launceston, ii. 87
  ―――― black ii. 70.――Black Augustine, iv. 156
  ―――― Clementine, ii. 60
  ―――― regular, college of at Glasnith, ii. 136
  Canterbury, Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 428.――Baldwin, i. 342. Robert
    Kilwarly 83. John Martin 87.――St. Just, ii. 287. St. Mellitus
    288.――Theobald, and Simon Mepham, iii. 115. Mellitus 3rd Archbishop
    of 167. William Sancroft 296. One of the seven bishops 299
  ―――― cathedral, iii. 246
  ―――― Gervase of, iv. 112
  Canute, King, ii. 60, 61, 70. His laws 61, 62.――Ridiculous legend
    of, iv. 96
  Canutus, King, ii. 60
  Cape Cornwall, ii. 290
  Capgrave, i. 295――iii. 332――iv. 93.――His book of English Saints, ii.
    292.――His Aurea Legenda, iii. 167
  Capgrove’s Life of St. Neot, ii. 396
  Cappadocia, i. 52, 388
  Capraria lanceolata, iv. 181
  Car, i. 172
  Cara Villa, Peter de, ii. 209
  Carantochus, St. i. 245
  Carantokes, St. by Leland, iv. 268
  Carbill, Robert Fitz-Hamon, Earl of, ii. 344, 347
  Carborro or Carburrow manor, iv. 130
  Carclaze tin mine, i. 50
  Carclew Barton, account of, iii. 224, 228, 229. Tin upon 225. Aisle
    belonging to, in Mylor church 228. Fine woods of 305
  ―――― purchased and improved by Mr. Lemon, ii. 85
  Carclew of Carclew in Milor, ii. 337
  Cardenham parish, ii. 187――iv. 47, 49, 50, 128, 129, 131, 155――or
    Cardinham, ii. 224, 260, 266
  Cardew, Rev. Dr. C. i. 402 _ter._――Dr. Cornelius, iii. 18.――Rev. Dr.
    master of Truro school, his monument in St. Erme’s church, iv. 85
  Cardiganshire, iii. 336
  Cardinan, Robert de, i. 167, 168
  Cardinham, by Leland, iv. 278
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 7, 225. Lord of Fowey 27.――Isolda de, iv. 107.
    Richard de 62. Robert de 101 _ter._, 102 _bis_, 103. Family 62, 107
  ―――― parish, i. 60, 112, 124――iv. 184
  CARDINHAM parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, manor,
    founder of church, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    ancient state, i. 167. Pedigree of Cardinham and Denham, daring
    exploit of John Denham 168. Called to the peerage, chapel built by
    Lady Denham 170. Glynn 171. Devynock 172. By the Editor, etymology
    172. Glynn 173. Statistics 173. Geology by Dr. Boase 174
  Caregrin, by Leland, iv. 291
  Careswell, ii. 71
  Carew, the historian of Cornwall, i. 152, 178, 210, 241, 258, 324,
    325, 350, 390――ii. 38, 39, 45 _bis_, 62, 69, 93, 147, 157, 172
    _bis_, 173, 197, 203, 204, 205, 230, 237, 251, 260, 261, 294
    _bis_, 358, 384, 394 _quat._, 398, 409 _bis_, 410, 411, 414
    _ter._, 417, 418, 419――iii. 14, 24, 25, 28, 39, 61, 91, 103, 149
    _bis_, 150, 171, 179, 235, 268, 270 _bis_, 276, 279, 287, 291,
    302, 313, 316, 328, 355, 357 _bis_, 374, 388, 389, 392, 437, 438
    _quat._, 439 _bis_, 443, 451――iv. 7, 8, 15, 23 _bis_, 24 _bis_,
    41, 96 _ter._, 112, 113, 132, 134, 162.――His history of Cornwall,
    ii. 296.――His survey of Cornwall, i. 167, 171, 172, 199, 252, 253,
    258, 323, 341, 372, 383, 384, 386, 396――ii. 3, 5, 7, 12, 17, 36,
    41, 89 _bis_, 90, 93, 107, 108, 120, 130, 175 _bis_, 180 _bis_,
    184, 186, 235, 236, 260, 282, 299, 337, 342 _bis_――iii. 66, 79,
    81, 102, 104, 105, 111 _bis_, 125, 129 _bis_, 133 _quat._, 139,
    140 _bis_, 168, 190, 381, 393, 436, 437――iv. 21, 34, 74, 111, 139
  ―――― Alexander, i. 33 _bis_. Sir Alexander 34. Anne 37. John 33, 34.
    Sir John 33, 153. Sir Nicholas 33. Nicholas, Lord 170, 171 _bis_.
    Reginald Pole 37. Richard 33 _bis_. Richard 38. Sir Richard 34.
    William 34. Sir W. C. 37. Sir William 86. Mr. 347. Family 33.
    Pedigree 34. Etymology of name 34, 35.――Sir Edmund, ii. 189. Sir
    George, commander of the Mary Rose frigate 341. Sir Peter 195.
    Family 93, 229, 415.――Sir A. M.P. for Cornwall, and his death,
    iii. 40. John 191. Right Hon. R. P. 439, 440. Sir William 437.
    Miss 60.――Colonel, iv. 185
  Carew of Anthony, John the historian of Cornwall, John his son, and
    Richard, iii. 193.――Miss, iv. 101. Richard, his epitaph, with
    comments, App. 14. iv. 378
  ―――― of East Anthony, Sir Alexander, i. 352
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Henry, iii. 373
  ―――― of Harrabear, Jane, Thomas, i. 352
  ―――― of Penwame, i. 223, 416
  Carey, William, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 4, 271
  ―――― of Clovelly, Sir George, iv. 139
  Cargaul manor, i. 397
  Cargol manor, iii. 267, 268, 270. Account of 267
  Cargoll parish, i. 15, 246, 250, 396, 403――ii. 52
  Cargreen, bargemen of, ii. 375
  Carhayes, the Trevanians removed to, no park at, iii. 202. House
    described 452
  ―――― manor, iii. 451
  ―――― parish, iii. 448, 451 _ter._, 453 _quint._ Rector of 452
  ―――― or Carhays, i. 299.――The name, iv. 9
  Carike road, i. 26――ii. 1――iv. 72
  Carilepho, William, Bishop of Durham, i. 290
  Carinthia, law of, iii. 186
  Carisius, St. history of, i. 379
  Carlian, ii. 308 _bis_
  Carloogus castle, iv. 228
  Carlynike, account of, i. 255
  Carlyon, i. 44. Derivation and arms by Hals 54. By the Editor
    55.――Rev. P. of Mawgan, in Pyder, ii. 160. Family 286
  ―――― of Menagwins, i. 55
  Carlyon of Trengreene, Philip, Thos. _bis_, i. 55
  Carmailoc, ii. 203, 211
  Carmelite friars, i. 83
  ―――― nuns, iii. 150
  Carmellus, i. 83
  Carmenow, ii. 293
  ―――― family, ii. 127――iv. 3, 41. Arms 72
  ―――― Carminow, or Carmynow, Jane, iii. 200, 208. John 208. John, and
    his daughters 131, 132. Ralph 129. Ralph, his arms, and contest
    with Lord Scrope for them 129. Traced to the reign of Arthur 138.
    Distinction awarded him 131. Trial detailed 137. Displeased with
    the sentence 131. His motto 131, 138. Robert 129. Thomas 131. Sir
    Thomas 200, 208. William and William 131. Mr. 464. Family 117,
    129, 135, 200, 208, 423. Heir of 140. Their sepulchre 132. Ancient
    monuments 132, 138. Partition of property 423
  ―――― of Carmenow, John, and his daughter, iii. 133. Family 214, 419,
    421. Their heirs 419
  ―――― of Fengollan, or Fentongollan, i. 65.――John, ii. 109. Drove the
    French from Marazion 171
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 128
  Carminow, Philippa, Sir Roger _bis_. Sir Thomas, i. 241.――Family,
    ii. 354, 358
  ―――― of Boconnock, family and property, iv. 97
  ―――― of Fentongollan, John, iii. 132. John 211 _bis_. John 211.
    Oliver 211, 212. Thomas 211. The great Carminows 211
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Penkevil, John, his hospitality, iii. 214. Oliver 215.
    Thomas 214. Their house pulled down 215
  ―――― of Polmawgan in St. Winnow, iii. 212
  ―――― of Resprin, John, iii. 214
  ―――― of Trenouth, Nicholas, iii. 357
  ―――― manor, iii. 137. Etymology of 137
  Carmynew of Fentongollan, i. 116, 117 _bis_
  ―――― of Resprin 171
  Carn Galva, iii. 244
  Carnadon prior manor, iii. 440
  Carnan bridge, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, iii. 224
  ―――― river, ii. 24
  Carnanton in Pedyr manor, iii. 125, 152. Account of 143. Left to the
    Willyams family and improved 159
  Carnarthen in Illogan, ii. 250
  Carnbray by Leland, iv. 266
  Cambre, monument to Lord de Dunstanville upon, iii. 389
  Carnbrea, i. 165.
  Carndeaw, etymology of, ii. 335
  Carndew, or Camsew manor, account of, iii. 61
  Carne, Richard, i. 9, 10. Family 9. Pedigree and arms 10.――Joseph
    and William, characters of, iii. 95. Mr. 100. Family 94
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, iii. 269
  ―――― of Penzance, ii. 318
  ―――― Bray, account of, ii. 237. Chapel at, account of 283
  ―――― Bray castle, in Luggan, ii. 237, 239, 283, 284
  ―――― Breanic, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― Buryanacht, i. 6
  ―――― Godolcan, by Leland, iv. 264
  ―――― Kye, ii. 237. Quantities of tin at 238 _bis_
  ―――― Mark, tumuli at, ii. 132
  Carnedde, i. 192
  Carnedon barton, iii. 459
  Carnen, ii. 17
  Carnesew, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Carneton, i. 209
  Carnhangives, by Leland, iv. 267
  Carnkie, i. 165――ii. 250
  Carnon branch of Falmouth harbour, iii. 304 _bis_
  Carnsew, ii. 94
  ―――― in Mabe, iii. 125
  ―――― family, ii. 94. Sir Richard and Grace his wife, her monument,
    iii. 66
  ―――― of Bokelly, iii. 61. William 61.――Derivation, ii. 337
  ―――― of Carnsew family, iii. 61.――In Mabe, ii. 335, 337. George 335.
    Sir Richard and two Williams, all sheriffs of Cornwall 335. Arms 337
  ―――― of Tregarne, Sir Richard, ii. 335
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136, 137. John 137. Thomas 136. Arms 136
  ―――― of Trewone, Henry, iii. 61
  ―――― manor, i. 136, 137
  Carock, St. monastery at St. Veep, prior of, iv. 110
  ―――― St. Pill, priory of, iv. 111
  Caroline, Queen, ii. 407
  Carpenter, Humphrey, jun. i. 303. J. P. 3. Rev. J. P. 204. William,
    shot at Skewis 269, 270 _bis_, 271 _quat._, 272 _quat._, 273
    _quint._, 274 _ter._, 275 _ter._ Family 302
  Carpenter of Mount Tavy, near Tavistock, ii. 400. J. P. 400,
    406.――John and Patience, iii. 301. Mr. 42.――Mr. iv. 45
  Carr, Lady Charlotte, iii. 172
  Carraton downs, account of, iii. 44
  ―――― hill, i. 196――ii. 154
  Carreth, account of, i. 298
  Carrow family and arms, i. 35
  Carsbroc, ii. 427
  Carshayes rectory, i. 72
  Carter, i. 223, 224. Honor 216. Richard 215.――Honour, iii. 237.
    Thomas of Dartmouth, Devon 315.――Colonel, iv. 189. Heirs of the
    family 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 222. John 223. Richard 222. Arms 223.――John,
    iii. 325 _bis_. Richard and family 325
  ―――― of Staffordshire, i. 222
  Carteret, Ralph de, ii. 209. Lord 348, 352. George Lord, married
    Grace, heiress of the Granvilles, Countess Granville 346.――Louisa,
    iii. 225. Lord Carteret 255, 256, 353.――Lord, iv. 16, 136
  Carthage, Scipio’s remark on its fall, ii. 426.――Destruction of,
    iii. 106.――Merchants of, iv. 168
  Carthagena, iii. 218
  Cartharmartha, account of, iii. 42
  Carthew, i. 260, 386, 393, 398
  ―――― copper mine at, ii. 256
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 255, 256. Mr. etymology of name and arms 255
  Cartuther, iii. 172
  Cartwright of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire, family, and W. R., M. P.
    iii. 152
  Carvaghe or Carvolghe, in Morvan and St. Tes, iii. 359
  Carvath, i. 49
  Carvean, iii. 355 _bis_. Etymology 364
  Carverth, account of, iii. 61
  ―――― Captain Henry, his history, ii. 94.――Gawan, iv. 77.――Mrs. iii.
    86. Mr. 88 _bis_. Family 61
  Carveth, or Carverth in Mabe, ii. 94――iii. 124
  ―――― O. A. i. 20.――Family of Thoms assumed the name, Thomas and
    arms, ii. 94.――John, iii. 82
  ―――― of Peransand, Anthony and his daughter, iii. 176. Family 187
  Carvinike, account of, i. 386
  Carvolgue manor, iii. 243
  Carwithinick, i. 241
  Cary, Henry, ii. 423
  ―――― of Clovelly, Devon, Mary, widow of Sir George, iii.
    269.――Family, i. 177
  ―――― Bollock or Bullock park, iv. 6, 7, 9. Account of 8
  ―――― of Cockington, Robert, i. 108
  Carynas, account of, i. 292
  Casa gigantas, i. 194
  Cassan, iii. 331
  Cassibelan, i. 10, 334
  Cassibelynn, ii. 3
  Cassiolus, Abbot, iii. 434
  Cassiter, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Bodmin, and its etymology, i. 79
  Cassiteridan islands, ii. 2
  Cassiterides, i 199
  Castell-an-Dinas, account of, i. 219, 228. Soil 230
  Castelle-an-Dinas, by Leland, iv. 262
  Castille, Alonzo and Frederick 2nd, kings of, i. 311
  Castle Caer Dane, iii. 322. Account of 319
  Castle Carne Bray, ii. 237, 239
  ―――― Cayle, iii. 342
  ―――― Chiowne, description of, iii. 244
  ―――― an-Dinas, account of, iii. 47.――or Dunes, iv. 53, 54. In St.
    Colomb 140
  ―――― Denis, i. 220
  ―――― Dore, iv. 102. Money found at in consequence of dreams 102
  ―――― hill, iv. 136
  ―――― Horneck, ii. 218. Near Penzance 285.――Account of, iii. 83
  ―――― Kaerkief, account of, iii. 320. Well in 322
  ―――― Keynock, ii. 187
  ―――― Killy Biry, or Killy Biny, account of, i. 372
  ―――― Kitty, i. 329
  ―――― Kynoek, i. 77, 88, 94
  ―――― Kynven, i. 329
  ―――― Terrible, ii. 420
  ―――― Treryn, iii. 31. Removing and replacing the rock 31
  ―――― Werre, account of, ii. 156
  Castledour, by Leland, iv. 279
  Castlemaine, Roger Palmer, earl of, husband of the Duchess of
    Cleveland, ii. 11. Appointed governor of Surat, ib.
  Castles after the Conquest, generally built of lime and stones, iv. 140
  ―――― in Cornwall, list of, iv. 228
  Castleton, Lawrence, Prior of St. Syriac’s, iv. 113
  Castletown, i. 261
  Cat eating the dolphin, i. 395
  Catacluse, stone of, iii. 178 _bis_
  ―――― Cliffs, pier at, iii. 179
  Catcher, William, iv. 77
  ―――― of St. Clements, John, iii. 327 _bis_
  Catchfrench, ii. 77 _bis_. Account of 68
  Catherine, queen of Charles the Second, iii. 148
  ―――― St. ii. 36. Her history 36. Her body found, its miraculous
    transportation, her wheel 37
  ――――’s St. ii. 41
  ――――’s St. chapel at Brightley in Kilkhampton, ii. 348
  ―――― St. chapel near Launceston, ii. 419
  Catholic church, general councils of, iv. 165
  Catholic clergy, i. 338
  Cattelyn, John de, i. 246
  Catullus, i. 183
  Catwater, iii. 108
  Cavaliers, song of the, ii. 278
  Cavall, i. 221
  ―――― Mr. arms, ii, Etymology, marriages of heirs, division of lands,
    ii. 335
  Cavedras, smelting-house at, ii. 317
  Cavendish, Lord George, ii. 326. Major, monument to 325
  Caweth of Caweth in Mabe, family and arms, ii. 337
  Cawsand, iii. 108
  ―――― bay, iii. 379
  ―――― village, iii. 379
  Caxton, i. 342
  Caxton’s, William, “Fructus temporum,” i. 338
  Cayl castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Caynham church, in Ludlow, Salop, ii. 292
  Ceall Lidain, iii. 331
  Cecil, Sir Robert, ii. 9. William 213. Sir William, lord treasurer,
    married the daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke 16. Earl of Salisbury
    66. Robert, Earl of Salisbury 213
  Ceely family, i. 256.――Name changed to Silly, iii. 237
  Cell-Cester, i. 326
  Celt, a thunderbolt, iv. 32
  Celtic, i. 172, 342
  ―――― people, iii. 49
  Celts of Cornwall, their conversion, ii. 240
  Ceriseaux, _see Sergeaux_
  Chad, St. patron of Litchfield, Worcester, and Shrewsbury, ii. 391.
    His death 392. Summerhouse dedicated to 391. Inscription in it 392
  Chalk ridges in England, iii. 10
  Challons, of Challons-Leigh, Catherine and Robert, ii. 354
  Chamberlayne, heir of, ii. 109
  Chamberlyne, Lord, iii. 155
  Chambers, Mr. iii. 156
  Chamond, John, ii. 415. His monument 416. Sir John 414 _bis_.
    Richard, remarkable for long life, honours, and numerous relations
    414. Thomas and arms, ib. Residence 416. Family 357, 395 _bis_,
    416.――Family, iv. 18
  ―――― of Trewhythenick, i. 207
  Champernon of Intsworth family, ii. 251, 254. John 251 _bis_. Sir
    John 251. Richard 251 _bis_, 254. Arms 254
  ―――― of Madberie, Devon, Richard and Sir Richard, ii. 251
  Champernoun, William, iv. 102, 103
  Champernown, Jane, ii. 118. John 70 _bis_. Thomas 118. Family
    119.――iii. 47
  ―――― of Halewin, ii. 107
  Champernowne, i. 348
  ―――― Richard, i. 36. Family 293, 313.――Henry, iii. 294. William 276.
    Mr. 448. Heiress 294. Family 276――iv. 107, 127
  ―――― of Beer Ferries, i. 347
  ―――― of Clyst Champernowne, Devon, family and arms, ii. 254.
  ―――― of Darlington, Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Halwyn, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Porth Prior, ii. 65
  ―――― of North Taunton, near Modbury, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Umberleigh, near Modbury, arms, ib.
  Chancellor, Lord, i. 270 _bis_――ii. 52, 123――iii. 109――iv. 65.――Sir
    Thomas More, ii. 53.――Richard Lord Scrope, iii. 129
  Chancery court, ii. 52 _ter._, 53――iii. 228
  Chancery suits, ii. 120
  Chandois, Lord, ii. 223
  Chandos, Brook, Lord, ii. 32
  Channel, iv. 12
  Chapel, old British, at St. Ives, ii. 261
  ―――― Carne Bray, iii. 429
  ―――― Comb, i. 12
  ―――― an Crouse, iii. 312
  ―――― garden, iii. 147
  ―――― house, iii. 256
  ―――― Jane, iv. 164
  Chaplin, John, i. 214.――Miss, iii. 11
  Chapman, Edward, i. 237. Story of 238.――Edward, iii. 16
  Chappell Amble, account of, ii. 336
  Chappie, Sergeant, i. 270, 274
  Charlemagne, iii. 335
  Charles, John, iii. 346
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 21, 25, 27, 66, 71 _bis_, 213, 235, 258, 277,
    305, 333, 335, 344, 396, 404, 405, 410, 411――iii. 61, 81, 134,
    142, 144 _ter._, 146 _bis_, 151, 154, 157, 161, 183 _ter._, 199
    _bis_, 213, 243, 269, 303, 315, 318, 358 _bis_, 463――iv. 75 _bis_,
    107, 114, 119 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 156, 162, 172.――His bed-room at
    Cothele, i. 157.――Identified with the established church after the
    Restoration, ii. 20. Sir Beavill Grenville’s services to 343.
    Fired at 411. D’Israeli’s Life and Reign of 78.――At Leskeard, iii.
    20, 42. Entertained at Trecarrell 42. Drew up his forces on
    Carraton Downs 44. His lines in answer to Ben Jonson 146. Le
    Strange’s life of him 145.――A battle of his army near Stratton,
    iv. 13. His managers of affairs 14. Lord Sandys raised a regiment
    of foot and of horse for 58. Marched to Cornwall, quartered at
    Liskeard 185. Surprised a party at Lord Mohun’s house, made a
    proposal of peace 186. Battle with Essex 187. Parliamentary
    generals forced their way through his army, his troops stopped the
    roads, were driven back, he sent Captain Brett forward, and for
    his success knighted him on the spot 188. Granted a parley 189.
  Charles 2nd, King, ii. 3, 5, 8, 21 _bis_, 25, 28 _ter._, 38, 44, 51,
    52, 53, 54, 55, 95, 100, 142 _bis_, 158, 220 _bis_, 235, 277, 302,
    316, 333, 345, 346, 421.――iii. 76, 104, 116, 134, 135 _bis_, 148
    _bis_, 162 _ter._, 186, 201, 209, 212 _bis_, 250 _bis_, 274, 363,
    381, 460, 463, 464――iv. 14, 57, 75, 94, 102, 107, 157.――His
    restoration, and war with the French and Dutch, ii. 27. Peace with
    Holland, debt to Captain Penrose 29. Reproved by Mr. Killigrew,
    his jester 15. Fonder of him than of his best ministers 22
  Charles 2nd, ship, ii. 375.
  ―――― Prince, iii. 185, 363
  ―――― 5th, Emperor, i. 411.
  ―――― 8th, Emperor, bought the empires of Constantinople and
    Trebizond, ii. 368
  ―――― Martel, King of France, iv. 126
  Charlestown, i. 11, 48――iv. 104
  ―――― in South Carolina, attack upon, ii. 268. Ship nearly reached,
    driven back ib.
  Charleton, iii. 438.――Lieut.-colonel, iv. 186
  Charlotte, a story of, ii. 103
  ―――― Queen, i. 157
  Charlwoodia australis, iv. 181
  Charters, inviolability of, identified with liberty, i. 389
  Chasewater, ii. 304, 310, 317. Almost a town 308
  Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of, i. 69 _bis_. Obelisk to him 71
  Chattisham, Suffolk, ii. 149
  Cheapside, ii. 191
  Checkenock or Killignock, iv. 139
  Cheep, Captain, iii. 205
  Cheesewring, i. 184 _quin._, 178――iii. 45 _bis_.――Description of, i.
    185, 186 _bis_, 190, 193
  Cheiney family, iv. 43
  Chelsea, ii. 98
  Cheni, Robert de, ii. 119
  Cheny, i. 383
  Chersonesus, ii. 125
  Chester, iii. 109
  ―――― choir, dedicated to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  ―――― Miss, iv. 129
  Chevy Chase, ballad of, i. 240
  Cheyney, Charles, Viscount Newhaven, iii. 458. John 116.――John de,
    John, John, and John, iv. 43. Sir John and Sir John, both Speakers
    of the House of Commons 44. Ralph de, Robert de, and William de, one
    of them in the Crusades, arms 43
  Cheynoy in St. Endellyan, iv. 43
  Chiandower, ii. 84, 120, 124, 125. Etymology 125. Tin smelting-house
    at 82
  Chichester, ii. 292.――John Lake, Bishop of, iii. 296. One of the
    seven 299
  ―――― Charles, iii. 276
  Chilcot, i. 8, 323
  Chilcott, William, iii. 276
  Chiliworgy, i. 189
  China, ii. 290――iii. 183
  ―――― clay or stone in St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 454, 455 _ter._
  Chinese wall, i. 189――iii. 289
  Chiowne, iii. 289
  Chippenham, i. 257
  Chiverton in Perran Zabuloe, iv. 90.――Account of, iii. 333
  ―――― Sir Richard, i. 314.――Richard and Miss, iii. 162
  Chiwidden, St. the first smelter of tin, iii. 330
  Cholwell, Mr. master of Wike St. Mary School, iv. 134
  Christ Church College, Oxford, iii. 296, 297 _bis_――iv. 86,
    95.――Rev. J. Bull, canon of, iii. 43.――Dean and chapter of, iv. 97
  Christian church divided by heresies, ii. 63
  ―――― festivals appointed for the days previously dedicated to pagan
    rites, ii. 288
  Christianitatus, Deanery of, Exon, ii. 319
  Christopher’s, St. iii. 183
  Chrysocoma cernua aurea, iv. 181
  Chrystallography, ii. 47
  Chubb, Egidius, iii. 153
  Chudleigh rectory, i. 130
  ―――― James, ii. 189, 190. John Sheriff of Devon 235.――General, iv.
    13 _bis_. Taken prisoner 15
  Chudley family, ii. 395
  Chulmleigh hundred, Devon, iv. 101
  Chun castle, i. 229 _bis_
  Church blown up, i. 215
  ―――― of England, iii. 298, 300
  ―――― lands confiscated, iii. 155
  ―――― tower at St. Enedor, fall of, i. 387
  Churches, the different uses of Roman Catholic and Protestant, iv. 103
  Churchill, Anne Duchess of Marlborough, i. 127. Lady Henrietta 234.
    Henrietta Duchess of Marlborough 126. John Duke of Marlborough
    126.――Charlotte, iii. 217
  Chydiock, coheir of, iii. 140
  Chyendur, iii. 324 _bis_
  Chyncoos, account of, ii. 316
  Chynoweth, i. 289. Account of 291
  ―――― of Chynoweth, i. 291. Arms 292.――Anthony, John and his three
    daughters, and Mrs. iii. 125. Arms 126
  Chyton, iii. 326
  Chywarton, iii. 324 _bis_. Account of 325
  Chywoon, ii. 104
  Cileintenat, Roger, iv. 27
  Cineraria populifolia, iv. 181
  Cinque ports, ii. 38
  Ciriac, Caricius or Cyret, St. iv. 112
  Cissa, King of the South Saxons, ii. 284
  Cistercian abbey, at Newenham, Devon, iii. 293
  ―――― or White Friars, i. 83
  Citrane, i. 162
  Civil war, iii. 92, 152, 158――iv. 75, 87, 96.――Havoc of, iii. 294.
    Part taken by Cornwall in 298
  Civil wars, ii. 387, 396, 410――iii. 183, 264, 274.――Trees at Tehiddy
    cut down in, ii. 240
  Clahar, iii. 258
  Clair, Clear, or Cleer, St. parish, iii. 13, 43, 45 _bis_, 260, 266, 371
  Clanricarde, Earl of, ii. 93
  Clare, Earl of, iii. 148. Hollis Earls of 147. John and Gilbert 148
  ―――― St. history of, i. 175. Elopes from her parents and becomes an
    abbess 176
  ―――― poor, nuns, i. 176
  Clare’s, St. well, description of, i. 177――ii. 315. Treasure
    supposed to be concealed and discovered there 316
  Claremont place, Brunswick-square, ii. 396
  Clarenbaldus, King’s chaplain, ii. 426
  Clarencieux the provincial herald, iii. 130, 131
  Clarendon, Earl of, iii. 200.――Advises the imprisonment of Sir
    Richard Grenville, gives an unamiable character of him, ii. 345. A
    partial historian 350
  Clarendon press, ii. 163――iii. 251
  ―――― province, Jamaica, ii. 120
  ――――’s History, i. 114
  ――――’s Rebellion, ii. 347
  Clares, nunnery of, at Truro, and their well at Edles in Kerrier,
    iv. 73
  ―――― poor, ii. 19. First brought to England 19. Nunnery of, at
    Liskeard 170
  Claret, receipt for making, ii. 186
  Clarke, i. 311 _bis_. Rev. J. E. 316.――Jeffrie, ii. 16. Mr. 162
  Classe, G. of Torrington, Devon, ii. 281
  Claude Lorraine, picture by, i. 195
  Clayton, Mary and Sir William, iv. 107
  Clear, St. Cape, iii. 6
  Cleare family, their arms, i. 177
  ―――― of Mertock, Robert, i. 177
  ―――― of Treworgy, i. 177
  Cleare, St. of Tudwell, i. 177
  Cleather family, i. 19, 198.――John sen., Samuel, and arms, iii. 325
  ―――― St. i. 308, 377
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 36――iv. 61 _bis_, 63.――Rocks in, iii. 23
  CLEATHER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    first fruits, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Cletus, i. 197.
    Basill, the Trevelyans 198. Foye Fenton 199. By Tonkin, Basill
    199. St. Eledred 200. By the Editor, Bordeny Abbey, story of Sir
    John Trevelyan 200. Statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 201
  Cleave house, iii. 256
  Cleder, i. 2
  Cleer, St. parish, i. 381, 413
  CLEER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    first fruits, land tax, name, i. 174. Etomology, saint’s history,
    mendicant friars 175. St. Clare’s well, family of St. Clare,
    Treworgy, Conock, Tremabe, Treworock 177. Pennant, Wring-Cheese,
    the Hurlers, and the other halfstone, Dungerth’s monument from
    Camden 178. From Bond 179. From Polwhele 180. From Hals 181. Bond
    continued 182. Cheesewring 184. Gumbs house 184. Druidical basons
    186. Rock of white marble near Looe, Sharpy Torry 187. View from
    188. Extract from Ovid 189. Kilmarth Hill 189. Druids, from the
    Monthly Magazine 192. Etymology of Kilmarth, cromlech at Trethevic
    193. King Doniert, father of St. Ursula, story of Ursula and her
    nuns, Claude Lorraine’s picture of their embarkation 195. By the
    Editor, other monuments, King Doniert’s death 195. The Hurlers,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 196
  Cleer, St. town, i. 193
  Clement 5th, Pope, iii. 115
  ―――― 8th, Pope, anxious to reform the Greek Church, ii. 370
  ―――― St. Pope and Martyr, iii. 344.――His history, i. 206
  ―――― St. island and chapel, iii. 287
  ―――― St. parish, i. 393, 404
  CLEMENT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, Condura, the Earl of Cornwall, i. 202. Caddock
    his son, Lambesso 203. Oliver King, ancestry of Samuel Foote,
    Penare 204. Tresimple Park, Polwhele 205. History of St. Clement
    206. By Tonkin, the Polwheles, Penhellick, Trewhythenick, Lambesso
    207. By the Editor, Polwhele, Rev. Charles Collins, Penhellick,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 208
  Clement’s, St. church, near Temple Bar, iii. 142
  ―――― parish, ii. 315, 318――iv. 70, 75, 80, 92――or Clemens, iii. 180,
    190, 354 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, has a church of its own, iv. 76
  Clements, Thomas, iii. 246 _bis_, 247 _ter._――Rev. D. of Warleggon,
    iv. 131
  Clemowe, Richard, iii. 387
  Clemsland or Climsland manor, account of, iii. 7
  Clerk, Henry, i. 213 _bis_. John 315. Paul 10.――Bernard, ii. 427.
    Sir George, his seat Pennycuick, county of Edinburgh 20
  Clether, St. parish, ii. 377 _bis_, 378
  Clethra arborea, iv. 181
  Cletus, Bishop of Rome, his history, i. 197
  Cleveland, Barbara, Duchess of, ii. _bis_.――Marquis of, i. 300
  Clicker Tor, ii. 79――iii. 172, 173 _bis_, 180
  Clickitor in Menheniot, iii. 373
  Clies family, iii. 83
  Clifford, Rosamond, i. 240.――Thomas, D. D. iii. 239
  Clifton, iii. 94. Near Bristol 251
  ―――― in Landulph, ii. 365, 371, 372――iv. 373 _quin._, 375. Account
    of 375
  Climerston, ii. 247
  Climsland Prior manor, iv. 9, 11
  Clinton barony, i. 151
  ―――― John 1st Lord, i. 151.――Arabella, ii. 313. General Sir Henry
    268. Lord 231 _bis_.――Margaret, heir of the Earl of Lincoln, iii.
    216. R. G. W. Trefusis, and C. Trefusis, Lords and Lady 230
  Clive, abbey of, Somersetshire, iii. 349, 350
  ―――― Colonel, ruined by a contested election, i. 390.――Family, iii. 94
  Cloak, iii. 222
  Cloake, Dr., iv. 74
  Cloberry, Mr. i. 381.――Miss, iii. 66
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Clobery, Lucy, ii. 153
  ―――― of Bradstone, iii. 44
  Clode, Major, iii. 338
  Clodworthy, John, iii. 189
  Clome, popular prejudice against in Cornwall, i. 267
  Clopton, Hugh, iv. 134
  Clotworthy, i. 416
  Clowance, i. 266. Description of 288
  Clowberry, William, iii. 2
  Clowens, account of, i. 261
  Cluniac monks, iv. 111
  Clutterbuck, Captain, iii. 288
  Clyfton in Landulph, Theodore, Paleolagus died at, ii. 365
  Clymsland, ii. 429
  Clyse, John, iii. 83
  Coach, ancient, i. 358
  Coade, Edward, iv. 65
  Coalition ministry, i. 389.――Of Lord North and Mr. Fox, ii. 245
  Coat, Sarah, iii. 461
  Cobbeham, John de, iv. 153
  Cobham, Lord, i. 87.――Family, iii. 117.――John de, iv. 13
  Cobœa scandens, iv. 181
  Cock, William, i. 224. Family 234.――John and Robert, ii.
    160.――Anthony and John, iii. 382
  Cock’s kitchen, i. 165
  Cocke, Thomas, iii. 387
  Cocks, Anne, Charles, Lord Somers, Reginald, and family monument,
    iii. 229
  Code of St. Wen, John, iii. 325 _bis_
  Coffin, Rev. C. P. of Tamarton, iv. 42
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Richard, iii. 3
  ―――― of Portledge, Richard, and Miss, iii. 3.――Richard, iv. 40
  Coffyn, Miss, ii. 236
  Cohan, St. iii. 180
  ―――― Martyr parish, iii. 181
  Coill, King of Colchester, i. 237
  Coke, John, i. 20 _bis_
  ―――― of Tregaza, Christopher, i. 395. Thomas 394, 395, 396
  ―――― of Trerice, John, singular history of, i. 394. Arms 395, 396
  Colan parish, iii. 139, 275
  ――――, Little parish, i. 230――iii. 267
  COLAN parish, or Little Colan, by Hals, situation, boundaries, named
    from the Barton, ancient state, founder of church, impropriation
    and value of benefice, patron, rector, incumbent, land tax, family
    of Colon, i. 209. Coswarth 210. Cudjore 211. By Editor,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 212
  Colburn and Bentley, iii. 95
  Colchester, ii. 76
  Coldnell, John, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 7
  Cole family, ii. 216, 217, 336. Captain Christopher 216. Captain
    Francis, R.N. 216, 217. John 123. Rev. John, D. D. and Samuel
    216.――Rev. Samuel, D.D. of Sithney, iii. 446. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian
    56. Mr. 66
  ―――― MSS. i. 300
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170
  ―――― of Devon, Philip, iii. 211, 215
  Coleridge, Rev. J. D. iii. 4
  Coleshill family, ii. 256.――Sir John, killed at Agincourt, his
    infant son heir of the family, iv. 16
  Colgan, iii. 434
  Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, iv. 106
  Collectio spinosa, iv. 181
  Collet, Sir John, Lord Mayor of London, iv. 134
  Collier family, iii. 277.――Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  ―――― of Bosent family, iii. 348
  Collins, Edward, i. 403 _bis_. Rev. Edward 351, 352, 353, 366.
    Elizabeth 352. Rev. John 208, 353. Wrote a note to Steevens’s
    Shakpeare 353. John 403.――Rev. John of Redruth, ii. 243.――Edward,
    iii. 339. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s great grandfather, rector of
    Sithney, Phillack, and Gwithian 446. The poet 219
  Collins of Treworgan, in St. Erme, John, i. 353, 396. Arms
    396.――Edward, iii. 343. Family 343, 382
  ―――― of Treworgye, Edward, ii. 146, 147. Family 146
  ―――― of Truthan, Edward, iii. 165
  Colliton, Mr. iv. 23
  Collon, Little, i. 212
  Collquite or Killyquite, account of, iii. 65
  Collrun in Perran Zabuloe, iii. 319
  Collarian farm, account of, iii. 47
  Collwell, Thomas, ii. 120 _quater._ Family 120
  Collyar, i. 213
  Collyer family, i. 135.――Rev. Mr. ii. 92
  Collyns, Thomas, prior of Tywardreth, his correspondence with
    Cromwell, Vicar General to Henry 8th, iv. 105. Described 106. His
    election, and death 106
  Colmady of Longdon, ii. 137
  Colomb, St. parish, i. 56, 148, 211, 213, 215, 225, 250, 404――ii.
    67, 85, 113, 217, 253.――Or Columb, iii. 149, 160, 324, 395――iv. 53
  ―――― St. Lower, i. 209, 249――iii. 267
  ―――― Major, St. i. 115, 140, 161, 209, 230, 235, 392 _bis_, 407――ii.
    198――iii. 61, 139, 141, 142, 143, 161――iv. 2, 137, 140, 151
  COLOMB Major, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    state, i. 212. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    history and description of church, Arundel chapel 213. History of
    St. Colomba, Jesus chapel 214. Contest for its revenues 214.
    Church blown up 215. Subscription for its repair, pinnacle
    destroyed by lightning 216. Steeple, College of Black Monks 217.
    History of Bishop Arundell, four free chapels, weekly market 218.
    Fairs, Castle-an-Dinas, the Coyt 219. King Arthur’s stone,
    Retallock barrow, the nine maids 220. Truan, pedigree of Vivian
    221. Epitaph on Mrs. Vivian, pedigree of Carter 222. Trevithick,
    Trekyning, Nanswiddon 223. Tresuggan, Trekyninge Vean, Bespalfan
    chapel 225. By the Editor, the Saint, Nanswhyden, consumed by
    fire, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase, Fatwork mine,
    Manganese mine 227. Castle-an-Dinas by Borlase, tower built on the
    walls 228. By the Editor 229
  Colomb Minor, St. church, i. 74――iii. 177
  ―――― Minor, St. parish, i. 245, 251――iii. 269, 275
  COLOMB Minor, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    revenues impropriated, vicars stipend, patron, land tax, church well
    kept, i. 230. Trelvye, Ryalton 231. Mundy family 232. Penitentiaries
    233. Towan, Hendræ, Trevithick 234. By the Editor, Rialton, new
    quay, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 235
  ―――― St. Porth, i. 235, 388
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 218
  ―――― St. tower, iv. 229
  ―――― or Columb, St. town, i. 218, 227――iii. 280――iv. 187. Road to
    Launceston from 46
  Colomba, St. i. 213
  Colomba’s St. day, i. 214
  Colon of Colon, i. 209, 210 _bis_. Jane, Margaret 209. Roger 209
    _bis_.
  Colon manor, i. 210
  ―――― manor, Little, account of, i. 209
  ―――― parish, i. 386
  Colquite, i. 262――ii. 180――iv. 22
  Colshill, i. 262
  ―――― of Tremada, John, i. 319 _quat._
  Colshul, of St. Ewe, i. 418. Sir John, _bis_, Joan 418
  Colshull, Joan and Sir John, iii. 316
  Colston family, iii. 95
  Colt, i. 220
  Coltdrynike, account of, ii. 67
  Columba, iii. 331
  Columbes, St. by Leland, iv. 261
  Colyn, Oto, iv. 127
  Comb Alan, ii. 402
  Combe, Barton, i. 132――iii. 181
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  ―――― Henry, iv. 90
  Comborne, i. 288――ii. 136 _bis_
  Come to good, ii. 35
  Come to good Sunday, ii. 35
  Common Pleas, Court of, in Cornwall, ii. 53
  Commons, House of, i. 390 _bis_, 355――ii. 66, 71, 75, 76, 95, 158,
    159 _bis_, 170.――Resolved not to sit on account of breach of
    privilege, i. 345.――Sir John Cheyney twice speaker of, iv. 44
  Comneni, imperial race of, ii. 366
  Comprigney, account of, ii. 318
  Conant, St. iii. 396, 397, 398 _bis_.
  ―――― or Gonnet’s park and meadow, iii. 396, 397
  ――――’s St. well, on Trefrank, iii. 393, 396
  Conanus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Condura or Condurus, Earl of Cornwall, i. 36, 202――ii. 320.――His
    history, i. 203
  Condura manor, ii. 320
  Conerton, ii. 260; or Connerton 145 _bis_
  ―――― manor, exchanged for St. James’s, iii. 140; or Connorton manor,
    account of, ii. 145, 147. Exchange of 145, 147, 148
  Connock, Mrs. iii. 20
  Conock of Treworgy, i. 177. John, etymology of name, arms ibid.
  ―――― of Wiltshire, i. 177
  Conor, etymology, i. 202
  ―――― Mr. master of Truro school, iv. 85
  Conorton of Lanherne, ii. 148
  Conqueror, i. 43――ii. 89――iii. 14, 142 _bis_, 264, 462――iv. 62. His
    death 71
  Conquest, ii. 70, 147, 238, 343――iii. 150, 226, 443――iv. 81 _bis_,
    140. Consort or West Lower hundred, i. 38
  Constans, the schismatic emperor, murderer of St. Martin, ii. 125
  Constantine, Emperor, i. 327. History of 237.――St. iii. 175, 178
  ―――― or Constanton parish, ii. 136――iii. 59, 74, 77, 124――iv. 2
  CONSTANTINE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, i. 236. Saint’s
    history, Trewardevi 237. Story of Mr. Chapman 238. Churches
    endowed by Constantine and other monarchs 240. Notice of Carmenow
    from Tonkin 241. By the Editor, Merther, Trewren, Carwithenick
    241. Chapels at Benalleck and Budeckvam, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 242
  Constantine, St. church of, iii. 175, 178 _ter._ Font at 178 _bis_
  ―――― St. his festival, iii. 178, 179 _bis_
  ―――― St. well of, iii. 175
  Constantinople, ii. 368 _bis_, 370――iii. 187 _bis_――iv. 100, 101,
    148.――Arius bred at, ii. 63
  ―――― emperors of, calling themselves emperors of Rome, ii. 365. Last
    who reigned at, ib.
  ―――― empire of, gold to Charles 8th, ii. 368
  Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, i. 237 _ter._
  Constat of Bishops of Landaff, i. 382
  Convent, the first in Christendom, Franciscan, i. 81
  “Conveyancer, Noye’s,” iii. 154
  Conworthy, west, iii. 103
  Conybeare, Rev. J. E. i. 111
  Conyland, ii. 230
  Cood, ii. 320
  ―――― Michael, iii. 134
  ―――― of Pensimple, William, iii. 238
  Coode, Anne, iii. 248. John 143, 248. Richard 248. Miss 463. Family
    253. Heir of 361. Arms 249. Monuments to 253
  Cook, Mr. ii. 377
  Cooke, family, i. 18.――Sir Anthony, ii. 373. Sir Anthony of Giddy
    Hall, Essex 7, 15. His daughters learned, and their great marriages
    16. Katherine 7, 15. Oswald 423.――Dr., of London, iii. 187
  ―――― of Mevagissey, Joseph, and Paschas, i. 357
  ―――― of Treago, John, i. 248. Thomas 259
  ―――― of Tregussa, i. 142
  Cooper, Anthony Ashley, Earl of Shaftesbury, ii. 379. Bishop
    66.――Rev. Dr. Samuel, iii. 72
  Copgrave, i. 414, 415
  Copleston family, i. 347――iii. 276
  ―――― of Copleston, i. 347. John 104
  Coplestone family, ii. 292. The great 293, 294. Hereditary esquires
    of the white spur, and very rich 293. John tried for murder, and
    John his son, and arms 293
  ―――― of Colbrook, Devon, ii. 292
  ―――― of Warleigh, Christopher, iii. 250
  Copley, Sir Joseph, ii. 76
  ―――― of Bake family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Sprotborough, ii. 76
  Copper, seldom appears on the surface, but is mixed in tin lodes,
    ii. 134. Mode of selling in Cornwall 318. Veins and branches of
    native 360
  Copyholds, renewals of, iv. 54. Converted in Cornwall into leases
    for life, ib.
  Coran, account of, i. 419
  Corbean, i. 49
  Corbet, Anne, i. 36, 203. Catherine 296
  ―――― of Allenaster, co. Warwick, Anne, iii. 456, 463. Robert, her
    father 463
  ―――― of Shropshire family, iii. 404, 405
  Cordall, John, iii. 318 _bis_. John and Ralph 218
  Cordelier or Franciscan friars――_see Friars_
  Coren of Bullsworthy, John, iii. 3
  ―――― of Stephen’s family and arms, iii. 3
  ―――― St. ii. 113
  Corey, Rev. Richard, i. 377
  Corfe Castle, Henry Bankes M.P. for, iii. 221
  Corfu, ii. 368
  Corington, Sir John, his widow, i. 314
  Corinth reduced by the Turks, ii. 367
  Cork, i. 115
  ―――― county, iii. 331
  ―――― Edmund Boyle, Earl of, ii. 385
  Corker, Robert, of Falmouth, i. 399.――Mr. ii. 11.――Robert, iii. 444
  Corlyer of Tregrehan, Thomas, i. 259
  Cornall, Teek, iii. 287
  Cornavy, ancient name for Cornwall, iv. 39
  Cornburgh, Avery, iii. 405
  Cornehouse monastery, i. 407
  Cornelius, St. i. 244
  Cornelly parish, i. 300, 424 _bis_――ii. 356――iii. 182, 188, 189, 354
    _bis_
  CORNELLY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, consolidation
    with Probus, i. 242. Patron, incumbent, land tax, impropriation,
    ancient state, name in 1521, Tredenike 243. By Tonkin, etymology,
    Trewithenike 243. Saint 244. By Editor, Gregor family 244.
    Statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Corneth, John, ii. 375
  Cornish acre, ii. 89, 120
  ―――― antiquities, ii. 392
  ―――― Britons, King Athelstan’s victory over, iv. 40
  ―――― clergy ii. 89
  ―――― critics, their mistakes, iii. 320
  ―――― crown, iii. 451
  ―――― demesnes, iii. 451
  ―――― diocese, visitation of, iii. 456
  ―――― families educated at Truro school, iv. 85
  ―――― historian, ii. 95
  ―――― insurrection, iii. 387
  ―――― kings, iii. 451
  ―――― lawsuits, ii. 53
  ―――― men in Charles the second’s service, ii. 29
  ―――― minerals, Mr. Williams’s fine collection of, ii. 134
  ―――― miners, iii. 229.――Marched against the combined fleet, ii. 245
  ―――― names, App. 9, iv. 312 to 318
  ―――― office for administration of the sacrament, ii. 31
  ―――― people, their insurrection against Henry 8th, ii. 192
  ―――― proverbs, i. 354, 368
  ―――― rebels, ii. 186. King answers their demands 195
  ―――― see, i. 116
  ―――― tinners, iv. 167
  ―――― tongue spoken late, ii. 31 Scawen’s dissertation upon, iv. 193
    to 221
  ―――― trials, ii. 53
  ―――― vocabulary, iv. 39
  ―――― Wonder Gatherer, ii. 173――iii. 392
  ―――― works translated, iii. 288
  ―――― family, i. 10.――Rev. G. J. ii. 309. William 216. Elizabeth,
    lived to a hundred and thirteen, iv. 17
  ―――― of Trevorike, William, ii. 255 _bis_. Miss 255. Mr. 256
  Cornmarth, ii. 133
  Cornua ammonis, plentiful at Keynsham near Bath, ii. 297
  Cornwall, Archdeacon of, William de Augo, ii. 426
  ―――― archdeaconry, iii. 460
  ―――― assizes, i. 173.――Held at Launceston, ii. 422
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 18.――ii. 54, 299 _bis_. Berwoldus 60. Suffragan
    to the diocese of Exeter at St. German 72.――Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― bishopric of, i. 96. 231.――ii. 95――iii. 456
  ―――― cathedral of, i. 73.――Mr. Whitaker’s discussion upon, iii. 408
  ―――― county, i. 327, 328, 334――ii. 19――iv. 48, 49.――Afield of
    political speculation, i. 69. Encroachment of the sea on its
    coasts 60. Rebellions in 86, 88.――The back door of rebellion, ii.
    186. Mr. Rashleigh the first collector of minerals in 47. Recent
    histories of 47. Smallest parish in 49. Judge Dolben a happiness
    to 52. St. German in 65 _bis_. Parochial history of 66. Ancient
    mining of 82. Romantic scenery of 88. Dunstone prevalent in 88.
    Service on the King’s coming into 89. First boarding school for
    ladies in 91. Inundation of sand buried the northern parts of 149.
    Rebels made prisoners in 197. Executed 198. Seven Saxon Kings
    dined together in 284. A petrifier of serpents wanted in 292.
    Fragmentary rocks in 330. Blessings proclaimed to the builders of
    Bideford bridge in all the churches of 341. Contributed to by most
    families of note in 341. Successful royal campaign in 345.
    Gentlemen’s seats in, embellished from Stowe 351. Gold found in
    354. Inaccessible situation of 386. Select vestry in all large
    parishes of 388. Part taken in civil war by 396. Lan used as a
    prefix in 424. Launceston the capital of 431. Hills and bad roads
    of 431.――Relics of antiquity in, iii. 52. Vallies in, heaps of
    rubbish 59. Medicinal waters of 79. No vicarage churches in 114.
    Granite in 432. Devon dismembered from 104, 462. Unsettled state
    of 246. First great iron works in 305. The west of, reduced by
    Athelstan 322. Prince Charles in 363. St Sennan came to 431 _bis_.
    Error of some writers upon 6.――Alien priories in, iv. 101.
    Earthworks in 126. Settlement of the Saxons in 125. Many
    gentlemen’s sons of, educated at Wike St. Mary’s school 134. The
    Northern entrance into, was formerly by Stratton 16. Trevalga in
    the most desolate part of 67. London architecture reaching to 81.
    Copper ores of, purchased by Mr. Coster 89. Truro the first town
    in 85. Essex and his army entered, iv. 185
  ―――― Custos Rotulorum of, Lord Robarts, ii. 379
  ―――― Geological Society of, ii. 291――iii. 424――iv. 122
  ―――― History of, Mr. Fortescue Hitchens assisted in compiling, ii. 224
  ―――― hundreds of, account of them, App. 13, iv. 317
  ―――― Lords Lieutenant of, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380.――Two Earls of
    Mountedgecumbe, iii. 107
  ―――― members of parliament for, ii. 351 _ter._ Sir John Eliot 71.
    Sir William Lemon 85.――Francis Basset, iii. 229. Admiral Boscawen
    219. Hugh Boscawen 40. James Buller 249. Sir A. Carew 40. Sir
    William de Ferrers 165. Sir B. Granville 40. Sir William Lemon
    229, 249. E. W. W. Pendarves 367. Mr. Praed 9. Thomas de Prideaux
    56. Sir Thomas Sereod 165. Nicholas Trefusis 40. Sir W. L. S.
    Trelawny 301. John Trevanian 200, 201, 204. His letter 204. Sir
    Richard Vyvyan 136. Sir R. R. Vyvyan 137.――Francis Gregor, iv. 89.
    John de Tynten 96
  ―――― militia, iv. 37.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, ii. 399.
    Jonathan Phillips, Captain in 399.――Mr. Williams, Colonel of, iii
    159.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, iv. 45. Henry Thompson,
    Captain in 109
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 47, 68. Basset 235 _ter._, 304, 394, 395.
    Carnesew 186, 335 _ter._ Chamond 414 _quater._ Champernon 251.
    John Enys 97. Grenvill 341 _quater._ William Harris 139. Orchard
    343. Treffry 43 _ter._――Mr. Amy, iii. 235. Thomas Le Archideakene
    405. Arundell Sir John 141, 274. Sir J. 213. Renfry and Renfry
    141. Humphrey Borlase 238, 268. Hugh Boscawen 213. Buller Sir
    Francis 463. John 249. Richard and Sir Richard 463. Carmenow John
    132, 133. Ralph 129. John and J. T. Coryton 346. Stephen Durnford
    374. Peter, Sir Peter, Richard, Richard and Sir Richard Edgecumbe
    104. John Eliot 337. George Herisey 417. James 419. Richard 417.
    Richard Gedy 337. Edward Herle 41. John de Mawgan 148. Erasmus
    Pascoe 343 Richard Penrose 444. Gregory Peter 176. Mr. Popham 446.
    R. Prideaux 56. Thomas Rawlings 280. John, and Sir John Reskymer
    133. Sir John 147. Hugh Rogers 445. Sir Richard Sergeaulx 65. John
    de Tregaga 211. John Tremayne 101. Charles, Sir Charles, Hugh,
    Hugh, Hugh, William, Sir William, and Sir Wm. Trevanian 199.
    Walter de Treworther 269. Francis, Hanniball, Michael, Richard,
    and Richard Vyvyan 134. John, Thomas, and Thomas Walesbury 116.
    John Worth 62
  Cornwall county, standard of, iii. 332
  ―――― Carew’s survey of, index to, iv. 381
  ―――― duchy, i. 3――ii. 87, 155, 375, 404――iii. 14, 15, 26 _bis_, 28,
    57, 286――iv. 6, 9, 14, 127, 186.――A manor annexed to, ii.
    46.――Robert Corke, receiver of, iii. 444. Holdings 286.――Manor, iv. 6
  ―――― Duke of, i. 75, 202, 253, 323, 413――ii. 145, 229, 230, 309,
    365, 376, 401, 402――iii. 24, 28, 44, 64 _ter._, 81, 223, 328,
    349――iv. 7, 8, 61, 71, 125. His lands 186. Edward I. 296. Prince
    Edward 339.――Edward the Black Prince, ii. 422――iv. 71. Frederick
    Prince of Wales, ii. 84. Solomon, a Christian 338. William 408.
    Edward the Black Prince, iv. 71
  ―――― Dukes of, iii. 14, 15, 24――iv. 72.――Their Exchequer Hall, iii.
    26.――Had a castle at Helstone, ii. 402. List of them from the time
    of Edward III. i. 373
  ―――― Duke and Earl of, i. 318――iv. 7, 8, 78
  ―――― Earl of, i. 151, 153, 202, 318, 322, 323――iii. 448, 462.――His
    castle at Truro, now in ruins, iv. 76.――Ailmer, i. 73. Algar 73,
    74, 94 _bis_, 95. Caddock 203, 254. His history and arms 203.
    Condur 254. Condura 36, 202. Cradock 36. Edmund Plantagenet 253,
    254. John 296 _bis_. John of Elham 256, 339, 341. Piers Gaveston
    338. Reginald 36. Richard 36, 340.――Robert 402. Edmund, ii. 138.
    Prince John, his treason 177. Protected Pomeroy 178. Reginald 420,
    428. Richard 109, 138, 403, 422. Richard Plantaganet 155. Richard,
    King of the Romans 8, 156. Robert 418. Roger 128. William
    418.――Ailmer, iii. 462. Algar 462. Cadock 82, 462 _bis_. Agnes or
    Beatrix, his daughter 463. Condura 462. Edmund 15, 26, 27. Son of
    Richard King of the Romans 285. Edward of Caernarvon 302 _bis_.
    John 27. King 448. Reginald 353. Richard 14, 15, 26, 27, 47, 268,
    350. King of the Romans, &c. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_.
    A promoter of monastic establishments 285. Robert 14, 27, 44. Earl
    of Morton, &c. 291, 345, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam, Earl
    of Morton, &c. 462.――Edmund, iv. 4. His history 368. Gothlois 94.
    John 71 _bis_. Of Eltham, his history 371. Succeeded to the crown
    71. Reginazd 169. Incorporated Truro 77. His history 353. Richard
    26, 27, 41. His history 356. Robert Earl of Morton, &c. 15, 67,
    102, 118. Roger 41. William Earl of Morton, &c. 100, 111
  ―――― Earls of, ii. 38, 145, 257 _bis_, 259, 260, 384, 422――iii.
    79, 168, 442, 448, 452, 456――iv. 6.――Held their court at Tintagell
    castle, ii. 402.――Their history, app. 12. Before the Conquest, iv.
    346 to 348. After the Conquest 348 to 373
  ―――― Earls of, Norman, iv. 81
  ―――― Earldom of, ii. 156, 379, 384――iii. 22, 452.――Raised to a
    Dukedom, ii. 155. Lost its feudal sovereignty 392
  ―――― King or Earl of, i. 322, 323
  ―――― Kings of, iii. 326, 452
  ―――― Prince of, i. 327
  ―――― Princes of, ii. 158――iii. 13
  ―――― Launceston Castle, their seat, ii. 418
  ―――― See of, reasons for removing, iii. 416
  ―――― sovereigns of, iii. 365
  ―――― Geffery, iii. 449. Joan 448. John 318. Sir John 27. Richard de
    448. William 449. Family 198
  Cornwall, of Burford in Shropshire, family, iii. 449
  Coronilla glauca, iv. 181
  ―――― valentina, iv. 181
  Corpus Christi College, Oxford, iii. 406
  Corrack road, ii. 281. Account of 284
  Corringdon, Rev. Mr. ii. 340
  Corsican gold, iv. 33
  Cortyder, by Leland, iv. 280
  Corvith, in St. Cuby, iii. 362
  Cory, Rev. W. ii. 364
  Coryton family, i. 410――ii. 32――iv. 130. Johanna, iii. 166. John
    346. Sir John 164, 165 _bis_, 266, 345, 346. John. T., 346 _bis_,
    348. Built a fine house 166. Family 161, 165, 346. Name 165
  ―――― of Crockadon, John, i. 315
  ―――― of Newton family, i. 315.――John, ii. 231. William 305.――Anne
    and Catherine, iii. 162. Sir John 162 _ter._, 176. Sir John’s widow
    163. William and Sir William 162. Family 161. Arms 162.――Sir John,
    iv. 9
  ―――― of Pentillie, Mr. iii. 372.――Of Pentilly, J. T. i. 316
  Cosawis, or Gosose, ii. 100
  Cosens, Nicholas, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 317. Family 319
  Cosowarth, Miss, i. 387
  ―――― Bridget, Sir Samuel, and Nicholas, iii. 135. Miss 116. The
    estates passed to Vyvyan 135
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 387
  ―――― of Penwarne family and heir, iii. 191
  Cossa, i. 326
  Cossens, i. 313
  Coster, Mr. of Bristol, i. 226.――A coppersmith there, took Mr. Lemon
    into partnership, iv. 89
  Coswarth, i. 210. Account of 211
  ―――― Bridget and Sir Samuel, i. 222. Arms 211
  ―――― of Coswarth, Bridget, i. 211. Dorothy 210. Edward 211 _bis_.
    John 210 _bis_. John 211 _quat._ Nicholas, _bis_, Robert, _ter._
    Samuel, Sir Samuel, _bis_, 211. Samuel 212. Thomas 211
  Coswin, account of, ii. 142
  Cosworth, Miss and Mr. iii. 193
  Coswyn de, John, and family, ii. 142
  Cotehele, i. 154, 158 _bis_, 159――ii. 108, 115.――View of  the Chapel
    at, i. 156.――Thick woods about, iii. 102
  ―――― de Cotehele, Hilaria and William, i. 154
  Cotele, iv. 70
  Cotland, ii. 71
  Cottell of Alderscombe, Alexander, and family, ii. 351. Arms 352
  Cotterell’s dispute with Le Grice for the lands of the latter, ii. 277
  Cottey, Christopher, and Mr. iii. 327
  Cottle, Alexander, and his father, iii. 116
  Cotton, William, i. 141. William, F. S. A. 228.――Sir John, iii. 235
    _bis_, 237. His sister 237. William 233, 244. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 233. William, son of the Bishop 234, 235. Family and their
    monuments 233.――Family, iv. 45, 62
  ―――― MSS. 154
  Couch, Reginald, ii. 90
  Coulson, Henry, and Rev. T. H. ii. 359
  ―――― Rev. H. T. of Ruan Major, iii. 420
  Coumb, St. Lower, parish, iii. 139
  Coumbe village, iii. 255
  Council, general, of the British clergy, at St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Councils, ecclesiastical, i. 100 _ter._
  Court barton, iii. 448 _bis_――ii. 395, 396
  ―――― in Lanreath, ii. 394
  ―――― in St. Stephen’s, the Tregarthyns removed to, ii. 109
  ―――― of chivalry, iii. 129
  ―――― leet at Helston, ii. 145.――Of Ryalton, i. 231 _bis_
  ―――― manor, ii. 110
  ―――― roll, tenure by copy of, ii. 51
  ―――― rolls, iii. 234.――Of a manor for three centuries, in
    possession of the editor, iv. 54
  Courtenay, Sir Edward, i. 33. Elizabeth, Florence, and Isabel 65.
    Jane 33. Maud 65. Peter, Bishop of Exeter 373.――Kelland, ii. 353,
    354, 384. Richard and Thomasine 386. Walter 189. William, sheriff
    of Devon 235. Lord William and Sir William 189. Family 354, 362,
    375.――George, iii. 214. Archbishop 171 _bis_. Monument to a 439.
    Family 373, 437.――Nicholas, iv. 112. Lawrence 113. Family 41, 97.
    A branch of at Treveryan 109. Arms 96
  Courtenay of St. Benet’s, Henry, i. 113.――In Lanyvet, Henry, iv. 188
  ―――― of Boconock, Edward, i. 43. Of Boconock and Haccomb, Emelyn,
    and Sir Hugh 64
  ―――― Earls of Devon, Edward, i. 63, 64 _quat._――Edward 11th Earl,
    iii. 436. Edward 12th Earl 437 _ter._ Edward 16th Earl 64, 65
    _bis_.――Hugh, i. 63.――Thomas, and Thomas his successor, iii.
    350.――William, i. 64
  ―――― Henry Marquis of Exeter, i. 43, 64――ii. 375
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Hugh and Margaret, i. 262.――Sir Hugh, iii. 437
    _bis_
  ―――― of Moland, Elizabeth and Sir Philip, i. 64
  ―――― of Powderham, i. 411
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 385, 387. Charles and Humphrey 385.
    Kelland 385 _bis_. William, ib.
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, Sir Peter and William, ii. 385――or
    Trethyrfe, i. 65――iii. 133
  ―――― i. 171, 177――ii. 292
  ―――― of Boconnock, iv. 157
  ―――― of Penkivell, ii. 54
  ―――― of Trehane, William, i. 397――ii. 130
  ―――― of Tremeer, i. 396――iii. 187
  ―――― of Trethurfe, i. 397
  Courts of Westminster, Cornwall remote from, ii. 145
  Covent Garden theatre, Mr. Dagge manager of, ii. 34
  Coventry, Lady Anne, i. 37.――Henry, iii. 252
  Coverack, ii. 331 _quater._ Noted for a lucrative trade 324
  ―――― cove, a transport lost in, ii. 325
  ―――― pier, ii. 331
  Covin, i. 205
  Cowley contrasted with Killigrew, ii. 22
  Cowling, John, and his daughter, iii. 288
  Cowlins of Kerthen, i. 266
  Coysgarne, iii. 326
  Coyt, in St. Colomb, account of, i. 219
  Coytfala, now Grampound, i. 353
  Coytpale, i. 257
  Cozens, or Cosens, William, iv. 77
  Crackington cove, ii. 88
  Cradock Earl of Cornwall, i. 36
  Craggs, Harriet; and James, Secretary of State, ii. 75
  Craig Vrance, ii. 305
  Crane, i. 162, 164.――In Cambume, ii. 123
  ―――― of Crane, Richard, family and arms, iii. 387
  Crantock church, i. 74, 248, 250
  ―――― college, i. 247, 250
  ―――― parish, i. 230, 249, 289, 293――iii. 267, 343
  CRANTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 245.
    Ancient state and revenues, impropriation, vicar’s stipend, patron,
    incumbent, land tax 246. Consecrated well, name of church, Treganell
    247. Treago 248. Gannell creek, Tremporth bridge 249. By Tonkin,
    saint’s name, impropriation, incumbent. By the Editor, collegiate
    church 250. Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 251
  Crantoke, by Leland, iv. 285
  Crawley, Judge, iii. 144
  Creation, i. 260
  “Creation of the World,” Mr. Keigwyn’s translation published by
    Editor, iii. 329
  ―――― and “Flood,” i. 109.――Translated, iii. 288
  Crediton, Devon, ii. 69――iii. 248, 415.――St. Boniface born at, iv. 126
  ―――― Leofric, Bishop of, iii. 416. Livingus, Bishop of 415
  ―――― see of, iii. 415
  ―――― college, iii. 7
  Credys in Padstow, not noticed in Tanner, ii. 388
  Creed, Apostles’, in Cornish, i. 252, 260
  ―――― church, i. 258
  ―――― parish, i. 140, 300, 424――ii. 90――iii. 170, 195, 198, 354, 371,
    448, 450, 451
  CREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 251.
    Apostles’ creed in Cornish 252. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, Tybesta, Grampound borough, privileges 253.
    Fairs and market, chief inhabitants, Trevelick, Tencreek 254.
    Pennans, Nantellan, Carlynike 255. Nancar 256. By Tonkin,
    Trencreek, Granpont, ib. Trevellick, Trewinnow, Pennance 257.
    Trigantan, the church 258. By the Editor, Tybesta and Grampound
    ibid. Hawkin’s family 259. Differences of the Cornish creeds,
    statistics, vicar 260
  ―――― rectory house, i. 258
  Creeg meer, account of, iii. 319
  Cregoe, account of, i. 297
  ―――― i. 205. Rev. John 424.――Edward, ii. 54. M. G. 58
  Cremble passage, iii. 105
  Cressy, battle of, iv. 72
  Crewe, Rev. Mr. ii. 86.――Elizabeth-Anne and John, iii. 220. Mr. 185, 211
  Crewenna, St. i. 263
  Crews, Rev. Mr. i. 253
  Crewys, Sir Alexander, i. 347. Mr. of Lesnewith, iii. 22. Mr. 276
  Cricklade, i. 258
  Criticism, &c. letters on, ii. 76
  Croaker of Crogith, i. 299
  Croan, i. 371. Account of 376
  Crocadon, account of, iii. 162
  Crockaddon, account of, i. 313, 316
  Crocker, Michael, i. 8
  ―――― of St. Agnes, Miss, iii. 80
  Croftilborow, iii. 439
  Croftshole, iii. 439 _bis_
  Crogith, account of, i. 299
  Croker, Sir John, ii. 189. Robert 337, 338
  Cromlech at Trethevye, i. 193
  Cromleigh at Lanyon, iii. 89
  ―――― at Malfra, iii. 90
  ―――― in Morva parish, iii. 90, 244
  ―――― in Zennor parish, iii. 90
  Cromleighs, description of them, iii. 90
  Cromwell, Oliver, i. 204――iii. 186, 188, 381.――Curious letter from,
    ii. 47.――His interregnum, i. 204――ii. 277――iii. 421, 449.――His wars
    with Charles 1st and 2nd, iv. 75.――Richard, iii. 188.――Thomas, his
    correspondence with the prior of Tywardreth, iv. 105. Described 106
  Crook, Judge, iii. 144
  Croome family, iii. 192
  Cross family, ii. 252, 397
  ―――― of Bromfield, Somerset, Mary and Richard, iii. 315
  ―――― posts, establishment of, i. 56. Farmed by Mr. Allen 57
  Crosses on moor stones, i. 195
  Crossman, ii. 54
  Crosstown village, iii. 255
  Crostetedon, i. 236
  Crowan parish, i. 118, 160, 355――ii. 122, 139, 141 _bis_, 144,
    272――iii. 7, 65, 384, 389, 441, 442
  CROWAN parish, by Hals, boundaries, ancient state, value of
    benefice, patronage, rector, incumbent, land tax, endowment,
    Clowens, pedigree of Seynt Aubyn, i. 261, Tregeare, by Tonkin,
    etymology 263. Tregeare, Hellegan, Clowance 264. By the Editor,
    patronage of the church, oversight of Hals, Sir John Seynt Aubyn,
    Lady Seynt Aubyn’s marriage portion 265. Stoke Damarel, Devonport,
    advowson, by Lysons, Kerthen 266. Shewis, Henry Rogers’s
    resistance of the sheriffs, fatal consequences 268. His escape,
    arrest, trial 269. Evidence 270. Lord Hardwicke’s charge 278.
    Proclamation 279. His son’s account 280. His death 282. Sir John
    Seynt Aubyn’s letter on the occasion 284. Monuments in the church,
    chapel of ease, charity school, statistics, feast, vicar, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, celebrated for mines, beauty of Clowance 288
  Crown demesnes, iii. 365
  ―――― patronage, ii. 231――iii. 222, 223, 253, 284, 349――iv. 40, 97,
    127, 137, 160. Let 40
  ―――― “Noye’s Rights of,” iii. 154
  Crudge, Adry, i. 357
  Cruetheke, iii. 372
  Cruff of Borew, i. 421
  Crystalline rocks in Linkinhorne, iii. 45
  Cubert church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, iii. 39, 275, 333
  Cuby parish, i. 413――ii. 2――iii. 354, 371, 402, 403, 451.――St. iv. 117
  CUBY, St. parish, or Tregony, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    antiquity, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, history
    of the saint, i. 294. His shrine, privileges of the borough 295.
    Castle, arms of the borough, family of Pomeroy 296. Crego 297.
    Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to render the river Val navigable,
    Carreth 298. Hospital 299. By Tonkin, Crogith, bridge, ruins of
    the old town, and of St. James’s church, its patron 299. By the
    Editor, ancient town, castle, and priory 299. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 300
  Cudan Beke, i. 32
  Cudanwoord, ii. 59
  Cudden Point, iii. 311 _ter._, 375. Curious custom at 311
  Cuddenbeck, ii. 68
  ―――― borough, ii. 69
  Cudjore, account of, i. 211
  Cudworth, Mr. iv. 94
  Culloden, victory of, caused the fall of the Whigs, ii. 244
  Cumberland, i. 289――iii. 246
  Cuming, Alexander, iii. 445
  Cummin, Rev. Mr. ii. 398
  Camming, Sir Alexander, and Mr. iii. 9
  Curgenven, Captain and Mrs. iv. 4
  Curgurven, Rev. William, iii. 357 Curlyghon or Curlyon, ii. 155.
    Account of 301
  ―――― family, ii. 301
  Curlyon family, descendants of Richard, i. 54
  Curnow, John, iii. 343 _ter._ and three daughters 343. Family 54,
    343.――John, iv. 55
  Curran Boake, ii. 61
  Currie or Karentocus, St. church iv. 12
  Curthop, i. 298
  Curthorp, i. 298
  Curtutholl, account of, iii. 170
  Curvoza, account of, iii. 362
  Cury parish, i. 118, 356――ii. 80, 126 _bis_――iii. 110, 127, 128,
    257, 416, 419
  CURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, family of Bochym,
    Arundell’s rebellion, i. 301. Family of Bellot, Bonython 302.
    Bochym, Shewis 303. By Editor, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 304
  Custendon, i. 236
  Custom house establishment at St. Ives, ii. 261.――At Truro, iv. 74
  Customs, laws of, iii. 423.――Mr. Lamb, collector of, at Fowey, ii.
    47――and excise, laws of, iv. 175
  Cuthbert, St. his history, i. 289.――Bishop of Lindisfarne, iv. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 215, 254――iii. 267, 313
  CUTHBERT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, rector, land tax,
    saint’s history, i. 289. Translation of his relics and the
    bishopric from Lindisfarne to Durham 290. Holywell, Chynoweth 291.
    Carynas 292. By Tonkin, plague, holy well 292. Hallanclose,
    church, Kelsey 293. By the Editor, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 293
  Cuthill, i. 154
  Cutler, Sir John and Mary, ii. 380
  Cyric, St. the monk of, iv. 114
  Cyric’s, St. creek, iv. 113

  Dacia, i. 336
  Daddoe, Rev. J. of Merthyr, iii. 189
  Dagge, Mr. possessor of Killigarreen; and Mr. and his brother,
    manager of Covent-garden theatre, ii. 34
  Dal, monastery at, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains enshrined there 90
  D’Albert, Sir Perdiccas, ii. 176
  Dalbier, a parliamentary general, iv. 186 _bis_
  Dallaway’s Chichester, iii. 205
  D’Alneto family, ii. 375
  Dameliock castle, i. 328 _bis_, 329 _bis_, 330 _ter._, 331 _ter._,
    332――iv. 94.――Siege of by King Uter, i. 329
  Damelsa castle, iv. 140
  ―――― house, iv. 140
  Damerell, Sir John, iii. 60. Arms 61
  Damholt, Lord, French Admiral, ii. 342
  Danaus, his daughters, iii. 265
  Dance Meyns, i. 141 _bis_
  Dandy family, ii. 397
  ―――― of Trewenn, William, i. 326
  Danell, i. 383
  Danes, i. 290――ii. 27――iii. 262, 365――iv. 140. Burn Bodmin, ii. 60.
    Bishop Stidio’s loss by 61. Arrived in West Wales (perhaps
    Cornwall), and defeated on Hengiston downs 310. Probably buried in
    the three barrows 317. Their castles 423.――Destroyed Nutcell
    abbey, iv. 126
  D’Angers of Carclew, Isabella, iii. 225 _bis_. James 225. Margaret
    225 _bis_. Richard 225. Family 224. Arms 226
  Daniel, Nicholas, i. 375.――Richard, iv. 77.――Family, i. 434
  Daniell, Thomas, i. 58――R. A. ii. 33 _bis_, 318. Successful in
    mining 33. Thomas 33 _bis_. Built a house at Truro of Bath stone
    33. Member for West Looe 34. Samuel, his Chronicle 284.――Mr.
    succeeded Mr. Lemon, married Miss Elliot, iv. 89
  Daniell’s Chronicle, i. 339
  Danish barrows, iii. 319
  Danish camp, iv. 77. Dissertation upon 78
  Danmonia, iv. 39
  Danmonii, i. 199
  Danvers, Sir John, iii. 316, 317.――Family, i. 121
  ―――― of Dantesy, Wilts, Sir John, iii. 317, 318
  Daphne odora, iv. 181
  Dapifer, Richard, iv. 107
  Darell, Thomas, and family, iii. 240
  Darley family, and Rev. Mr. ii. 226
  Darlington, Lord, proprietor of Camelford borough, sold it since
    Reform bill, ii. 405
  Dart of Dart Ralph, Devon, family, iii. 193
  ―――― river, iii. 103――iv. 158
  Dartmoor, i. 170, 188――ii. 213――iii. 45, 431. Forest 265――iv.
    6.――Hills, iii. 253. Chain of granite hills to Land’s End, from 120.
    Road across them 121
  Dartmouth, ii. 83――iii. 105.――Pirates conveyed to, iii. 41
  ―――― William Legge, first Earl of, iii. 206
  Darwin, Dr. lines by, i. 30
  Daubeney, Giles, Lord, i. 87
  ―――― Catherine and Ralph, ii. 251. Lord 189, 191. Sheriff of
    Cornwall 186
  Daungers of Carnclew, Isabel, iii. 303. James 303 _bis_. Margaret 303
  Davenport, Judge, iii. 144
  Davey of Creed, i. 144
  David, King of Israel, i. 305, 329
  ―――― St. iii. 434 _bis_.――Bishop of Menevia, i. 24, 304, 321, 382
    _ter._ His history by Hals, and by the Editor 305. Legend of 307
  Davidstowe barton, account of, i. 305――parish, i. 21, 197, 199,
    382――ii. 401――iii. 22, 180, 275――iv. 61 _bis_, 124, 125
  DAVIDSTOWE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of living,
    incumbent, land tax, i. 304. History of St. David, barton of
    Davidstowe 305. By Tonkin, St. David. By Editor, his history more
    at large 305. Impropriation of tithes, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 307
  Davie, John, iii. 387
  ―――― of Burnuhall, i. 147 _bis_, 148
  ―――― of Orleigh, Charles, i. 380. Account of his wife, ib.
  Davies, Henry, i. 282 _bis_.――Henry, iii. 6. Henry, great uncle to
    the Editor 307. Rev. George, Rector of Perran Uthno 307 _bis_.
    Rev. John, ditto 306, 307. Miss 429. Family 35, 47,
    216.――Catherine, the Editor’s aunt, iv. 165. William 55.――Family,
    ii. 170, 218, 304
  Davies of Bosence, i. 360. Catherine 360, 362. Elizabeth 362, 363.
    Henry 360 _bis_, 361, 365. John 360 _bis_, 362 _bis_. Mary, ib.
    Philippa, ib. William 361 _bis_. Arms 361. Crest 365. Monuments at
    St. Earth 361
  ―――― of Burnewall, in Buryan, Christopher bought Noye’s title to the
    Lanow estate, but constrained to compromise with the Earl of Bath,
    pleaded his own cause to the admiration of the court, ii. 334
  ―――― of Canonteign, Devon, Thomas, iii. 269
  ―――― of St. Earth, Catherine, i. 376.――William, ii. 34.――John and
    his daughter, iii. 159. William 145, 159
  ―――― of Gear, i. 364
  Davis, Christopher, i. 141, 144 _bis_. Henry 144. John 292. Arms
    144.――Mr. and Dr. late of Plymouth, ii. 111. John 352.――Rev. John,
    iii. 351
  Davis’s British Lexicon, i. 120
  Davy, Sir Humphrey, i. 385――ii. 218――iii. 48, 94. Anecdote of 94.
    His life by Dr. Paris 95.――His grandfather, an architect, ii. 32.
    Rev. C. W. 270.――Family, iii. 48, 94
  ―――― of St. Cuthbert, Mr. and Mrs. and family, iii. 317
  Dawnay of Cowick, Yorksh., Sir John, and arms, iii. 438
  Dawney of Sheviock, Emelyn, i. 63, 64 _bis_. Sir John 63.――Emelyn,
    iii. 436, 437, 438. Henry 438. John 437. Sir John 436. Nicholas 437,
    438 _ter._, 439. William 437. Mr. built the church, and Mrs. the
    barn 439. Family 436 _bis_, 439. Arms 437
  Dawson, the Right Hon. G. R. iv. 143. J. R. Dean of St. Patrick’s,
    furnished the Editor with information 141, 143. Captain 31
  Day of Judgment, Latin prize poem upon, ii. 154
  ―――― John and Peter, i. 216.――Dorothy, iii. 145, 159. John 159. Rev.
    John of Little Petherick 334. Peter 145
  ―――― of Tresuggan, i. 225
  Daye, i. 298
  Dayman, Rev. Charles, i. 343――ii. 233
  ―――― of Flexbury, Rev. Charles, iii. 351. John 353. Family 351
  Dead, custom of saluting, i. 183
  Deadman Point, ii. 106, 113, 115. Its Geology 115
  Dean, rural, oath of, ii. 307
  ―――― General, and his death, ii. 26
  Deane’s Essay on Dracontia, i. 141
  Decumani, i. 234
  Deer park, ii. 402
  Deerso river, its source, iv. 237
  Defoe’s Tour through Great Britain, ii. 346
  Degembris manor, iii. 269
  Degemue in Kerrier, iii. 422 _bis_
  Delabole quarry, i. 118. Slate 343
  Delahay, i. 262
  De la Mare, Peter, iv. 28
  Delcoath, i. 128, 165 _bis_.
  Delian, St. history of, i. 382
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 328
  Dell, Rev. Henry, of Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 403, 405. Rev. John ditto 403
  Delphic oracle, iii. 162
  Delves, Sir Bryant Broughton, iii. 9
  Delyan, St. Landaff cathedral dedicated to, ii. 65
  Democracy vindicated, ii. 77
  Denham, Judge, iii. 144. Miss 191. Heir of the family 140
  Denham’s town, iii. 361
  Denis, Great and Little, i. 39
  ―――― St. i. 386, 392
  ―――― St. abbey, near Paris, ii. 169
  ―――― St. church, iii. 198
  DENIS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, land tax, patron, incumbent, i. 308. Saint’s history, ib.
    Church 309. Robert Dunkin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 310
  Denmark, George Prince of, called George Drinkall, ii. 15
  Dennis family, ii. 313――iii. 23. Rev. Mr. 171
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 143. Edward 320. George, ib.
  ―――― of Orleigh, i. 171
  ―――― of Trembath, Alexander, his character, and Miss, iii. 33
  ―――― St. name explained, iv. 313
  ―――― chapel, iii. 453
  ―――― parish, i. 212, 227, 341――iii. 58, 180, 207, 391, 395, 402, 448
    _bis_, 450 _ter._, 453
  ―――― rectory, i. 72
  Dennis, St. vicarage, iii. 448, 451, 453
  ―――― in Branwell, iii. 202
  Dennithorne, Nicholas, ii. 402
  Densill, account of, iii. 147
  ―――― barrow, iii. 147
  ―――― Alice and John, iii. 133
  ―――― of Densill, Alice, and Anne, iii. 147. John 147 _bis_. Serjeant
    John ibid. Thomas, and family 147
  ―――― of Philley, Devon, Rich. iii. 148
  Derby, lofty tower at, iii. 363
  Despatch transport, lost returning from Spain, ii. 325
  Devereux, Robert, Earl of Essex, iv. 185
  Devil’s coyts, i. 220
  Devon county, i. 113, 168, 170, 327, 334, 342――ii. 19, 71 _bis_, 77,
    109, 110 _bis_, 115, 122, 137, 149, 177, 293, 340, 413, 415,
    417――iii. 56, 254 _bis_, 256, 279, 336――iv. 39 _bis_, 40 _bis_,
    125.――Part of, iii. 457.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――Romantic scenery
    of, and dunstone prevalent in, ii. 88. Perkin Warbeck marched into
    188. Cornish rebels enter 195. Made prisoners in 197. Blessing
    proclaimed in all its churches for the builders of Bideford bridge,
    to which most families of note contributed 341. Donne’s map of 221.
    Granite in, iii. 432. Divided from Cornwall 104. Lord Clinton
    removed to 230. Werrington parish in 460.――Many gentlemen’s sons of,
    educated at Wike St. Mary, iv. 134. Charles 1st marched through 185
  ―――― bishops of, iii. 415
  ―――― member of parliament for, Sir T. D. Ackland, iii. 271
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 43, 130 _bis_, 196, 341 _bis_.――Thomas
    Arundell, iii. 141. John Cheyney 116.――William, John, and John de
    Cheyney, iv. 43.――James Chudleigh, ii. 189.――Sir John Damerell,
    iii. 60. Stephen Durneford 101, 141. Sir Peers, Peter, and Sir
    Rich. Edgecumbe 103. Sir Richard Edgecumbe 101, 103. Richard Hals
    and William Wadham 116
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 350, 438 _bis_――A faggot belonging to, ii.
    410.――Ordgar, iii. 384, 460; and Elphrida his Countess, iv.
    6.――Ordulf, iii. 385. Courtenay, Edward Hugh 10th, i. 63.――Edward
    11th, and Edward 12th, iii. 436.――Edward 12th, or the blind, Edward
    13th.――Edward 16th, i. 64.――Edward 16th, ii. 189.――William 17th,
    Edward 18th.――Thomas, i. 64――iii. 350 _bis_
  Devonport, i. 266
  Devynock, i. 172
  Dewen of Marazion, Alice, iii. 54
  Dewer, Captain, ii. 219
  Deweston, ii. 430
  Dewin, Mr. ii. 83
  De Witt’s engagement with Blake, ii. 25
  Deza, Donna Giovanna, i. 311
  Diamond, history of the Pitt, i. 68. Weight, drawing of it, worn by
    the Kings of France in their hat, stolen at the Revolution, but
    recovered, placed by Napoleon between the teeth of a crocodile in
    the handle of his sword 69
  Diana, shrine makers of, ii. 53
  Dictionnaire Historique, i. 111
  Dictionary, first Latin and English, written by Sir Thomas Elliot,
    ii. 66
  ―――― Holwell’s Mythological, Etymological and Historical, iii. 171
  Digby, Col. iv. 186. Lord, combat of his troop with Straughans ibid.
  Dilic, St. i. 2
  Dillington, Dorothy, iii. 346
  Dillon, Rev. Robert, ii. 123
  Dinah’s cave, iii. 282
  Dinam, Geoffrey de, ii. 415 _bis_
  Dinant, Oliver de, i. 168 _bis_, 170
  Dinas, Little, promontory and fortification, its siege, i. 40
  Dingle, Miss, iii. 65
  Dinham bridge, i. 168
  ―――― family, i. 349. Charles 170. John _quin._ and Josce 168. Lady
    Elizabeth 170. Galfred de 168. Jane Lady Zouch, Joan Lady Arundell
    and Elizabeth Lady FitzWarren 170 _bis_. Margaret Lady Carew 170 and
    171. Arms 170.――Lanhearn descended lineally from, iii.
    150.――William, iv. 45. Family 62
  ――――’s land, iii. 41
  Dinnavall quarry, iv. 45
  Dinsull, ii. 172
  Dioclesian, Emperor, i. 52. His fortune told by a Druid 192.――St.
    Alban martyred under, ii. 64
  Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4, 20
  Dion, ii. 162
  Diosma ericoides, iv. 183
  Diploma of D. C. L. from Oxford University, iii. 50
  Dirford castle, iv. 228
  Disne, Le, river, ii. 64
  D’Israeli, ii. 78. His Commentaries, his Eliot, Hampden, and Pym 78
  Dissenters, their contest with the establishment for Proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Divine Legation, iii. 69
  Divinity, James’s introduction to, iii. 155
  Dix, Rev. E. of Truro, iv. 92
  Dobbins, Mr. iii. 162
  Doble, John, iii. 185
  Dock, iv. 33
  Doddridge’s History, iii. 28.――Of the Duchy of Cornwall, ii.
    404.――Of Wales and Cornwall, (Sir John,) iv. 8
  Dodman point, ii. 330
  Dodson, Robert, iii. 358.――Family, i. 221
  ―――― of Hay, i. 411. Arms 412
  ―――― of London, i. 412
  Dogherty family, ii. 362
  Doidge, Rev. Mr. of Tallant, iv. 23
  Dolben, Mr. iii. 17.――Mr. Justice, appointed to Cornwall, his
    administration of the law a happiness to the county, ii. 52.
    Petition to Charles II. against him 53. His name struck off the
    commission 54
  Dole abbey, in Franche Comté, iii. 281
  ―――― Sampson, Archbishop of, iii. 336
  Dolichos lignosus, iv. 181
  Domesday, ii. 379
  ―――― Book, ii. 51, 70, 169, 175, 259, 299, 315, 319, 384――iii. 22,
    27, 44, 46, 64, 74, 78, 101, 110, 111, 114, 117, 118, 124, 127, 139,
    143, 161, 163, 169, 175, 182, 190, 195, 196, 198, 237, 261, 276, 291
    _bis_, 345, 349, 352, 365, 391, 393, 400, 402, 421, 422, 441, 451,
    456, 461――iv. 1, 6, 12, 15, 19, 20, 39, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    67, 68, 70, 81, 93 _bis_, 94, 96, 99, 102, 110, 115, 117, 118 _bis_,
    124, 128, 137, 139, 153, 155, 160, 161
  Domesday Roll, ii. 48, 62, 86, 92, 94, 106, 151, 155, 226, 253,
    320――iv. 184
  ―――― Survey, iv. 62, 93
  ―――― Tax, ii. 36, 50, 59, 80, 129, 141, 145, 229, 232, 251, 257,
    273, 275, 291, 315, 332, 335, 340
  Dominica, St. i. 315
  Dominican abbey, Dublin, iv. 147
  ―――― chapel and friary at Truro, iv. 73
  ―――― friars, iv. 73. Walter de Exeter said to be one 111
  Dominicans, i. 176, 312. _See Friars_
  Dominick, St. i. 175 _bis_. De Gusman 310, 315. His history 311
  ―――― St. parish, i. 151, 153――ii. 309, 364, 375――iii. 161, 167, 345
  DOMINICK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint’s
    history, i. 311. Dominican friars 312. Halton ibid. By Tonkin,
    Crockaddon 313. Pentilly 314. Halton, the Saint, a Female 315. By
    the Editor, Francis Rous, Charles Fitz-Geoffrey, Sir James Tillie
    315. New mansion at Pentilly, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 316
  Domitian, i. 198――iv. 165, 167
  Doncaster, John, ii. 189
  Doniert, i. 178, 179 _bis_, 180 _ter._, 182 _bis_, 195 _ter._
  Donne, Benjamin, ii. 221
  ――――’s Map of Devonshire, ii. 221
  Donneny manor, iv. 127
  Donnithorne, i. 8
  Dorchester, St. Berimus, Bishop of, ii. 60
  ―――― Oxon, i. 407
  Dorset, i. 334
  ―――― county, H. Bankes, M.P. for, iii. 221
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Duke of, iii. 294
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Marquis of, iii. 350
  Dosmeny pool, i. 178, 189.――By Leland, iv. 285
  Dotson of Roskymer, Henry, iii. 324 _bis_, 325. John 325 _bis_
  Douay college, iii. 143 _bis_
  Dovenot, i. 168
  Dover castle, ii. 10
  ―――― town, ii. 10, 76――iii. 10.――A cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged and
    made a packet station 45.――Change of its name, iii. 29. High water
    at 98
  Dower park, account of, ii. 336
  Doweringe, Rev. Mr. ii. 291
  Down hills, ii. 121
  Downes, Rev. Mr. i. 129.――Mr. ii. 119, 120 _quat._
  Downevet borough, ii. 420
  Dozmere, account of, and stories relating to, iii. 265. Etymology 266
  Dracæna australis, iv. 181
  Dracontia, Essay on, i. 141
  Drake, Sir Francis, i. 315――ii. 21――iii. 460――iv. 86.――John, ii.
    195.――Z. H. iii. 256
  ――――’s island, iii. 108
  Dranna point, ii. 331
  Draper, i. 283
  Drayns, East, manor of, in St. Neot and St. Cleere, iii. 359
  Drayton’s Polyolbion, App. 8, iv. 293 to 308, and notes from 308 to 311
  Drew, Mr. iv. 34.――Miss, i. 39
  ――――’s Teignton, Devon, ii. 98
  Drift, account of, iii. 427
  Drillavale quarry, iv. 45
  Drineck, ii. 260
  Drinking at St. Colomb, i. 219
  Drinkwater, Rev. Mr. i. 398
  Drogo, iii. 33
  Druid, female, prophesies Dioclesian’s elevation to the throne, i. 192
  Druidical antiquities of the Scilly islands, iv. 175
  ―――― basons, i. 185, 186 _bis_, 187, 190. A very large one 191
  ―――― learning, iii. 52
  ―――― monument, i. 196
  ―――― residence, fine site for, i. 192
  Druids, i. 183――iii. 49, 290, 385.――Etymology and account of, i. 192
  Druis, Celtic, i. 192
  Drummond, Lady, i. 313.――Sir Adam and his daughter, iii. 201. Sir
    William 200.――Sir William and his two daughters, iv. 156
  Drus, British and Greek, i. 192
  Dry tree, iii. 127, 138
  Dublin, i. 295 _ter._――iv. 146
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 143 _bis_. Archbishops of 146. Michael de
    Tregury, Archbishop of 138. Taken prisoner at sea 146. Few records
    of the prelates and dignitaries 144
  ―――― city and diocese, iv. 146
  ―――― St. Patrick’s church at, iv. 138, 146
  Dubritius, St. Bishop of Landaff, i. 382
  Du Cange, ii. 369.――His Glossary, iii. 389
  Duchy Exchequer, iv. 99. Leonard Lovice, receiver general 41
  ―――― officers, negotiation of Helston with, ii. 164
  Duckenfield, Captain, monument to, ii. 325
  Duckworth, Admiral, iii. 440
  Duddowe, i. 243
  Dugdale, ii. 163, 344――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101.――His Baronage, ii.
    91――iii. 27.――His Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 217, 300――ii. 62, 96,
    208――iii. 78, 232, 332, 372, 446――iv. 6, 26, 100, 105.――His short
    view, &c. iii. 26. His Warwickshire 317
  Dukas’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Dulo parish, ii. 298, 391, 394.――Road to Hessenford from, iv. 30. Or
    Duloe, ii. 397――iii. 245, 253, 291, 302, 347
  DULO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 316. Patrons, incumbent, landtax, rector,
    story of a Rev. Mr. Forbes, new vicarage house 317. Death of Rev.
    Mr. Fincher, council against lay impropriation, Trewergy 318.
    Tremada, Westnorth 319. Trenant, Trewenn 320. By Tonkin, value of
    benefice, Trenant, ib. By Editor, etymology from Archbishop Usher,
    and Bond’s Sketches of East and West Looe, history of St.
    Theliaus, Treworgy, Trenant 321. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 322
  Dundagell castle, i. 328, 329, 330 _bis_, 332. Account of 323
  ―――― manor, i. 322――iv. 43
  ―――― parish, i. 372, 404――ii. 259――iii. 81――iv. 20, 42, 66, 94
  ―――― Robert de, i. 323
  DUNDAGELL or TINTAGELL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, manor, ancient name, i. 322. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, landtax, market, fair, Trebennen, borough arms, court
    leet, representatives, family of Dundagell, castle 323.
    Consecrated well and chapel, Pendew, Porth Horne, rock arch over
    the sea 324. Lines on the castle, and on King Arthur 325. Arthur’s
    history, King Uter’s surname and arms, his victories 326. Love for
    Igerne 327. Merlin procures him admittance to her 330. Marries
    her, his death 332. Merlin’s prophecy of Arthur 333. Arthur’s
    victories over the Saxons 334, and Romans 335. Round Table, his
    arms 336. Death, and discovery of his tomb 337. Edward Third’s
    Knights of the Round Table 339. By Editor, remarks on Arthur and
    the castle 340. Impropriation of benefice, two other chapels 341.
    Print of Arthur by Caxton, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase. Kneighton’s Kieve 343
  Dundee, ii. 66
  Dunecheine, name for Dundagell, i. 322, 324
  Dunechine, i. 342
  Dungarvon, fishing nets introduced from, ii. 264
  Dungeness, sea fight before, iii. 26
  Dungerth, i. 182 _ter._ His monument 179 _bis_, 184 _ter._, 195.
    Inscription of 180. Vault under it 181. Inscription 180, 182
  Dunheved church, iii. 458
  Dunhevet castle, ii. 417, 427
  ―――― town 417. Inhabitants drawn to Launceston 418
  Dunkin, Robert, i. 310――iii. 83
  Dunkirk, ii. 55――iv. 157
  Dunmeer, i. 368
  Dunscombe, Mr. iii. 125
  Dunstan, St. iii. 415.――Wished to make St. Udith Queen, iv. 94
  ―――― St. parish, London, iii. 251
  Dunstanvill, i. 36
  Dunstanville barons from Henry I. to Henry III. ii. 249. Barony
    conferred 249
  ―――― Reginald de, ii. 239.――Earl of Cornwall, iv. 169.――Family, ii. 239
  ―――― Lord de, i. 114, 137, 164.――ii. 23――iii. 239, 353, 386――iv.
    107, 136, 154.――Godrevy, his property, ii. 150. Memoir of 243.
    Joined Lord North’s party 245. Headed the Cornish miners in
    defence of Plymouth, and created a baronet 246. French revolution
    247. Created a peer, his connexion with the Plantagenets, and
    private character 249. Marriages and issue 250.――His marriage,
    iii. 230. His death, and public monument 389.――His edition of
    Carew, i. 241, 258, 341――ii. 45, 109, 120, 294, 394 _bis_, 398,
    409, 419――iii. 28, 39, 79, 81, 91, 102, 150, 171, 179, 279, 287,
    302, 388, 393――iv. 132
  Dunster, Reginald de Mohun, Lord of, iii. 293
  Dunstone prevalent in Cornwall and Devon, ii. 88
  ―――― rock, iii. 256.――Rocks, ii. 234
  Dunveth, i. 117
  Duporth, iv. 104
  Durant, family, iii. 270.――Family and heir, iv. 16
  Dureford, monastery at, iii. 206
  Durham county, i. 183, 289, 290
  ―――― bishops of, Ralph Flambard, and William Carilepho, i. 290
  ―――― bishopric, transferred from Lindisfarne, i. 290. Immunities
    curtailed and restored 291. Arms of 291
  Durneford family, iii. 107
  ―――― of Devon, Stephen and Miss, iii. 101, 102. Family 101
  ―――― of Stonehouse, i. 347
  Durnford, Stephen, iii. 374
  Dutch fleet, engagements of with English, ii. 25, 26, 28
  ―――― man of war, a fight with, ii. 41
  ―――― ships driven into Falmouth harbour, ii. 6
  ―――― squadron, iii. 287
  ―――― war, ii. 27, 28, 42, 94, 267.――Wars, iii. 186
  Duvaura dependens, iv. 181
  ―――― undulata, iv. 181
  Duverdier’s History of the Swiss Cantons, iii. 186
  Dye, St. history of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― chapel of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― town of, ii. 131
  Dynas castle, iv. 228
  Dynham family, i. 167, 168 _ter._ John 169 _bis_. Lord 170.――Galfrid
    de, iv. 156

  Eadbald, King of Kent, iii. 281
  Eadnothus, bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  ―――― brother of Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  ―――― Bishop of Devon, iii. 415, 416
  Eagle vicarage, ii. 363
  ―――― white, Cornish for, i. 120
  Earle, Mr. i. 296
  EARME, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, saint’s history, i.
    393. Tregaza, Godolphin blowing house 394. The cat eating the
    dolphin 395. Truthan, Treworgan, Treworgan Vean, Innis 396. Trehane
    397. By Tonkin, Cargaul, Jago family 397. Killigrew 398. Ennis,
    Polglace 399. Trevillon 400. By Editor, advowson, Mr. Wynne
    Pendarves 400. Polsew 402. Treworgan, Truthan, Killigrew, statistics
    403. Geology by Dr. Boase 404
  Earth, St. bridge, i. 360
  ―――― St. church, i. 345, 377
  ―――― parish, ii. 169――iii. 5, 46, 125
  EARTH, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land-tax,
    Trewinard, i. 344. Arrest of a member of parliament, murder by Mr.
    Trewinard 345. Fatal duel 346. Other murders by gentlemen,
    Trenhayle 347. Trelizike 348. Gurlyn 349. By Tonkin, name,
    Trewinard 349. Trelisick 350. By the Editor, name, church,
    monuments in it 351. Vicars 353. Curious story of Mr. Symonds 354.
    Glebe, vicarage house, churchyard, bridge widened by the Editor,
    adjoining parishes 355. Trewinnard 356. Improved by Mr. Hawkins,
    artificially supplied with a stream of water 358. Trelisick 359.
    Tredrea, Bosence, Roman intrenchments 360. Monuments of the Davies
    family 361. Perthcolumb Gear, Tregethes, copper mill at Trewinnard
    364. Genlyn, Treloweth, tin smelting house there, Lamb tin 365.
    Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, school 366
  East Angles, Sigebert King of, ii. 284
  East, hundred, i. 151, 153, 377――ii. 226, 229, 250, 361, 363, 364,
    377, 417――iii. 1, 37, 40, 41, 43, 101, 161, 167, 335, 345, 371, 374,
    436, 437 _bis_, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 50, 59 _bis_, 63 _bis_, 68,
    69, 376
  ―――― India Company, ii. 227
  ―――― Indies, ii. 100
  ―――― Saxons, Sebert King of, ii. 284
  ―――― St. pool, ii. 281
  Eastbourne, Sussex, iii. 33
  Eastcot village, iii. 255
  Eastwellshire hundred, i. 310, 409――ii. 59, 309.――Etymology, i. 32
  Eata, St. bishop of Lindisfarne or Hexham, history of his see, iv.
    42. His death 43
  Eath, St. parish, ii. 332
  Eaton, Rev. D. iii. 463, 464
  Ebbingford, Thomas de Waunford, Lord of, iv. 13
  ―――― or Efford manor, account of, iv. 16. By Leland 258
  Ebchester, i. 183
  Ebiorite heresy, iii. 59
  Ecclesiastical courts, iii. 155
  Ecclesis Gwenwan, i. 321
  Echard, ii. 78
  Echium grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― nervosum, iv. 182
  Eddystone lighthouse, its situation, iii. 375. History of the first
    376. Of the second, fire, accident from the burning lead 377.
    History and description of the present 378
  ―――― rocks, iii. 376
  Edeston island, iv. 238
  Edgar, King, iv. 93, 97
  Edgecombe of Cuttvyle, Sir Pierce, and Hon. Richard, iii. 374.
    Family 375
  Edgecumbe, Hon. Richard, i. 417. Sir Richard 153, 154, 417, 418.
    William 154.――Peter, ii. 189. Peter sheriff of Devon 235. Sir Peter
    187. Sir Richard 100, 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_, 187. Sir Henry
    Bodrigan’s defence against 115.――Hon. Richard, iii. 374. Sir Richard
    394. Roger 358. Miss 199. Mr. 107.――Hon. Richard, iv. 75.――Family,
    i. 154 _ter._, 157, 421――ii. 362, 393――iii. 190 _bis_, 203――iv. 71,
    136 _bis_, 143, 158. Arms 72
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Richard, ii. 114
  ―――― of Mount Edgecumbe, Sir Richard, ii. 114.――Sir Peers, iii. 102,
    103. Peter 101, 103 _bis_, 104. Sir Peter 104. Sir Piers Lord of
    Cotehele and of East Stonehouse 101. Richard, Richard, Richard,
    Richard 104. Sir Richard 102, 103, 104. Sir Richard favoured Henry
    the 7th’s pretensions 101. His narrow escape and subsequent reward
    102. Built a chapel and was sheriff 103. His struggle with Bodrigan
    for plunder 204. On the winning side at Bosworth 204. Family 101,
    194. History in Carew 104. Arms 103
  Edinburgh, iii. 94
  Editha, St. her early death, self denial, legend of, her mother
    Abbess of Wilton, iv. 96
  Editor, ii. 83, 99, 100. A descendant and heir at law of
    Attorney-general Noye 339. M.P. for Helston 160, 164. On poor law
    committee 159. Remembers an English fleet of 40 sail pursued up the
    Channel by an enemy of nearly double 247. Remembers a cloister at
    St. Bennet’s 387. Has seen an original receipt of a fine for
    non-attendance at the Coronation of James I. 269. Has heard
    traditionary accounts of the plague 271. Is indebted to the Rev. J.
    Smythe for admission to Pembroke College 287. Character he has heard
    of Mr. Knile 267. Mr. K.’s monument stands on his land 268. His
    remembrance of Mr. Pitt 154. His memoir of and friendship for Lord
    de Dunstanville 243, and feelings in writing of him 249. His
    inquiries on the subject of the vessel driven from Charlestown to
    St. Ives 268. His remarks on the superstition, monastic
    institutions, and devastations of the 16th century 425.――The
    heir of Humphrey Noye, iii. 151. His education 96. His age 273. His
    connexion with Sir Humphrey Davy 94. Introduced him to Dr. Beddoes
    251. Raised a subscription for replacing the rocks at Trereen Dinas,
    and Lanyon Cromlech 32. Has printed Keigwin’s translations 288.
    Remembers Sarah Coat, who lived to the age of a hundred and four
    460. Possesses the manor of Lamellin 20. An old receipt 6. A MS. of
    Noye’s 154, and his picture of which he has presented a copy to
    Exeter College 156. Has also the marriage contract of Humphrey Noye
    ibid. and a letter of Mr. J. Trevanion’s 204. Found the form of oath
    for rural deans 307. His visit to Mr. Walker 4. His remarks upon Dr.
    Borlase 49. Upon the Book of Job 69, and on Hugh Peters 71. His
    character of Penzance corporation 92. Remarks on the method of
    making signals 106. On Plymouth breakwater 108. On monasticism,
    popish mummeries 122, 262, 301, 332, 399, 401. On the succession of
    animal and vegetable life 174. On the motives of civil wars 203. On
    etymologies 206. On representation 272. On old age 273. On the
    Lionesse country 331. On Elizabeth’s laws against papists, and on
    the reigns of the Tudors 370. On the purchase of advowsons by a
    society 400. On Hals’s specimen of Homer 420. His character and
    biography of Mr. Whitaker 406.――Possesses a manor in Towednack
    parish, iv. 54. Purchased Trereen Dinas 166. His remarks on the
    alteration of ancient gothic churches, and its cause 103.――His
    mother and residence, i. 360.――His grandfather, ii. 34. And
    great-grandfather 146, 160
  Edles in Kenwen, iv. 73
  ―――― manor, ii. 315. Account of ibid.
  Edmonds, Everard, iv. 77
  Edmondsbury, St. i. 338
  Edmund Earl of Cornwall, iv. 4 _bis_
  ―――― Ironside, i. 211
  ―――― saint and king, i. 407 _bis_
  ――――’s, St. chapel, iii. 317, 318
  Edmunds, Henry, ii. 30
  Edulphus bishop of Exeter, ii. 7
  Edward the elder, king, i. 407――iii. 1, 416
  ―――― the martyr, king, his death, iv. 94
  ―――― the confessor, king, i. 25――ii. 38, 61, 73, 174, 177, 205
    _bis_, 208, 214――iii. 130, 365, 416. Saint 363――iv. 155.――Built St.
    Michael’s church, ii. 202. His charter to it 208. Translated 209.
    Placed a priory of benedictine monks there 208
  Edward 1st, king, ii. 38, 89, 155, 313, iii. 361 _bis_, 384, 394,
    409, 412, 414, _bis_, 15, 26, 44, 56 _bis_, 101, 111, 112, 116, 129,
    132, 165, 214, 230, 245, 254, 257, 261, 277, 284, 291 _bis_, 334,
    336, 339, 345, 347, 349, 352, 354, 372, 374 _bis_, 384, 389, 396,
    398, 403, 405 _bis_, 437, 438, 442, 449, 457――iv. 7, 15 _bis_, 23,
    24, 43 _bis_, 44, 62, 66, 67, 76, 83, 84, 95, 96 _bis_, 102, 112
    _bis_, 118, 119, 128, 129, 139, 140, 153 _bis_, 157 _bis_, 162
    _bis_.――Frequented Helston, ii. 156
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 6, 38, 363, 409, 410――iii. 26, 129, 165, 211, 316, 405
    _ter._――iv. 3, 96
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 4, 6, 38 _bis_, 45, 120, 146, 155, 176, 177, 209, 302,
    316, 336, 341, 409――iii. 15, 27, 56, 60, 65, 79, 115, 129, 130, 133
    _bis_, 140, 199, 200, 212, 270, 316, 323, 372, 381, 405――iv. 6
    _bis_, 8, 13, 21 _bis_, 43, 101, 103, 139, 156, 171
  ―――― 4th, ii. 108 _bis_, 182 _quin._, 183, 185, 186, 188, 191, 209,
    251, 254, 260, 341 _bis_――iii. 116, 141, 147, 168, 211, 247, 270,
    274――iv. 13, 22 _bis_, 43 _bis_, 161.――His commission to punish the
    Foy pirates, ii. 41
  ―――― 6th, ii. 72, 196, 197, 198, 326, 335, 386, 404, 414――iii. 170,
    208, 268――iv. 135
  ―――― the Black Prince, iii. 27――iv. 4, 8. The first duke of
    Cornwall, won his plume at Cressy 72
  Edwards, John, i. 364, 365.――John, iii. 342. Notice of 340. Joseph
    341. Mr. 196. Family, curious tenure of 178
  Edwardsia grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― microphylla, iv. 182
  Edwyn, King of Northumbria, iii. 284. His death ibid.
  Efford, iii. 270.――Near Stratton, ii. 184.――Sir J. Arundell removed
    from, iii. 274
  Egbert, King, iii. 322
  Egbright, the 13th King of England or the West Saxons, ii. 310.――His
    victory, iv. 6
  Egerton, Lord, ii. 9
  Egeus, Pro-consul of Rome in Achaia, commanded the crucifixion of
    St. Andrew, iv. 101
  Egid, St. ii. 430
  Eglesderry in Kerrier, iii. 442 _ter._
  Egleshale parish, ii. 340
  Egleshayle church, i. 75, 372. Tower 374
  ―――― of Egleshayle, Matthew, and arms, i. 374
  ―――― parish, i. 234, 351, 372――ii. 151, 332――iii. 64, 74, 237.
    Living of 301
  EGLESHAYLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, patron, incumbent, rector, value of benefice, land tax,
    founder, park, i. 367. Peverell’s crosses, Prior’s cross, Cornish
    proverb, Pencarrow 368. Camp in Pencarrow-park 369. Kestell 370.
    Rudavy Croan 371. Epitaph, Tregleah castle, Killy Biry, Ward bridge
    372. Piers laid on woolpacks 373. Church tower built 374. By Tonkin,
    Pencarrow ibid. Padstow harbour, Croan 376. By the Editor, Wade
    bridge, Pendavy 376. Crowan, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, vicar 377
  ―――― Thomas Longbound, vicar of, i. 373. Vicarage 130
  EGLESKERRY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 377.
    Impropriation, ancient state, manor of Penheale, mathematical school
    at Looe 378. Trelynike 379. By Tonkin, saint, small-pox ibid. By
    Editor, proprietors of Penheale 380. Statistics, vicar, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 381
  Egles Merthyr barton, iii. 180. Tenement 209
  Eglesros or Egles Ross parish, ii. 275――iii. 402
  Eglos Crock church, ii. 256
  Egloskerry parish, i. 197, 381――ii. 377, 399, 430――iii. 38, 457,
    461――iv. 50, 51, 59, 60 _quat._, 63 _bis_, 64, 68, 69
  Egypt, iii. 187.――The Saracens in possession of, ii. 37. Deserts of 279
  Eldon, Lord Chancellor, iii. 253, 290, 351
  Eleanor, Queen, i. 339
  Eledred, St. i. 200
  Elementa Logicæ, ii. 33
  Elerchy manor, ii. 50――iii. 404――iv. 116 _bis_. House 118, 121
  Elerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  Elercky parish, iv. 116, 118 _quater._ Etymology 118
  Elerky and Ruan Lanyhorne in Ruan and St. Veryan, ii. 359.――Manors,
    iii. 406
  ―――― mills, iv. 119
  Elford, Miss, iii. 66.――Family, i. 347, 387――ii. 293, 427
  ―――― of Roach and St. Dennis, iv. 161 _bis_
  Eliot, Mr. i. 321.――Edward Craggs, ii. 75. Rev. John 354. Sir John
    77 _quin._, 78 _quat._ Richard 75. Sir Richard 71. Sir Thomas 66,
    71. Walter 71. Lord 78, 86. Family 66, 252. Its origin 66.――John,
    and Sir John the celebrated patriot, iii. 39, 337. Rev. Robert,
    fifty years rector of Pillaton 346.――Family, iv. 12, 127
  ―――― of Berks, ii. 66
  ―――― of Cambridgeshire, ii. 66
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 66
  ―――― of Port Eliot, John, i. 379.――Daniel, ii. 71. Edward 70, 71,
    72, 77. John 71. Sir John 66, 70, 71 _bis_. Katharine and Nicholas
    71. Richard 70 _bis_, 71.――Lord Eliot, iii. 39. William his son 39, 337
  Elizabeth, popular abbreviation of, iv. 120
  ―――― daughter of King Edward 1st, i. 63
  ―――― Queen, i. 344――ii. 6, 7 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 56, 66, 68, 69 _bis_,
    213, 215, 227, 233, 293, 314, 341 _bis_, 342, 344, 414――iii. 8, 16,
    20, 67, 103 _bis_, 104, 105, 119, 134, 199 _bis_, 212, 234, 242,
    287, 293, 294, 311, 317 _bis_, 318, 325 _quater_, 357, 358 _bis_,
    360, 369, 370, 445, 463 _bis_――iv. 20, 41, 107, 172. Gave a charter
    to Truro 73
  ―――― Princess, iii. 27
  Ellery of St. Colomb Major, marshal of Lydford castle, iii. 184
  Ellett, i. 274. John 272
  Elliot, ii. 232
  Elliott, Mrs. sister of Ralph Allen, Esq. i. 58. Rev. St. John
    12.――Miss, ii. 33.――Miss, niece of Mr. Allen of Bath, iv. 89
  Ellis, George, i. 271, 275.――John, iii. 429. Pascoe 83. Arms 429,
    432. Family monuments 432
  ―――― of Bray, John, ii. 282
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  Elmsworthy, account of, ii. 347
  Elphrida, Countess of Devon, iv. 6
  Elvan courses, i. 159――iv. 5
  Ely, Francis Turner, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Emelianus, i. 197
  Emendationes in Suidam, ii. 265
  Enador parish, iii. 267
  Enchanted Lovers, a pastoral, iv. 97
  Endelient, i. 1
  Endellion or St. Endellyan parish, ii. 332, 340――iii. 179, 237,
    241――iv. 44, 47
  Eneas, i. 153
  ENEDELLYAN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity,
    stunt, his history, i. 382. Value of benefice, Roscurok, Trefreke,
    Tresongar, Pennant, Cheny 383. By Tonkin, Roscarrake, Trefreke 384.
    By Editor, Port Isaac, church, rectory, and prebends 384. Church,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 385
  Enedor, St. parish, i. 209, 212――ii. 353, 355, 356――iv. 20, 140
  Enedor-Bosithney borough, iii. 81
  England, ii. 373, 407――iii. 450――iv. 172.――Miserable state of, ii.
    375. French invasion of 40. Peace of France and Holland with 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. St. Mellitus preached in 288. Some
    Paleologi may still be living in 369. Theodore’s settlement in 370,
    372, 373. Duke of Bracciano came to 371. Greek language fashionable
    in 373.――its water communication interrupted by chalk hills, iii.
    10. First impropriation of benefices in 114. St. Sennan, the most
    westerly point in 431.――Copyholds in, iv. 54. Lands in, given to
    foreign monasteries 99. Wars between France and 144. St. Dunstan
    wished to make St. Udith queen of 94
  ―――― crown of, iv. 145
  ―――― King of, ii. 146――iv. 7
  ―――― kings of, ii. 259, 422――iii. 168, 442――iv. 6.――Their eldest son
    to be Duke of Cornwall for ever, ii. 422.――Arms, iv. 71
  ―――― and France, Perkin Warbeck proclaimed King of, ii. 188
  English channel, ii. 358, 398, 409
  ―――― crown, iii. 451, 452
  ―――― Etymological Dictionary, iii. 148
  ―――― fleet encounters the Dutch, ii. 25. Refuses quarter, and
    defeats the enemy 26. Forced into Falmouth harbour ibid. Dismissed
    without pay 29. Detained at home 246. Cruizing while combined fleets
    were in Falmouth sound 246
  English language, iv. 126. Life of Guy, Earl of Warwick, in old 113
  ―――― men, iv. 99. On one side of Tamar 40. Fought against the Turks,
    ii. 371
  ―――― romance, ii. 214
  ―――― squadron captured Cadiz, iii. 287
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Enmour, island of, iv. 171
  Ennis, account of, i. 399――ii. 218
  Enny, St. chapel, and probably well, iii. 426
  Ennys, Samuel, iii. 327
  Enodoc, St. iii. 240
  Enodor, St. iii. 268
  ―――― parish, i. 160――ii. 270
  ENODOR, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint, his advice to
    Augustus, Carvinike, i. 386. Pencoll, Gourounsan, Trewheler,
    flatness of the country, fall of the church tower, mines, two rivers
    387. By Tonkin, hundred, history of St. Athenodorus, Summercourt,
    Penhele, and Fraddon villages, fairs, Michel village 388. Members of
    parliament, borough system, Reform Bill 389. Illustrious
    representatives of Michell, right of voting 390. Reform election,
    Pencoose, Trewhele, Treweere 391. Gomronson, Boswallow, Michell
    manor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 392
  Ensham, abbot of, i. 233
  Ensleigh cottage, i. 26
  Entrenchment, Roman, at Bosence, i. 360
  Eny water, ii. 427 _bis_
  Enys, ii. 93
  ―――― John, ii. 97. Samuel 31, 97, 100, 317. Family and etymology of
    name, by Tonkin 97
  ―――― of Enys, John, ii. 93, 243. J. S. 57, 99, 243. Built a new
    house at Enys 100.――Mr. and his character, iii. 38. Family 332
  Ephesus, ii. 53
  Epigrams, Greek, anthology of, iv. 87
  Epimachus, St. ii. 81
  Epitaph of Richard Carew of Anthony, with observations upon it,
    Appendix XIV. iv. 378
  Ercedekne, Sir John l’, iii. 373
  Ercildowne, Thomas of, ii. 308
  Ergan, St. i. 351
  Erica ciliaris, iii. 230
  ―――― vagans, iii. 173, 260――iv. 180
  ―――― A multiflora, grows on all the uncultivated serpentine rock in
    Cornwall, ii. 331
  Ericornus fragrans, iv. 182
  ―――― punctata, iv. 181
  Eriobotrya japonica, iv. 182
  Eriocephalus africanus, iv. 182
  Erisey barton, iii. 416.――Account of, ii. 116
  ―――― Miss, i. 305.――Richard, ii. 6. Family 116, 117, 170, and arms
    116.――De, George, iii. 417. James 419. Richard 383. Richard, story
    of 417. Miss 135, 417. Mr. anecdote of 418. Family 258, 416, 419.
    Arms 419
  ―――― of Brickleigh, Devon, James, iii. 417
  ―――― of Trethewoll, James, i. 408
  Erisy, i. 125, 136 _bis_
  Erme, St. church, i. 402.――Monument to Dr. Cardew in, iv. 85
  ―――― St. parish, i. 207――ii. 2, 93, 146, 353, 355, 356――iii. 354
  ERNEY, ST. parish, part of Landrake, church still existing, Hals’s
    MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, Eagle
    vicarage, Lincolnshire, a daughter to Landrake. By Editor, Trelugan
    manor, Markwell, church entitled to service only once a month, ii.
    363. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Erroll, James Carr, Earl of, iii. 172
  Erth, St. parish, i. 261, 417――ii. 80, 99, 100, 225.――By Leland, iv.
    267――The vicar’s sister, iii. 310
  Ervan, St. church, i. 74
  ―――― St. parish, i. 409――ii. 256――iii. 334, 335
  ERVAN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, i. 404.
    Trenbleigh, discovery of a sepulchral urn there, Treranall 405. By
    Tonkin, Treravall, Trenowith 406. By Editor, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 406
  Ervyn, St. parish, i. 407――iii. 175, 179
  Escallonia rubra, iv. 182
  ―――― montividiensis, iv. 182
  Escott, Thomas, iv. 37
  Escudifer, a French family, i. 210
  Ess family, ii. 153
  Esse, Radolpho de, ii. 119
  Essex county, Henry Marney, sheriff of, iii. 65
  ―――― Earl of, i. 113 _ter._, 114.――The parliamentary general, ii.
    277――iii. 20, 42, 73, 184――iv. 75.――Lord, ii. 411. Marched to
    relieve Plymouth, then into Cornwall, iv. 185. Hemmed in by the
    king’s troops, and obliged to retire alone 187. Followed by his
    principal officers 188. His army 186
  Est Low, by Leland, iv. 279
  Establishment, church, its contest with dissenters for proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Estcot, Richard, ii. 423
  Estwaye, ii. 429
  Ethelbert, King of Kent, ii. 284――iii. 284 _bis_
  ―――― 2nd, King, i. 407
  Ethelburga, Queen of Northumbria, iii. 284 _bis_
  Ethelfleda, wife of Earl Alric, iii. 263
  Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, ii. 284
  Ethelgar, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Ethelnodus, Archbishop, iv. 96
  Ethelred, King, iii. 384――iv. 94
  ―――― 2nd, King, ii. 61
  ―――― King of the Mercians, history of, i. 200 _bis_
  ―――― King of the West Saxons, i. 240. Buried at Wimborne 200
  Ethelwin, St. Bishop of, i. 290
  Ethelwold, Bishop, reproved St. Udith, iv. 93
  Ethelwulf, i. 240
  Ethy, iv. 158
  Eton college, ii. 149. First provost of, iii. 255
  ―――― school, character of, ii. 243, 244
  Eubates, i. 192
  Eure river, Yorkshire, iv. 79
  Eurex in Normandy, iv. 116
  Europe, iii. 310. Tour of 87
  Eury, St. ii. 272
  Eusebius, his Chronicle, iv. 148
  Evall, St. parish, i. 143, 404――iii. 139, 161, 175, 335
  EVALL, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, saint, i.
    407. Trethewoll 408. By Editor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 409
  Evans of Landrini in Wales, iii. 187
  Eve, i. 409
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 309, 315――iii. 43, 195
  EVE, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, manor of
    Trebighe, knights hospitalers, i. 410. Trebigh 411. By Tonkin, Hay,
    name of parish, Trebigh, Bickton. By Editor, saint, church 412.
    Patron, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Eve’s enchantment, ii. 102
  Every, Rev. Nicholas of St. Veep, iv. 114. His death 115
  Evyland manor, ii. 197
  Ewald, St. son of Ethelbert the 2nd, his history, i. 407
  Ewan, St. parish, iii. 18
  Ewe, St. manor, i. 418
  ―――― parish, ii. 105, 115――iii. 198, 202, 207, 451――iv. 117
  EWE, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 413. Patron, incumbent, land tax, name, saint,
    murder of St. Hugh by the Jews, consequent persecution of that
    people 414. Lanhadarn 415. Tregonan, Halliggon, Trevithick 416.
    Treluick, by Tonkin, patron, Pelsew, Trelisick, Precays 417.
    Tregonan, Treworick, St. Ewe manor, Lanewa 418. Heligon, Coran,
    Lanhedrar, Lower Lanhedrar, Trelean, Rosecorla, Trelewick, Tregian,
    Pensiquillis, Lithony, Borew 420. Tregenno, Levalra, Penstruan,
    church 421. Monuments, gentry removed, Tremayne family 422.
    Statistics 423. Rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 424
  Ewny parish, ii. 258 _bis_, 284
  ―――― St. chapel, ii. 284
  Ewyn, i. 212
  Ex river, i. 342 _bis_
  Excavation at Pendeen, ii. 284
  Exceter Brygge, iv. 255
  Exchequer, iv. 20 _bis_
  ―――― court, pleas of the crown in, iii. 442
  ―――― records, iii. 139――iv. 138
  ―――― rolls, iii. 140
  Exeter assizes, ii. 293
  ―――― bishop of, i. 15, 116, 135, 209, 231, 243, 250, 367, 377, 386,
    387, 392, 396, 397, 407, 409――ii. 3, 6, 24, 50, 51 _quin._, 52, 54,
    57, 61, 62, 70 _bis_, 92, 104, 106, 115, 116, 130, 141, 144, 203,
    204, 258, 260, 265, 299, 302, 309, 315――iii. 1 _quat._, 5, 40, 60,
    110, 111, 141, 175, 177, 179 _bis_, 180, 181, 210, 224, 231, 254,
    257, 267, 268, 332, 354 _bis_, 370, 373 _bis_, 428, 441, 443――iv.
    44, 47, 53, 116 _bis_, 152, 164 _bis_, 185.――His royalties proved,
    iii. 2.――William Brewer, his history, i. 130. Peter Courtenay 373.
    Peter Quiril 300. Walter 251.――Bartholomew, ii. 415. Edulphus 7.
    Frederick 58. Leofric 69, 203, 211, 212, 215. Walter 69. Gervase
    Babington 7. William Brewer 95. Walter Brounscomb 96. John Grandison
    96, 341. Keppell 224. Peter Quiril 412. Dr. John Ross 224. Walter de
    Stapledon 143. John Voysey 195. Dr. Ward 4. William Warlewast
    87.――William Brewar, iii. 182. William Buller 301. William Carey 4,
    271. William Cotton 233. Peter Courtenay 181. Dr. Fox 141. John de
    Grandison 2. Hall 79. George Lavington 3. Dr. Redman 142. John Ross
    300. Edmund Stafford 446. Sir Jonathan Trelawnny 295, 296, 297
    _bis_. Robert Warlewast 456, 457. Stephen Weston 46. Thomas 2 _bis_.
    William, 2.――Carey, iv. 166. Walter Brounscomb 2
  ―――― bishops, consistory of, iii. 181
  ―――― bishopric of, ii. 95, 113
  ―――― canonry, iii. 460
  ―――― canons of, iv. 66 _bis_――Rev. J. Grant, iii. 40. Rev. John
    Rogers 54, 77, 445. Nicholas 60
  ―――― cathedral, i. 130――ii. 265, 341――iii. 182, 233, 258 _bis_, 309, 373
  ―――― chancellor of, iii. 269.――Rev. John Penneck, ii. 217
  ―――― church, i. 349――ii. 61――iii. 320, 363, 367 at, iii. 309
  Exeter city, i. 59 _bis_, 88 _bis_, 284, 342 _bis_――ii. 76, 189,
    190, 191, 224, 299――iii. 25, 96, 160, 364――iv. 184.――Insurrection
    in, i. 296.――Bishoprics of Cornwall and Kirton removed to, ii. 61,
    69. Defence of against Perkin Warbeck 189. Cornish rebels march to
    195. Siege of 196. Relieved 197. Rev. J. Smyth died at 286.――Reduced
    by Lord Berkeley, iv. 14. St. Boniface educated at 126. Isaac’s
    Memorials of 111.――Guildhall of, iii. 309. Members of parliament
    for, John Buller 249. Mr. Kekewitch 19. Charles Trevanion steward of 199
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 71, 111, 116, 130, 141, 143, 144, 221,
    224, 228, 233, 265, 281, 307, 355, 389――iii. 50, 51, 67, 84, 141,
    152, 155 _bis_, 156, 167, 171 _ter._, 408――iv. 144, 145
  ―――― dean of, Edward Trelawney, ii. 230 _bis_――John Arundell, iii. 141
  ―――― dean and chapter of, i. 129, 236, 242, 344, 366――ii. 253, 256,
    275――iii. 171, 177, 179, 257, 258, 313, 316, 332, 426 _bis_,
    427――iv. 66, 67, 118, 121, 157, 159
  ―――― deanery, i. 130
  ―――― diocese, iii. 307.――Its registry, ii. 348――iii. 257, 316, 332
  ―――― Domesday, iii. 353
  ―――― Joseph de, i. 325, 326, 342 _bis_.――Walter de, iv. 111
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― Marquis of, iv. 97.――Henry Courtenay, i. 64, 65――ii. 375
  ―――― name, iii. 458
  ―――― road from, i. 20
  ―――― see of, i. 130, 231, 403――ii. 70――iii. 271, 456. Transferred
    there 415
  Exmouth, i. 169
  “Extent of Cornish acres,” iv. 7, 15, 24, 41, 67, 96, 112, 153, 162
  ―――― of all the parishes in Cornwall from Mr. Hitchins’s
    measurement, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Eyans of Eyanston, i. 142
  Eynesbury, i. 99. Hunts, ii. 263

  Fairfax, i. 44.――Sir Thomas 143――iv. 74
  ―――― the parliamentary general, iii. 81. Hopton’s surrender to 189
  Fairs, custom of displaying a glove, iii. 309
  Fal, Fale, or Fall river, ii. 356――iii. 210, 361, 403, 404. Part of
    it stopped up 405――iv. 117
  Falemuth, by Leland, iv. 288
  Falgenne, ii. 1
  Fall, James, i. 268
  Falmouth borough, iii. 8. United with Penryn 99
  ―――― district, i. 346
  ―――― harbour, i. 26, 359――ii. 1, 24, 48, 275, 276 _bis_, 281 _bis_,
    357――iii. 180, 189, 190, 207, 224, 231, 395, 404――iv. 70, 72, 75,
    84.――Its breadth, extent, numerous arms and traffic, ii. 17.
    Description of 1. Pleasant country around and fine timber 2. Greeks
    fetched tin from 3, a hundred sail may lie at anchor in, without
    seeing each others maintops 3. Rhymes upon 3, 17. One of the best in
    the kingdom 16. Most advantageous station for packets, but inferior
    in accommodation for larger ships to Plymouth or Portsmouth 18.
    Extraordinary story of a boat driven from 320, 324.――Stone sent to
    London from, iii. 63
  ―――― Lord, i. 20, 310――ii. 117. Buys Trelisick 33.――Viscount, iii.
    215 _bis_, 217, 220.――Earl of, ii. 357――iii. 74, 189, 220, 221――iv.
    5.――For six days only, John Robarts, ii. 379.――Lady, iv. 167
  ―――― parish, i. 136――ii. 97. Rocks of St. Feock similar to those in 35
  FALMOUTH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 1.
    Dismembered from Budock 15th Charles Second, Sir Peter Killigrew
    having built a new church 3. Rectory, patron, first rector, church
    consecrated, incumbent, rector’s house and garden, pulpit cloth,
    manors and seats, Arwinike 4. Town 8. Pendennis castle 12. By Tonkin
    15. Arwinick 17. By Editor, harbour, Fox family 18. Irregular trade
    with Lisbon 19. Known to the ancients, various names ascribed,
    British name Smithike, story of Pennycumquick, church dedicated to
    King Charles 20. Town extended northward, new houses convenient,
    beautiful villas, sends in conjunction with Penryn two members to
    parliament, statistics, present rector 23. Geology by Dr. Boase 24
  Falmouth river, iii. 405
  ―――― town, ii. 17――iii. 16, 96, 121, 189, 228, 305――iv. 72,
    229.――Incorporated by Charles Second, contained only five houses
    within the memory of persons living, new name first recorded when it
    had increased to five or six hundred, opposition to John Killigrew
    building the town, ii. 8. Memorial to the king, referred to Sir
    Nicholas Hals, his answer and reasons 9. King approved the project,
    Mr. Killigrew continued his buildings, inhabitants enriched, market
    10. Chief inhabitants, custom house officers, gave the title of earl
    to Charles Lord Berkeley, of viscount to George Fitzroy, son of
    Charles the Second, and to Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan 11. Fortunes
    made by irregular commerce 19. Road to 104. From London 344. Road to
    Marazion from 215.――Passage to Truro from, iii. 226. Road from
    Helston to 63. From Truro 304.――Has the same mayor as Truro, iv. 77,
    84. Has more inhabitants than Truro 85
  Fanhope, Lord, iii. 27
  Fann, i. 172
  Fanshaw of Basill, Robert, i. 201
  FARABURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, ii. 48. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax 49. By
    Tonkin, patron and incumbent ibid. By Editor, smallest parish in
    Cornwall, consolidation of benefice, situation of church, name,
    statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 50
  Farnabie, Thomas, his origin, parentage and history, iv. 86. A
    royalist, monument to in Sevenoak’s church, his works, Boyle’s
    character of him, dedicated his Horace to Prince Henry, and
    favorably received by him 87. Thomas, of London, carpenter, his
    father, and the mayor of Truro his grandfather 86
  Farnham, Nicholas de, i. 290.――Mr. iii. 236
  Farrabury parish, iii. 232, 236
  Fast, ii. 82
  Fasti, iii. 297
  Fatal Curiosity, a tragedy, ii. 102
  Fatwork Mine, i. 227, 230
  Faustine, i. 206
  Fawey, by Leland, iv. 276
  Fayrer, Rev. Joseph, iv. 47
  Felicia, Wife of Guy, Earl of Warwick, iv. 114
  Felicitas, Sancta, iii. 339
  Fenterwarson, village, ii. 405
  Fenton, ii. 1
  ―――― Berran, iii. 322
  ―――― East and West, i. 199
  Fenton Gymps of Fenton Gymps, Joan, iii. 324 _bis_. John, John,
    John, John 323. John 324 _bis_. Ralph 323. Family 323
  ―――― Gymps manor, iii. 323, 324. Account of 322
  ―――― Gymps Veor, iii. 322, 324 _bis_
  ―――― Gymps Vyan, iii. 324 _ter._
  ―――― Vease, iii. 319
  Fentongellan, i. 116
  Fentongimps, i. 243
  Fentongollan family, iii. 208, 209
  ―――― manor, iii. 182, 189, 208, 212 _bis_, 215, 221, 464. Account of
    by Hals 209. By Tonkin 210. By Lysons 214. House 221. Gone 212.
    Hals’s description lengthy 213
  Fentonwoon, account of, ii. 405
  Fentrigan, or Ventrigan Manor, iv. 127
  ―――― downs, races at, iii. 35
  Feock parish, ii. 280, 298, 309――iii. 170, 306――iv. 90
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His wife and children 25
  FEOCK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patronage, incumbent, land-tax, the
    saint, his figure in the church window, ii. 24. Dwelling of Captain
    Penrose, his history 25. Tregew 30. Cornish tongue spoken there till
    1640, administration of the sacrament in Cornish 31. Lanyon’s
    alms-houses 32. By Tonkin ibid. By Editor, Trelisick ibid.
    Killiganoon 34. Feock Downs, Come to Good, statistics and Geology 35
  Feock’s, St. by Leland, iv. 272
  Ferabery, Feraberry or Ferabury, iv. 66, 68
  Ferint ab Erbyn, ii. 50
  Ferrar, i. 199
  Ferrers, William de, iii. 165. Mr. 134.――Family, i. 151――ii.
    313――iv. 47, 137. De 258. Arms 134
  ―――― of Newton Ferrers, Devon, arms, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, family and arms, iii. 134
  ―――― Earl, Henry and Wakelyn, ii. 89
  Festing, Rev. C. G. R. of Paul, iii. 290
  Feversham church, iii. 114
  Fielding, i. 57
  Figtree, in Gwithian churchyard, ii. 150
  Filley parish, ii. 281, 357――iii. 416
  Finch family, ii. 67.――Judge, iii. 144
  Fincher, Rev. Mr. of Dulo, i. 317 _bis_, 318 _bis_.――Rev. Mr. of
    Veryan, iv. 118
  Finisterre, Cape, iii. 218
  Firbisse, Dudley, iv. 146
  Fish, habits of, ii. 265
  Fishal bay, i. 236
  Fisheries, St. Ives famous for, iii. 261. Especially for pilchards, ib.
  Fitz, ii. 71
  ―――― of Fitzford, i. 347.――Near Tavistock, Sir John, iv. 41
  Fitz-Geoffrey, Charles, i. 315
  Fitzgerald, Lady Anne, and Charles Earl of Kildare, i. 297. Earls of
    Kildare 34
  Fitzhamon, Robert, Earl of Carbill in Normandy, ii. 344
  Fitz-Harry, Reginald, i. 203. Earl of Cornwall 296, 36――iii. 456, 463
  Fitz-John, Margaret and Richard, iii. 149
  Fitz-Roy, George, Viscount Falmouth, and Earl of Northumberland, and
    his arms, ii. 11.――Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, iv. 82 _ter._, 84
    _ter._ A charter from 83
  Fitz Walter, i. 170――ii. 292
  Fitz Warren family, ii. 415
  ―――― Warren, Foulk Bourchier, Lord, i. 170
  Fitz-William, Elizabeth, iii. 303. Sir John 302, 303.――Mabile, iv.
    26. Robert 103 _bis_. Roger 26
  ―――― of Hall, Elizabeth, ii. 409, 410. Gervase, Sir John, _bis_,
    Robert, William, _bis_, 409. Family 409. Arms 410
  Flambard, Ralph, Bishop of Durham, and Lord Treasurer, ii. 290
  Flamborough head, iii. 10
  Flammock, etymology of name, i. 85. Thomas 86 _bis_.――The rebel,
    iii. 388.――Hanged, i. 87. William and his arms 85
  Flammock of Bodmin, i. 387
  ―――― of Gomronson, i. 392. John 387
  ――――’s rebellion, history of, i. 61, 86, 369――ii. 188. His rebels 187
  Flanders, i. 195, 335――iii. 143――iv. 157
  ―――― war, iv. 116
  Flandrensis, Richard and Stephen, i. 104
  Flavell, Rev. T., of Mullion and Ruan Major, monument to, iii. 258
  Fleet prison, iii. 268
  Fleet street, London, iii. 251
  Flemanck, Mark le, i. 86
  Flemen family, iii. 78, 80, 90 _bis_, 94
  Flemming family, descent, i. 104.――Family, ii. 292
  Fleta, ii. 6
  Fletcher, Rev. J. R., of Quethiock, iii. 373
  Flete, Thomas, iii. 247
  Flintshire, ii. 65
  Flood, i. 260
  Flora, goddess, ii. 165
  Floyd, ii. 320――iii. 168, 394, 429 _bis_――iv. 13.――His dictionary,
    iii. 403
  Flushing, in Mylor parish, packet station removed from Falmouth to,
    ii. 11
  ―――― in Nankersy, iii. 227, 231. Description of, improved by Mr.
    Trefusis 227. Now going to decay 228
  Fonnereau, Thomas, his history, ii. 358.――An adventurer, iii. 423
  Fontevrault, in Anjou, i. 341
  Fooda village, ii. 405
  Foot of Treleyassick, Friend, John and Sarah, ii. 55
  Foote, Mr. i. 205.――John, of Truro, ii. 121.――Rev. T., vicar of
    Leskeard, iii. 21.――Samuel, ii. 90 _bis_. His first publication was
    a domestic tragedy 90
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207. John 204 _bis_. Henry 204 _bis_. Samuel 204
  ―――― of Tregony, i. 204
  Foow of Tiverton, i. 172
  Forbes, Rev. Mr. a miser, i. 317
  Forrabury rocks, ii. 274
  Forrester family, iii. 9
  Forschall, Rev. Josiah, iii. 408
  Forster, Rev. Benjamin, account of, and letters published by Mr.
    Nichols, i. 71
  Fortescue, Mr. i. 36, 283. Family 391.――The parliamentary colonel
    and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14. John 185 _bis_. Appointed
    sheriff of Cornwall, assaulted St. Michael’s Mount, but was repulsed
    184. Family 77. Rev. George, of St. Mellian 167.――Rev. George, of
    Pillaton, iii. 348. Hugh, ancestor of Earl Fortescue 216. Sir John,
    Lord Chancellor 191. Martin, acquired Buckland Filleigh by marriage
    148. Miss 163. Mr. 193.――Colonel, iv. 185
  ―――― of Devon, Mr. ii. 251
  ―――― of Fallowpit, Devon, Elizabeth, ii. 339
  ―――― of Filleigh, Hugh, i. 205. Family 387.――Hugh, ii. 68.――Arthur,
    iii. 191
  ―――― of Pencoll, Arthur, i. 387
  ―――― of Vallapit, ii. 190
  Forth, Earl of, iv. 186
  Foss, i. 10
  Fosses Moor, ii. 121
  Fossiliferous slate, i. 343
  Four Barrow Down, ii. 317
  Fowey borough, its franchise, ii. 412.――Represented several times by
    the Rashleighs, iv. 107. Jonathan Rashleigh, M.P. for 101, 107.
    Philip 108. William 109
  ―――― church, i. 52; or Foy, Mr. Treffrye contributed towards its
    erection, ii. 43
  ―――― harbour, ii. 36, 39, 409, 412――iv. 23; or Foye, ii. 88
  ―――― mines and Lanescot Consols, iv. 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 92, 413――iv. 110, 158
  FOWEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    impropriation, ancient chapel at, tutelary saint, her history by
    the Editor, ii. 36. Her body found 37. Church and tower, town,
    franchise, incorporation, form of writ, arms, markets and fairs,
    liberties of the Cinque Ports, had sixty tall line of battle ships
    temp. Edw. 3, 38. Assisted in the siege of Calais, grew rich by
    French prizes, afterwards turned pirates, town burnt and
    inhabitants massacred by the French 39. Again obtained letters 40,
    and relapsed into piracy, insulted King Edward’s messenger, and
    were punished, beauty and security of the harbour, blockhouses, an
    engagement between them and a Dutch frigate 41. Plase, Treffreye
    family, chief inhabitants of the town, hospital endowed by Mr.
    Rashleigh, the history of his fortune 44. By the Editor, remarks
    on the above, feudal supremacy of Tywardreth priory, right of
    voting 45. Manor, Rashleigh family, Mr. Austen’s works, Lysons’s
    account of the repulse of the French 46. Mr. Rashleigh’s
    collections and writings, letter of Thomas Cromwell, the brothers
    Lamb 47. Statistics and Geology 48
  Fowey river, i. 172 _bis_, 179 _bis_――ii. 91, 379 _bis_, 390,
    391――iii. 24 _bis_, 25 _bis_, 121, 262.――Or Foye, iv. 29, 30 _bis_,
    111, 155. Or haven 110.――Choked, iii. 25, 26.――Ford across, iv. 30.
    Source of 237
  ―――― road, iv. 32
  ―――― tower, iv. 229
  ―――― town, ii. 39, 41, 44, 45 _quat._, 48, 400, 411――iii. 20, 26,
    67, 71, 219――iv. 36, 38, 99, 107, 187, 188.――Collector of customs
    at, ii. 47. Once a mere village 412.――Road to, iii. 439.――By Leland,
    iv. 290.――Or Foye, ii. 88. Siege of 40
  ―――― Robert de Cardinam, Lord of, iii. 27
  Fowler, ii. 51
  Fox, the parliamentary captain and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14
  ―――― Messrs. their iron-works and character, iii. 305
  ―――― Miss, of Deal, iii. 159
  ―――― of Par, T. W. family, first settled there, removed to Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  ―――― Acts and Monuments, i. 233――ii. 195――iii. 210.――His
    Martyrology, ii. 193
  Foxworthy, Mr. iv. 74
  Foyefenton, i. 199
  Fraddon, i. 388
  Frampton, J. A. iii. 293
  ―――― castle, iv. 228
  France, i. 214――ii. 40, 59, 64, 86, 108 _bis_, 123, 244――iii. 121,
    133, 142, 150, 171, 187, 400, 401, 453, 464――iv. 169.――Court of, i.
    311. Kings of 335.――Peace between England, Holland, and, ii. 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. Protestants of, are Calvinists 74. St.
    German’s remains restored to 78. Pronunciation in 127. St. Dye a
    native of 133. War with 254.――Lord Hollis ambassador to, iii. 148.
    Fear of invasion from 97. Wars with 439.――Trade of Looe with, iv.
    36. Wars between us and 24, 144
  Francis, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82 _ter._, 175 _ter._, 176 _ter._――iii.
    19.――His history, i. 80. Written by St. Bonaventure 81
  Franciscans, i. 79, 176, 312.――iv. 73. Francis de Exeter said to be
    one 111. (_See Friars_)
  Franks, i. 411
  Freathy family, ii. 252
  Frederick, Emperor, i. 130
  Frederick 2nd King of Castille, i. 311
  French architecture, iv. 140
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― crew, surprise a Cornish party at a Christmas supper, and carry
    them into Brittany, iv. 24
  ―――― family, iii. 276
  ―――― fleet, ii. 245, 246. Seized the town of Marazion 171. Appeared
    in Plymouth sound 246
  ―――― invasion, ii. 40
  ―――― king, ii. 171――iii. 130
  ―――― language, iii. 20
  ―――― men, iv. 99, 157; and Spaniards, sea fight with 21
  ―――― people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― power in India, Pondicherry the chief seat of, iv. 11
  ―――― prizes, ii. 39 _ter._
  ―――― revolution, and Editor’s opinion upon, ii. 247
  ―――― wars, ii. 27, 94, 276――iii. 111, 183――iv. 101.――Edward 3rd’s
    ii. 39. Henry 5th’s 176
  Frendon, Gilbert de, iii. 354
  Friars, Augustine, or Black Friars mendicant, i. 83. Carmelite, or
    of the blessed Lady of Mount Carmel ibid.
  ―――― Cistercian or white, i. 83
  ―――― Dominican, i. 83
  ―――― Franciscan or Cordelier, i. 79, 80, 81, 82, 311 _bis_, or
    mendicant 82. History of their founder 80. Manner of living 82.
    When they came into England, their first convent here at
    Canterbury 83
  Friars of St. Francis of Paula, i. 83
  ―――― Mendicant, number in England, i. 83
  ―――― observants, i. 82
  Frignis, Gregory, mayor of Truro, iv. 77
  Friscobard, Amery of, i. 338
  Froissart, ii. 176
  Frost, William, mayor of Exeter, ii. 189
  Frowick, i. 53
  Froyns, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Frye, Rev. P., of St. Winnow, iv. 159
  Fueran, cell at, iii. 331
  Fulford, Sir Thomas, ii. 189
  ―――― Rev. John, of Probus, iii. 181
  Fuller, i. 108, 109
  ――――’s Gloucestershire, ii. 198
  ―――― Worthies, iii. 277
  Fullford, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Fulton river, or canal navigation, iv. 17
  Funeral monuments, cross-legged figures on, iii. 132
  Furley, Rev. Samuel, of Roach, iii. 396, 399. His character 399
  Furnace, reverberatory, introduced into Cornwall, i. 365
  Furneaux abbey, i. 320
  Furzdon of Devonshire, Mr. iii. 228
  Furze rock, iv. 29
  Fuschia adolphina, iv. 182
  ―――― apetela, iv. 182
  ―――― coccinea, iv. 182
  ―――― conica, iv. 182
  ―――― globosa, iv. 182
  ―――― gracilis, iv. 182
  ―――― maxima, iv. 182
  ―――― robertsia, iv. 182
  ―――― virgata, iv. 182
  Fust castle, iv. 228
  Fyning manor, iii. 206

  Gabriel, angel, i. 367
  Gaisford, Rev. Thomas, Dean of Christ Church, ii. 266
  Gaius, i. 335
  Galfridus Monmouthensis, i. 337, 397――iii. 79.――His Chronicle, ii. 50
  Galilee, iv. 100
  Gall, Henry, married Thomasine Bonaventure, his death, iv. 133
  Galleford or Camelford, ii. 402
  Gallia, i. 214――iv. 116
  ―――― Celtica, i. 107
  Galsworthy of Hartland, Mr. ii. 347
  Galton borough, ii. 162
  Games, John, iii. 83
  Gandi, Peter, iv. 28
  Gannell creek, i. 246. Account of 249
  Gardiner, Elizabeth, and Stephen Bishop of Winchester, ii. 194
  Garganus, mount, ii. 172
  Garlenick in Creed, iii. 454
  Garles, _see Grylls_
  Garnegan, i. 215
  Garrows, i. 415
  Garsike, by Leland, iv. 264
  Gascoign wine, iii. 182, 248
  Gascoigne, i. 338――iv. 145
  Gauerygan, account of, i. 224
  ―――― of Gauerygan, i. 224. Arms 225
  Gaul, i. 107 _bis_, 294――ii. 131
  Gaulis, Marianne, iii. 231
  Gaulish forests, i. 333, 336
  Gaunt, John of, iii. 65
  Gaurigan, ancestor of Charles Bodville, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Gaveston, Piers, i. 338
  Gayer of Araler-Grace, Samuel, i. 256
  Gazania rigens, iv. 182
  Geach, i. 10
  Geake, Mr. iii. 42
  Gear, account of, i. 364
  Gedy of Trebersey, Richard, iii. 337 _bis_. Family 337
  Gee, Rev. Walter, of Wick St. Mary, iv. 136
  Geenlow, i. 344
  Genefre, St. ii. 430
  Genesis, book of, iii. 69
  Genesius, St. ii. 86
  Geneva, iii. 188
  Genevour, wife of King Arthur, iii. 337
  Genis, John, ii. 423
  Genlyn, account of, i. 365
  Gennis, St. Manor, ii. 87
  Gennis, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 275, 352, 353.――or St. Gennys, ii.
    234, 273
  GENNYS ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, impropriator, ii. 86. By Editor, the
    Saint, Treveeg by Mr. Lysons ibid. Arms of the Yeo’s, manor of St.
    Gennis, Lord Rolle’s manor, Treworgy, Braddon family 87.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 88
  Genoese, Sir H. Killigrew, Ambassador to, ii. 372
  Gentleman’s Magazine, ii. 295――iv. 141. Communication to, respecting
    Tywardreth priory 104
  Geographers, ancient, vague and uncertain, ii. 19
  Geological society of Cornwall, ii. 100 _ter._――Instituted by Dr.
    Paris, Dr. Boase secretary to, iii. 95. Transactions of 11――iv. 166
  Geology, Dr. Boase on, iii. 95, 100.――Principles of, ii. 47――iii. 57
  George, William, iii. 387
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 75, 112, 304, 351, 431――iii. 62, 135, 201――iv.
    21, 157
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 303, 407――iii. 28, 62, 367――iv. 21, 107
  ―――― 3rd, i. 157――ii. 158――iii. 106, 219, 235, 249.――His accession,
    i. 321.――Bells rung by the same men at his coronation and jubilee,
    iv. 18
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. island, iv. 26
  George’s, St. channel, i. 234, 289, 407――ii. 48, 145, 182, 237, 273,
    282, 283, 340――iii. 253, 280, 430
  Geran, i. 413
  Gerance, parish, ii. 5, 275
  Gerandus, St. ii. 51
  Geranium, iv. 182
  Gerans, parish, ii. 275
  GERANS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ii. 50. Value
    of benefice, endowment, saint, patron, incumbent, land tax, seats,
    Tregeare 51. Dispute for its possession 52. Judge Dolben 53.
    Treligan, Rosteage, Trewince 54. By Tonkin, tenure, Nosworthy
    family, Trewithian, Trelegar 55. The Beacon, Tregaliavean, Rosteage
    56. By Editor, Rosteague ibid. Trewince, prospect from church,
    Bowling Green, endowment of church, Polskatho, Pettigrew, Nanquitty,
    Tregeare 57. Trewithian, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 58
  Gerard, Fitton, Earl of Macclesfield, i. 67
  Gereon, St. ii. 51
  Gerint ab Erbyn, i. 338. Elegy upon, ib. King Arthur’s admiral 404
  German accession, iii. 216
  ―――― court, ii. 407
  ―――― custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  ―――― line of English Princes, ii. 244
  ―――― ocean, iii. 11
  ―――― Protestants are Lutherans, ii. 74
  ―――― sea, ii. 27
  ―――― soldiers driven from Charlestown to St. Ives by the wind, ii. 268
  ―――― St. ii. 59, 60. His history, bishop of Auxerre, heresies of the
    Arians and Pelagians 63. He came over to refute the Pelagians,
    succeeded, preached at St. Alban’s 64. Victory obtained by his
    prayers 65
  German’s, St. abbey, ii. 60; or monastery 61, 62. Abbot of 62
  ―――― bishoprick, ii. 60
  ―――― chapel at St. Alban’s, ii. 65, 75
  ―――― creek, i. 32――ii. 363――iii. 436
  ―――― Lord, iii. 39.――Earl of, ii. 234
  ―――― manor, iii. 2
  ―――― parish, i. 343――ii. 87, 118, 361, 362, 363, 364 _bis_――iii.
    118, 119, 124, 167, 245, 275, 371, 436 _bis_, 440
  GERMANS, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rectory, chancel, ii.
    59. Abbey, once the cathedral see 60; afterwards collegiate
    church, derivation of the word abbat 61. Hircanus the Levite,
    value of the priory, borough 62. Election of members, writ, arms
    of the priory, market and fair, history of saint 63. Priory-house
    65. Eliots 66. Seats, Bake, Coltdrynike, Millinike 67. Hendre,
    Catchfrench 68. By Tonkin, town, first return to parliament 68.
    Elective franchise, sometimes called Cuddenbeck; the priory by
    Browne Willis 69. Eliot family 70. Priory-house 71. Seat of a
    suffragan bishop to Exeter, advowsons and impropriation 72. By
    Editor, saint’s celebrity, doctrines of Pelagius 72. Saint’s
    history 73. Various places in Britain dedicated to him,
    improvements at the priory 74. Statute for suffragan bishopricks,
    Bake, Mr. Moyle and his works 76. Aldwinick, Catchfrench, Sir John
    Eliot’s quarrel with Mr. Moyle 77. Statistics 78. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Clicker Tor, and Trerule foot 79
  German’s, St. priory, ii. 70, 75, 123, 361, 362――iii. 245, 253,
    336――iv. 69 _bis_.――Prior of, ii. 59, 118, 119 _bis_, 365――iii. 336
  ―――― town, iii. 268. The Cornish see removed to 415
  Germanes, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  Germanus, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 72. His victory
    explained, came a second time to Britain 74. Converted a pagan army,
    his death and burial, and places dedicated to him 75
  Germany, ii. 407 _bis_――iii. 285. Persecution of the Protestants in
    67.――St. Boniface undertook to convert, iv. 126 _bis_
  ―――― the apostle of, iv. 126
  Germayn’s, St. by Leland, iv. 291
  Germo, ii. 126
  Germocus, St. by Leland, iv. 264
  Germoe, King, his throne, i. 125
  ―――― parish, iv. 89
  ―――― people of, ii. 82
  Germow parish, i. 118 _bis_――ii. 169
  ―――― St. said to be an Irish king, his tomb and chair, ii. 81
  GERMOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, Godolphin Ball,
    ii. 80. By Tonkin, Godolphin Ball ibid. Name of parish, saint 81. By
    Editor, Hals’s history of St. Gordian, tradition of St. Germoe,
    village of Bojil, William Lemon 81. Process of mining 82. Mr.
    Lemon’s mine at Trowell 83. Gwennap mines, Cavnon adit, a present
    from Frederick Prince of Wales to Mr. Lemon 84. Lemon family 85.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 85
  Gernigan, Anne and Sir Henry, iii. 140
  Gernon, Geoffrey de, ii. 209
  Gernow, i. 300
  Geron’s, St. iv. 274. By Leland ibid.
  Gerrance, i. 26
  Gerrans parish, iv. 117 _ter._, 124
  Gerrard, Sir William, ii. 235
  Gerras mines, i. 20
  Gerry, Rev. Mr. ii. 319
  Gerson’s parish, ii. 281
  Geruncius, King of the Britons, ii. 50
  Gervasius, St. i. 99
  Gerveys, Elizabeth and John, ii. 396
  Getulius, a Roman citizen and martyr, iv. 117
  Ghent, ii. 127, 345
  Giant, story of a, ii. 113
  Giant’s hedge, description of, iv. 29
  Gibbon’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Gibbs, Dr. James, his Life, ii. 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 396
  Gibson, Captain Charles, R. N. ii. 375 _bis_
  Giddy, Rev. Edward, i. 362. Catherine ibid. Davies 363.――Edward,
    iii. 97. His character 93. Arranged the cabinet of the Cornish
    Geological Society 100. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s father 159, 337.
    John, memoir of 273. Thomas, his character 96. Family 94
  ―――― of Trebersey family, iii. 39
  Gifford family, ii. 153 _bis_.――Mr. Bishop’s assumed name, iii. 143
  ―――― of Fewborough family, iii. 222
  Giggy, St. ii. 254. His well ibid.
  Gilbart, John, iv. 55
  Gilbert, Davies (the Editor), i. 363――iv. 148.――Catherine, his
    daughter, ii. 100. Wife of Grenville 341. Family 189.――C. S. iii.
    151.――His History of Cornwall, i. 234――iii. 151.――Rev. R. P. of St.
    Wenn, iv. 151. W. R. 97
  ―――― of Crompton castle, i. 134
  ―――― of Tacabre, i. 134. Samuel 133, 134.――Of Tachbear, in
    Bridgerule, Samuel, iii. 235. Family 23――iv. 45, 62
  Gilpin, Mr. iii. 166
  Giraldus Cambrensis, i. 305, 337
  Githa, i. 168.――Wife of Earl Godwin, ii. 415.――Of Godwin, Earl of
    Kent, iv. 155
  Glamorganshire, ii. 216――iii. 281.――Mr. Daniel’s smelting-house in,
    ii. 33.――Supplied Cornwall with steam-engines, iii. 305
  Glant parish, ii. 36――iii. 425――iv. 99
  GLANT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ii. 88. Ancient name,
    value of benefice, endowment, patron, vicar, impropriation,
    land-tax, Penevit 89. By Tonkin, name, etymology 90. By Editor,
    Hals’s History of St. Sampson, ib. Penquite, Lentyon, a castle,
    name, first boarding-school for young ladies, peculiarities of the
    church, statistics 91. Incumbent, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 92
  Glanvill, Judge, i. 206. Miss 43, 245.――Mr. ii. 59
  ―――― of Catchfrench, Francis, i. 244
  ―――― of Killyvor, John and Mary, i. 221.――Family, iv. 160
  Glanville, Francis, ii. 77 _bis_. Rev. John 234. Family vault in
    Kilkhampton church 352. Family 231, 339.――Frances and William E.
    iii. 219
  Glaseney college, iii. 224. At Penryn 194.――Glasney, ii. 341, 96
    _bis_. Of canons regular 136. Provost of 113――iv. 1, 2. Its founder
    2.――Glassney, Robert Lyddra, provost of, iii. 257
  ―――― monastery near Penryn, iii. 446.――Glasseney, ii. 286
  Glasgow, i. 247
  Glasney, John de, i. 246
  Glasnith i. 209
  Glastonbury, i. 306, 337 _bis_――ii. 305――iv. 36
  ―――― abbey, iii. 262――iv. 25. Its dissolution 37. Michael, abbat of 26
  ―――― church of, iv. 26
  ―――― monks of, iv. 26, 27
  ―――― John of, i. 307
  Glebridge manor, account of, ii. 375
  Glenning, Nicholas, i. 113
  Glesnith, by Leland, iv. 271
  Glin, i. 168 _bis_. Account of 171 _bis_
  Globularia longifolia, iv. 182
  Gloucester, i. 113――ii. 76 _bis_
  ―――― Bishop of, William Warburton, ii. 265
  ―――― cathedral, cenotaph to the Rev. J. Smyth in, ii. 278
  ―――― Duke of, Richard, afterwards King, made sheriff of Cornwall,
    ii. 185
  ―――― earls of, ii. 148.――William, i. 266, 288.――William,
    illegitimate son of King Henry 1st, and Robert, his son, ii. 148
  ―――― hall, Oxford, now Worcester college, ii. 233. Its Fasti ibid.
  ―――― honour of, ii. 147, 341
  Glover, Rev. William, ii. 147 _bis_――Rev. William of Phillack, iii.
    344 _bis_
  Glover’s Somersetshire, iii. 186
  Gluvias parish, i. 135 _bis_――ii. 2, 129, 337――iii. 59, 224,
    231――iv. 1. Rev. G. Allanson, vicar of 95
  GLUVIAS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church before the
    Conquest, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, ii.
    92. Land-tax, seats, Roscrow, Innis, Gosose river and house, Penryn
    borough, the Ocrinum of Ptolemy, antiquity of manor 94. Charters,
    elective franchise, markets, fairs, arms, form of writ,
    insignificance in Carew’s time, subsequent improvement 95. College
    of Black Canons at Glasnewith 96. Inhabitants of Penryn, Lady
    Killigrew’s cup 97. By Tonkin, Enis, ib. Roscrow 98. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Gluvias, borough of Penryn, Enis, Cosawis, Bohelland
    farm, story of “Fatal Curiosity”, 100. Parish fortunate in clergy,
    beauty of situation, dangerous road remedied 104. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 105
  Gluvias, St. ii. 99
  Glyn, John, i. 215. Family 261
  Glynford, i. 172
  Glynn barton, i. 172, 173, 298
  ―――― Dr. Robert, his learning, ii. 153. Held in high respect at
    college, entertained Mr. Pitt 154. Thomas 142. Family 153. Arms
    142.――Jane, iii. 247 _bis_. John murdered 246. John 247, 248 _bis_.
    Thomasine 248. Miss 279. Family 23, 246. Arms 249
  ―――― of Glynn, Denny, i. 172. Edmund and John 173. Nicholas 171.
    Serjeant 173 _bis_. William 172. Family 173, 305. Arms 172.――Thomas,
    ii. 397 _bis_. Family 142, 339, 383, 397 _bis_. Property 397
  ―――― of Glynford, Nicholas, i. 172
  ―――― of Heliton, i. 173
  ―――― of Helston, ii. 339
  Glynne of Polkinhorne, Thomas and William, ii. 137
  Gnaphalium ericoides, iv. 182
  ―――― fetidum, iv. 182
  ―――― stœchas, iv. 182
  Godalgar, etymology, i. 119
  Godfrey, Charles and Charlotte, iii. 217
  Godollon castle, iv. 228
  Godolphin administration, ii. 217
  ―――― Ball, account of by Hals and Tonkin, ii. 80
  ―――― barony, i. 127
  ―――― blowing-house, i. 394
  ―――― earldom, i. 127
  ―――― Sir Francis, i. 123 _ter._, 232, 394 _bis_, 395 _ter._ Francis,
    Earl of 126, 127. Francis, Lord, and Henry 127. John 122 _bis_. Mary
    127. Sidney 59. Sidney, Earl of 123 _bis_, 126 _quat._, 232, 234.
    William 123 _quat._ Sir William 123, 232. Pedigree to the Earl 123.
    From the Earl 126. Family 74, 125, 160, 224, 225, 262 _bis_. Arms
    124. Property 127.――Catherine, ii. 217. Francis 217, 269. Sir
    Francis 9. Sir William 170. Miss 236. Duke of Leeds, heir of 218.
    Family 80 _bis_, 160, 170, 217 _bis_. Patrons of Helston 160. Arms
    335. Monuments and curious inscription on one 219.――Family, iii. 8,
    47 _bis_, 286――iv. 54, 173.――Saying of, iii. 295. A branch of
    57.――Lord, ii. 83, 139, 162, 219
  ―――― of Godolphin, Thomas, recorder of Helston, ii. 160.――John, iii. 211
  ―――― of Treveneage, iii. 81
  ―――― of Treworveneth, family extinct, Colonel William, iii. 288
  ―――― hill, i. 128 _bis_.――Hills, ii. 85
  ―――― house, i. 395
  ―――― lands, i. 119, 121. Etymology 119, 120
  Godrevy, account of, ii. 150
  ―――― point, i. 166――ii. 151
  Godwin, Bishop, i. 130. His catalogue of English Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― Earl, i. 168――ii. 415.――Of Kent, iv. 155 _bis_, 156
  Godwyn sands, iii. 310
  Golant parish, ii. 390
  Gold, the largest pieces in Cornwall found in Ladock parish, ii. 355
  Golden, Goulden, Gowlden, or Gulden manor, iii. 355, 356, 360, 361,
    365, 464
  ―――― parish, iii. 383
  Goldingham, i. 247 _bis_
  Goldney family, ii. 341
  Goldsithney village, iii. 308. Tale of a fair removed to 309
  Goldsmith, Lieut. R.N. removed the rock at Castle Treryn, iii. 31
  Goldsmith’s rents, London, iv. 86
  Goliah’s sword, i. 334
  Gomronson, account of, i. 392
  Gonnet’s, St. park, iii. 397
  Gonrounson, i. 387
  Gonwallo parish, iii. 127, 128; or Gonwallow, ii. 80, 237
  Gooch of Orford, Suffolk, G. W. iv. 130
  Good Hope, Cape of, iii. 187
  Goodall, Mr. ii. 43
  ―――― of Fowey, John, ii. 98.――Family, iii. 162
  Goodere, Captain, Dineley, Sir Edward, Sir John, i. 204.――Sir J. D.
    Captain Samuel, whose history is tragical, and was published by
    Foote, his nephew, and Miss, iv. 90
  Goodwood, i. 372
  Goodyere, Anne, iii. 159
  Goonhilly downs, i. 304――ii. 331 _bis_――iii. 127, 128, 138
  Goonwyn, ii. 254
  Gooseham village, iii. 255
  Goran manor, iii. 90
  ―――― or Gorran parish, ii. 330――iii. 195, 198, 202, 207
  GORAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, land-tax, church, prior
    to the Conquest, remarkable places, Goranhoane, Bodrigham, ii.
    106. Family of that name 107. Escape from Bosworth, Bodrigan’s
    leap 108. Discord with the Haleps of Lammoran, Tregarden,
    Tregarthyn family 109. Arms, Trewoolla 110. Family 111. Dr. James
    Gibbs 111. Anthony Wills 112. By Tonkin, etymology, saint 112.
    Trevennen, Trevasens, Polgorror, Treveor, Pennore, Thicavosa,
    story of a giant 113. Situation and description of church, Lady
    Brannell’s tomb, Richard Edgecombe’s monument 114. By Editor,
    Trevascus, Treveor, Bodrigan ibid. Statistics, vicar, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Deadman point 115
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 414
  Goran-carhayes, i. 413
  Goranhoane, account of, ii. 106
  Gordian, St. account of, ii. 81
  Gordon, Lady Catharine, ii. 186, 191. Perkin Warbeck’s wife,
    pensioned by Henry 7th 191.――Sir A. C. iii. 9
  ―――― St. church, ii. 80
  Gorges, Sir William, i. 348 _bis_
  Gorian, St. a persecutor converted, ii. 112
  Gorien, or Coren, St. a missionary from Ireland, ii. 113
  Goring, general, i. 113. Lord, the royalist general, iii. 81――iv.
    115, 187
  Gorseddan, i. 192
  Gosmoor, i. 220 _bis_
  Gosose, account of, ii. 94, 100
  ―――― creek, ii. 94
  ―――― river, ii. 94
  Gospels, ancient copy of, iii. 408
  Gotherington manor, i. 64――iii. 436
  Gothian, St. ii. 147
  Gothic architecture of Henry 7th’s reign, iv. 81
  Gothland, i. 336
  Gothlois, Earl of Cornwall, etymology of name, iv. 94
  Gothlouis, Duke of Cornwall, i. 324, 327 _quat._, 328 _quat._, 329
    _bis_, 331 _quint._, 332 _bis_, 342. His death 331, and funeral 332
  Gould, John, iii. 42
  ―――― of Downs, William, iii. 249
  Gove of Devon, Elizabeth, iii. 176 _bis_
  Goverigon, ii. 217
  Govill, iii. 402――iv. 117
  Gower, Rev. G. L. of St. Maben, iii. 74. Of St. Michael Penkivell 221
  Goynlase in St. Agnes, iii. 319
  Graas, ii. 292
  Grace, St. iii. 364. Her skeleton ibid.
  Grade parish, ii. 358 _bis_――iii. 128, 257, 421, 423
  GRADE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 116. By Tonkin, etymology
    and value of benefice ibid. By Editor, etymology, Erisey ibid.
    Advowson of living, feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Cadgwith, quarry at Cogar, Kennick cove 117
  ―――― St. ii. 116 _bis_
  Graffo hundred, Leicestershire, ii. 363
  Graham, Thomas, and Mr. ii. 47.――Rev. H. E. of Ludgian, iii. 54
  Grammar, Farnaby’s system of, iv. 87
  Grampont, iv. 30
  Grampound borough, account of, i. 253, 256, 258, 259――iii.
    395.――Arms, i. 254.――Philip Hawkins, M.P. for, iii. 356, 367. Thomas
    Hawkins 362
  Grampound, town, iii. 360, 371
  Grand Junction canal, iii. 10 _bis_
  ―――― jury, charge to, ii. 76
  Grandison, John de, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 1, 372 _bis_,
    373.――Demanded legacies for endowing churches, ii. 96. Used his
    influence in aid of Bideford bridge 341.――His register, iii. 1
  ―――― John Villiers, Earl of, i. 69
  ―――― Viscount, father of the Duchess of Cleveland, ii. 11
  Granite sent from Penryn to London, i. 242
  Grant, Rev. John of Lezant, iii. 40. Mr. Canon, rector of Ruan
    Lanyhorne 405. Mr. 404
  Grantham, ii. 76.――St. Symphorian and St. Wolfran buried at, iv. 117
  Granville, Sir Bevill, i. 113.――Colonel, ii. 93.――Sir Bevill, iii.
    40. His great victory 351. His death 40. Grace, and John Earl of
    Bath 255. Family 353. Saying of 295
  ―――― of Penheale, Degory, i. 419
  ―――― of Stow, Margaret and Roger _bis_, i. 419
  ―――― Grace, Countess of, and Robert Carteret Earl of, ii. 346
  Graunpond, by Leland, iv. 272
  Graves, Thomas, i. 37.――J. iv. 38
  ―――― Lord, i. 37――ii. 252
  Gray, the poet, i. 71. Mr. 384
  Gray’s Inn, ii. 267
  Great Mystery of Godliness, iii. 79
  ―――― Work mine, ii. 83, 304 _bis_
  Grebble, Mr. iv. 74
  Greece, iii. 187.――Emperor of, ii. 365 _bis_――Artists of, iv. 169
  Greef islands, iv. 237
  Greek church, ii. 370, 371
  ―――― college, ii. 371
  ―――― empire, ii. 373
  ―――― language fashionable in England, ii. 373.――Tables of, iv. 87
  Greeks, i. 341――iii. 395.――Acquainted with Falmouth harbour, ii. 19.
    And fetched tin from it 3
  Green bank, Falmouth, i. 137
  Greenough, Mr. iv. 124
  Greenwich, ii. 223, 359, 399――iii. 281, 375, 376
  ―――― East, ii. 56
  Greenwich observatory, the first meridian, ii. 222
  Grees, Germaine, iv. 77
  Grefe by Leland, iv. 289. Islet by Leland and trajectus 274
  Grege, William, iii. 16
  Gregor, Francis, ii. 393.――Rev. William, iii. 113. Mrs.
    406.――Francis, iv. 77, 89, 121, 129. William 123. His analysis of
    Veryan limestone 123, 124. Family 74, 89, 128, 130
  ―――― of Cornelly, i. 204
  ―――― of Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  ―――― of Tredinike, Francis, i. 243, 244 _sex._ John 243, 244. Miss
    244 _bis_. Rev. William ibid.――Family, iii. 112
  ―――― of Trewarthenick, Mr. ii. 407.――Francis, iii. 315 _bis_, 318
    _ter._ His ancestors 318. Mr. 54.――Family, ii. 407
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93――iii. 327
  Gregory, Mr. ii. 146
  ―――― Pope, ii. 203, 212
  ―――― St. Pope, ii. 288
  ―――― 1st, or the Great Pope, iii. 284, 285――ii. 287. His letter
    preserved 288
  ―――― 9th, Pope, i. 312
  ―――― 13th, Pope, founded a college for Greek children at Rome,
    opposed the Greek errors, his calendar, ii. 370
  Gregov, M^c, i. 365
  Grenfell, Pascoe, ii. 216. Pascoe, jun. notice of ibid.
  ―――― of Marazion, Emma, ii. 224
  Grenville, Anne, and Rt. Hon. Bernard, ii. 98. Bernard, sheriff of
    Devon 341. Bernard, father of Sir Beville and Sir Richard 348 _bis_.
    Sir Bevill 31. Sheriff of Cornwall 186. Sir Beville 333 _ter._, 334.
    Registry of his baptism 348. Sold Lanew and Bryn 332. His letter to
    Sir John Trelawny 349. His character 343. By Editor 348. His death
    in the battle of Lansdowne 343. Epitaph to 347. Poetical 348.
    Charles 351. George, sheriff of Devon 341. George, M.P. for
    Cornwall, rhyme on his election, created Lord Lansdowne, a poet, his
    imprisonment and death 351. Grace, Countess Granville 346. John 342.
    Sir John, afterwards Earl of Bath 333, 345, 350. Dispossessed Noye
    by unjust litigation of an estate sold to him by Sir Bevill 333.
    Instrumental to the restoration, created Earl of Bath, &c. 345.
    Built the mansion at Stowe 346, 351. Earls of Bath 340. Richard,
    sheriff of Cornwall, and Richard, sheriff of Devon 341. Richard,
    descended from Rollo, Duke of Normandy, came over with William the
    Conqueror 344. Sir Richard, vice-admiral 342. His battle with the
    Spaniards, and death 344. Sir Richard 342. Registry of his baptism
    348. Called by the rebels Skellum Grenville, imprisoned, Clarendon’s
    unamiable character of him, his death 345. Robert, sheriff of
    Cornwall 341. Roger, Capt. R.N. 341, 344. Lost in the Mary Rose
    frigate 342. Sir Theobald promoted the building of Bideford bridge
    341. William, Archbishop of York, son of Sir Theobald 344. Family,
    by Lysons, settled at Bideford 341. Possessed the manor of
    Kilkhampton nearly from the conquest 343. Under a temporary eclipse
    350. Monuments 347.――Sir Richard, trait of, iii. 184 _bis_. Miss 60
    _bis_.――Sir Richard, his siege of Plymouth, raised by Essex, he
    retreated, was followed, re-inforced by the King, iv. 185. Quartered
    with the King at Lord Mohun’s house 186. With other generals hemmed
    in Essex, and obliged him to retire 187. Family 16, 136――i. 262
  Grenville of Bideford, John, sheriff of Devon, ii. 341. Richard 344
  ―――― of Ilcombe, ii. 346
  ―――― of Penheale, George, i. 378.――Degory, ii. 110
  ―――― of Stow, Roger, i. 313. Family 17, 19.――Thomas, sheriff of
    Cornwall, probably the first of Stowe, ii. 341. Family 109, 332
    _bis_. Sir Bernard 22, 162. Sir Bevill 22. His birth and death 162.
    Unhorsed in the battle near Stratton 13. Sir John 172. Family 162
    _bis_
  ―――― of Stowe, Bucks, family, iii. 192, 194
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ―――― Lady, present possessor of Boconock, i. 69. Lord 69, 112
  ―――― Duke of Buckingham, iii. 192
  Greston-moor, iii. 41
  Grey, Thomas, Duke of Dorset, iii. 294. Thomas, Marquis of Dorset
    350. Henry, Duke of Suffolk 294 _bis_. Heir of the family
    140.――Family, i. 383
  ―――― Lord, ii. 197
  Greynville, Rev. Mr. ii. 414
  Gridiron, explanation of St. Lawrence’s, i. 89
  Griffin, Colonel, i. 68
  Griffith, William, ii. 426
  Grills, Charles and Rev. Richard, ii. 394
  Grogith, i. 243, 244
  Grose, Mr. ii. 387
  Gross, Mr. iii. 82
  Grosse, Ezekiel, i. 162. William 136. Family 145, 162――ii.
    217.――Miss, iii. 248. Mr. 383. Family 390. Arms 249
  ―――― of Comborne and Golden, Ezekiel, iii. 212, 215, 243, 361, 406,
    427, 463. His daughter 215, 361, 406, 427, 463 _bis_
  Growden, Lawrence, iii. 175
  Groyne, packet boats from receive their despatches at Falmouth, ii. 11
  Gryllo, Rev. William, i. 288
  Grylls or Garles, rocks at, iii. 23
  ―――― Rev. R. G. i. 128. Matthew and Robert 8.――Alice, ii. 396.
    Charles 227, 396 _ter._ John 396 _bis_. Richard and Rev. Richard
    396. Rev. R. G. 395, 396. Thomas 218. Mrs. 228. Family
    395.――Christopher, iii. 260. Rev. R. G. of St. Neot’s 262, 266.
    Restored the church 262, 264. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian 57. Family
    113――iv. 54
  ―――― of Court, Charles, ii. 395
  ――――  of Helston, Rev. R. G. ii. 124. Thomas 218
  ―――― of Tavistock, William, ii. 395
  ―――― manor, iii. 23
  Guary Mir, or Miracle Plays, iii. 329
  Guavis, William, iii. 284
  Gubbin’s cave, iii. 185
  Guddern, ii. 305. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 303
  ―――― barrow, ii. 305
  Guerir, or Guevor, St. history of, iii. 362
  Guernsey, i. 115, 169.――Lighthouses, ii. 358
  Guilford, ii. 76
  Guillemard, Mary, Philippa Davies, i. 363
  Guinear, i. 355
  Guisors in Normandy, ii. 177
  Gulby, Slade, ii. 114
  Guldeford, Henry, iii. 206
  Gullant, by Leland, iv. 277, 290
  Gully, i. 408
  ―――― of Tresilian, Samuel and Mr. iii. 269
  Gulval parish, ii. 169, 174――iii. 46, 54, 78
  GULVAL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Laneseley, Als
    family, ii. 118. Gulval well 121. By Tonkin, Lanistley manor,
    Keneggy ibid. Etymology of parish 122. By Editor, St. Gunwall ibid.
    Ancient name, according to Whitaker, impropriation, vicarage,
    Kenegie 123. Trevailer, Rosemorron, fertility of part of the parish
    124. Chiandower, parish feast, history of St. Martin, statistics
    125. Geology by Dr. Boase 126
  ―――― register, ii. 83
  ―――― well, ii. 121
  Gumb, i. 185 _quat._ Daniel, his house cut in a rock 184
  Gundred, iii. 398. Her filial love 393
  ――――’s, St. well, iii. 393
  Gundrons, ii. 121
  Gunhilly, by Leland, iv. 288
  Gunpowder plot, iii. 361
  Gunwall, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 122
  Gunwallo, King, ii. 126
  ―――― parish, i. 118, 301 _bis_, 304――ii. 155――iii. 257
  GUNWALLO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, etymology, ii. 126. Patron, incumbent, land tax, manor
    of Gunwallowinton 127. By Tonkin, circle of stones at Earth ibid. By
    Editor, St. Winwallo ibid. Manor of Winnington (by Lysons),
    situation of church, buried treasure, Mr. Knill 128. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 129
  Gunwallowinton manor, ii. 127
  Gunwin, account of, iii. 8
  Guran, i. 415
  Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  Gurnet’s head, iv. 165
  Gurney, Rev. Samuel, i. 354.――Sir Richard, parish priest of
    Bideford, admonished in his sleep to build Bideford bridge, ii.
    341.――Rev. Samuel of St. Earth and Redruth, iii. 386. Rev. Mr. of
    St. Mervyn 177. Three in succession held St. Mervyns for above a
    century 179.――Rev. Samuel of Tregony, iv. 129
  Gurran parish, iii. 190
  Guthrun the Dane, i. 290
  Guy, Rev. Charles of Padstow, iii. 278
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, iv. 111, 114. His life 113
  Guye, i. 8
  Guzman, Don Felix de, i. 311
  Gwairnick, i. 19
  Gwarnike, i. 16. Two chapels at 17
  Gwatkin, R. L. i. 2――ii. 306 _bis_. Mrs. 306.――Family, i. 2
  Gwavas, Mr. iii. 46. Family 286
  Gwavis, William, iii. 284
  Gweek, ii. 330
  Gwellimore, King of Ireland, i. 326
  Gwenap parish, ii. 123, 222, or Gwennap 144, 306――iii. 306, 380,
    390――iv. 1, 2, 5 _bis_. Mines of 89
  GWENAP parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, ii. 129. Patron, incumbent, land tax, rectory,
    remarkable places, Trefyns 130. St. Dye chapel, Paldy’s mine 131.
    Memorable storm 132. By Tonkin, tumuli at Carne mark, name of
    parish. By Editor, Saints Wenap and Dye 132. St. Dye’s history,
    Cornmarth, excavation at 133. Scornier, its rich mine, Poldice
    mine, copper in tin mines, size of church 134. Alterations,
    Beauchamp monument, tradition of monks in church tower,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining
    district, beautiful porphyry near Burncoose 136
  Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Gwendron parish, i. 221, 236――ii. 93, 155, 157, 166 _bis_――iii. 127
    _bis_, 128, 441, 442――iv. 1, 2 _ter._, 137
  GWENDRON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, remarkable places,
    Trenethike, ii. 137. Nine maids 137. By Tonkin, endowment of
    church, patron, impropriator, Trenithike, name of parish, Bodilly
    Veor, and Vean 137. Treneare 138. By the Editor, former patron
    138. Trenethick, Nansloe, Trelil, parish very productive of tin
    139. Penhallynk monument, vicarage house, parish feast, Mr. Jago a
    magician, statistics 140. Geology by Dr. Boase 141
  Gwenwynwyn ab Nan, i. 338
  Gwernak, by Leland, iv. 262
  Gwiator, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwihter, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwillim’s Heraldry, i. 320
  Gwinear, or Gwyniar, or Guinier parish, i. 160, 344――ii. 145 _bis_,
    225――iii. 339, 344, 345
  GWINEAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, ii. 141. Impropriator, land tax,
    remarkable places, Lanyon, Polkinhorne, Coswin 142. By Tonkin, name
    142. Impropriation 143. By Editor, productive of copper, Herland
    mine, Whele Alfred, Whele Treliston, Lanyon family 143. Statistics,
    vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, Relistion mine 144
  Gwinnodock, St. iii. 240
  Gwinter, ii. 331 _bis_
  Gwithian bay, ii. 145
  ―――― parish, ii. 234
  GWITHIAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor of Connerton,
    exchanged by Henry 3rd for that of St. James, ii. 145. Form of
    writ, value of benefice, patron, land tax 146. By Tonkin, rectory,
    patron, incumbent, etymology 146. By Editor, advowson, charter of
    Henry 2nd, manor of Conorton 147. Leland’s tradition of a large
    town, exchange of manors contradicted, account of St. James’s
    hospital 148. Lysons’s account of the inundation of sand 149.
    Planting of rushes to arrest it, sand calcareous, difficulty of
    burning it into lime, Godrevy, large fig tree in church-yard,
    parish feast, statistics 150. Geology by Dr. Boase, Godrevy
    point 151
  Gwyn, Mr. ii. 11
  Gwynn, i. 8
  Gwythian parish, ii. 141――iii. 140, 339 _bis_, 344
  Gyges, King, i. 394

  Haccombe, iii. 372. Chantry in ibid.
  ―――― Sir Stephen de, iii. 372
  Hack, John, iii. 387
  Hack and Cast, ii. 113
  Hadham, Edmund of, Earl of Britain and Richmond, iii. 65
  Hadley, John, his sextant, ii. 222
  ―――― in Suffolk, ii. 372
  Hadrian’s mole, iv. 148
  Hagulstadiensis, iv. 42
  Haile’s abbey, Gloucestershire, iii. 284, 285 _bis_
  Hailestown, by Leland, iv. 268
  Hains or Hens Burrow, iii. 394
  Hakewell’s Catalogue of the Speakers, iv. 44
  Haleboate rock, iii. 361
  Halep family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Lammoran, ii. 109
  Haleps family, iii. 215
  Halewyn or Hallwyn, account of, ii. 254
  Half crowns, £10,000 in, i. 265
  Halghland, ii. 430
  Haligan or Helligon, account of, iii. 65
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 66
  Halisworthy hundred, i. 133
  Hall barton, iii. 293――iv. 29, 31
  ―――― Bishop of Exeter, iii. 79. Mr. 280
  ―――― manor, iii. 293.――Account of, ii. 409. Walk at 410
  Hallabeer village, iii. 255
  Hallamore, Mr. ii. 97
  Hallet, Mr. iv. 22
  Hailing, Kent, ii. 152
  Hallton, account of, i. 312, 315
  Hallworthy, iii. 136
  Hals, Dr. i. 298. Lieut.-colonel James 113. John, Bishop of Lincoln
    or Litchfield and Coventry 218. Family 224.――Jane, ii. 119. John
    119, 120 _ter._ Simon 118, 119 _ter._ William 118. Family 118.
    Pedigree 119.――Anne, iii. 188. Grenville 187. Henry, memoir of 187.
    James, governor of Montserrat, taken prisoner at Plymouth 183. His
    life spared, suffered a rigorous imprisonment, verses given to him
    184. His marriage 186, and issue 186, 187. James 186. Wasted his
    property 187. John, Bishop of Lincoln or Litchfield and Coventry
    141. Nicholas 187. Thomas 186. His death 187. Thomas, memoir of
    187――William, the writer of this book, i. 216――ii. 56, 57, 86, 90,
    97, 99 _ter._, 116, 153 _bis_, 143, 147, 148, 163, 199 _bis_, 201,
    238, 256, 269, 273, 274 _bis_, 279, 281, 284, 305, 363, 411――iii.
    187, 62, 66, 90, 106, 126 _quint._, 135, 137, 160, 165, 166 _ter._,
    172, 184, 196, 213, 214 _quat._, 216, 221, 238 _bis_, 398, 432, 433,
    434――iv. 143, 25, 96, 138 _bis_, 139, 165.――His MS. ii. 127. Of
    Ladock parish lost 352.――Upon creeds, iii. 426. His mistakes 352.
    His parochial history 96. The MS. lent to the Editor 407.――Does not
    notice the Scilly Islands, iv. 168. His Cornish vocabulary 37, 39.
    On the vocabulary system 72. Granvill hall 74. The missing portions
    of his MS. sent to the Editor 184.――Family, iii. 208
  Hals of Efford, Anne, i. 221. John 419. Matthew 221. Richard 419.
    Family 298.――John, ii. 130
  ―――― of Efford and Fentongollan, John, i. 125. Sir Nicholas 125 and
    136. Nicholas 39.――Family, ii. 109
  ―――― of Fentongollan, i. 65. John 346, 356. Sir Nicholas 356.――John,
    ii. 170. Sir Nicholas 119, 170. Governor of Pendennis castle,
    sanctioned the building of Falmouth 9. His letters and reasons
    copied 10. Son of John of Efford, and his death 13. Family
    170.――John, iii. 209 _bis_, 212, 215, 464. Sir Nicholas 183, 212,
    215. Captain William, memoir of 183.――John and Sir Nicholas, iv. 2
  ―――― of Hals’s Savannah, Jamaica, Thomas and Major Thomas, ii. 120
  ―――― of Hungerford park, Berks, James, iii. 186
  ―――― of Kenedon, Richard, i. 313, 419――ii. 189――iii. 116
  ―――― of Lelant, i. 144 _ter._
  ―――― of Merthyr, James, i. 205; or Merther, James, ii. 30, 32, 111.
    Martha his wife 111. His eldest son, ii. 32.――Lieut.-col. James,
    iv. 188
  ―――― of Pengersick, Sir Nicholas, obtained a pardon for Lady
    Killigrew, ii. 6
  ―――― of Trembetha, John, iii. 7
  ―――― of Tresawsen, memoir of James, iii. 182
  ―――― of Truro, Grenville, i. 205
  Halse, James, M. P. ii. 271.――James, iii. 91
  Halsey, Rev. Joseph, i. 205.――Family 417. Edward, Joseph, M.D. and
    Nathaniel, iii. 188
  ―――― of Huntingdonshire family, iii. 188. Arms ibid.
  ―――― Rev. Joseph, of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 188 _bis_
  Halsham, Yorkshire, ii. 118
  Halton, i. 311. John de, Bishop of Carlisle 313
  ―――― of Hallton, Joan, i. 313 _bis_. Richard 313
  Halvose, iii. 113
  ―――― John, iii. 181
  Halwell, Sir John, ii. 189.――Family, i. 348
  Halwyn manor, iii. 313
  Ham, John, iv. 18
  Hambley of St. Columb, i. 259
  Hambly, Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii. 196
  Hamelin, presbyter of Launceston castle chapel, ii. 427
  Hamilton, Duke, i. 66, 67, 68.――Mr. iii. 62
  Hamley, Sir John, ii. 250.――Mr. iii. 65. Family 195. Arms 65
  ―――― of St. Neots, ii. 320
  ―――― of Trebithike, Mr. iv. 95
  Hamly of Trefreke, John, i. 383
  Hamlyn family, ii. 316
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  Hammett of Carmarthenshire family, iii. 256
  Hammond, Anthony, ii. 76
  Hamm’s castle, Normandy, the Earl of Oxford confined there, ii. 185
  Hamoaze, i. 266――ii. 362――iii. 45, 105, 108 _bis_
  Hampden, John, memorials of, ii. 349. Lord Nugent’s life of 77.――The
    rebel, iii. 144
  Hampshire, ii. 282――iii. 10, 145
  Hamson, Sir Thomas, i. 171
  Hancanon, Richard, i. 215
  Hancock, Rev. Mr. of St. Martin’s, near Looe, iii. 119
  Hancock of Hendreth, William, ii. 68
  ―――― of Pengelly, in Creed, Thomas, iii. 202
  Hankey, Warwick, iv. 157
  ―――― of Trekininge Vean, Joseph, i. 225
  Hans towns, ii. 6
  Hantertavas, account of, iii. 62
  Hardenfast manor, iii. 346
  Hardfast, i. 313
  Hardwicke, Earl of, Chief Justice, i. 269, 282, 283. His charge on
    the western circuit 278
  Hardy, John, ii. 209
  Hare of Trenowith, i. 406. Arms ibid.
  Harewood, i. 158. Sir W. Trelawney lives at, iii. 301
  Harleian MSS. iii. 154 _sex._
  Harlyn, John de, i. 373
  Hamington, Gervase de, iv. 41
  Harold, Edmund, Geoffrey and Thomas, iv. 146
  ―――― King, iii. 130, 142
  Harpsfield, i. 382――iii. 277
  Harrington, a notorious pirate, ii. 41
  ―――― Gervase de, ii. 128
  ―――― of Somersetshire, Miss, ii. 278
  ―――― William Bonville, Lord, iii. 294. Elizabeth, Lady; Lord, of
    Harrington, and his daughter ibid.
  Harris, William, i. 164. Family 197, 365.――Edward and Jane, ii. 304.
    John 58. Mary 416. Richard 255. Susanna 304. William sheriff of
    Cornwall 56. Mr. 416. The celebrated Mr. of Salisbury 103. Rev. Mr.
    253. Arms 122.――W. S. of Plymouth, his writings on lightning, iv.
    130.――Edward, iii. 103. John 82. William 103. Mr. 20. Family 83, 90
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  ―――― of Hayne, Sir Arthur, ii. 122. William 121, 123.――Sir Thomas,
    iii. 103
  ―――― of Kenegie, William, iii. 85.――In Gulval, ii. 212. Christopher
    121, 123. Lydia 282
  ―――― of Park family, i. 205.――In St. Clement’s, Samuel and Mr. iii. 382
  ―――― of Pickwell, William, i. 244
  ―――― of Roseteague, Richard, ii. 56
  ―――― of Rosewarne in Camburne, ii. 39. Mr. 56
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, iv. 161
  Harrison, Rev. T. H. ii. 347
  ―――― the historian, ii. 403
  ―――― of Mount Radford, Devon, family, ii. 294
  Harrow school, ii. 243
  Hart, Dr. i. 370.――Family, ii. 255
  Hartland abbey, i. 168.――Devon, ii. 413, 414 _bis_, 415 _bis_――iv.
    155, 156.――Account of, ii. 415. Abbats of 414. Prior of 49 _bis_
  ―――― Galfrid de Dynham, Lord of, iv. 156
  Hartley Winchcombe, i. 164. Henry Winchmore, ii. 56. Winchmore 139
  Harvey, Mr. i. 254.――John, iii. 341 _bis_, and his son 341
  Harwich, ii. 28
  Harwood in Calstock, ii. 230
  Hastings, a cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged 45.――Sands, iii. 10
  ―――― family, iii. 234, 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― Earl of Huntingdon, i. 378 _bis_
  Hatch, Samuel, i. 275. Family 270, 271, 274
  Hatsell’s Parliamentary Precedents, i. 356
  Hatt, i. 105
  Haulsey, Elizabeth, i. 399. John 400
  Haweis, David and Edward, ii. 307. Reginald 307 _bis_.――David, iii.
    382. Reginald 327 _bis_. Family 382, 383
  ―――― of Kelliow, Reginald, iii. 381. Mr. 382
  Hawes, John, iii. 387.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 4
  ―――― of Carlyan, ii. 302
  ―――― of Chincoos, Thomas, ii. 316. Arms 316
  ―――― of Kea, ii. 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Killiow, John, his arms, ii. 300
  Hawke, Mr. iv. 111
  Hawker, Rev. Jacob, iv. 19
  Hawkey, Joseph, ii. 415. Family 152.――Miss, iii. 116.――Joseph, iv. 139
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Joseph, ii. 253, 254
  ―――― of Trevego, Martha and Reginald, iii. 187
  ―――― of St. Wenowe, ii. 90
  Hawkins, i. 54, 243, 391, 407. Christopher 357 _bis_, 358, 364. Sir
    Christopher 8, 46, 258, 358, 392, 403. Henry 45, 259 _ter._ Jane
    357. John 274, 275, 357 _quat._ John and John Heywood 358. Dr. John
    417. Rev. John and Joseph 259. Mary 357, 364. Philip 357 _ter._
    Thomas 356, 357 _quat._, 358. Rev. Mr. of Blissland 259. Family 54,
    243, 391, 407. Arms 45.――Sir Christopher, ii. 148, 354, 358. His
    opinion of Ictis 20, 206. Rev. Mr. 258, 260. Family 281.――Sir
    Christopher, iii. 271 _bis_, 423. His discovery and working of a
    lead and silver mine 272. John 270. Rev. John, D.D. 268, 381. Of
    Pennance 356, 362. Rev. Dr. 196. Mary 367. Philip 268, 271, 354,
    356, 367. Rev. Mr. of Sithney 441. Mr. a pupil of Dr. Borlase 53.
    Mr. his paper on Geology 100. Family 197, 363.――Rev. Mr. Towednack,
    iv. 53. Family 161
  Hawkins of St. Austell, Barbara and Henry, i. 376. Grace 419, 422.
    Henry 419, 423
  ―――― of Creed, i. 45, 346, 387
  ―――― of Gonrounson, i. 392. Philip 387
  ―――― of Helston, i. 45. John 260 _bis_.――Thomas, iii. 113
  ―――― of Pennance, Ann and Barbara, i. 259, 260. Elizabeth 55, 259,
    260. George 259. Gertrude and Grace 260. Henry 259 _ter._ Jane 259.
    John 255, 260. John, D.D. 257, 259 _bis_. Mary 259 _bis_. Philip 55,
    255 _bis_, 257, 259 _bis_, 350. Arms 255.――Ann and Philip, ii. 242.
    Family 217
  ―――― of Pennemer, John, D.D. i. 418
  ―――― of Penzance, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356, 364, 366 _bis_. Christopher 259, 350.
    Thomas 346 _bis_, 349, 356, 357. Arms 349.――Christopher, iii. 136,
    196. Christopher of Helston and 367. Jane 136.――In St. Earth, and
    Trewithan in Probus, Sir Christopher, ii. 217
  ―――― of Trewithan, Christopher, iii. 368 _bis_. Henry and John 368.
    Philip 368 _bis_. Thomas 362, 368 _ter._ Miss 368
  Hawksley, Rev. J. W. of Redruth, iii. 390
  Hawkyns, Sir John, iv. 86
  Hawley, ii. 292. Dr. 233
  ―――― of Dartmouth, John, ii. 294
  Hawtys Brygge, iv. 255
  Hay, i. 187. Account of 411――ii. 353, 354
  Haydon, Mr. schoolmaster at Leskeard, iii. 18. Determined the
    longitude of Leskeard 19
  Hayford haven, iii. 74, 110
  Hayle, i. 359, 364 _bis_――ii. 83, 214
  ―――― causeway, iii. 386
  ―――― harbour, improved, iii. 341
  ―――― parish, iii. 339, 342, 343
  ―――― port of, ii. 261, 264
  ―――― river, i. 344, 350, 359, 377――iii. 5, 6, 125, 128, 339, 426.
    Estuary of 5, 11
  Hayleford channel, i. 236
  Hayman, Richard, iv. 18
  Hayme, Isabel, iii. 324. John 315, 324
  Hayne, in Devon, ii. 122 bis
  ―――― of Treland, John, ii. 320
  Haynes burrow, ii. 1
  Headon village, iv. 41
  Heale, Mr. ii. 151, 228, 319.――Miss, iv. 129――Family, i. 28, 107,
    177. Arms 107
  ―――― of Battlesford, ii. 137
  ―――― or Hele of Benetts, Edmund, iv. 152. George and Lucy 152, 154.
    Warwick 154. Name and arms 152
  ―――― of Brading, Lucy, ii. 235
  ―――― of Devon, Ellis, iii. 234
  ―――― of Fleet, Honor, and Sir Thomas, iii. 225. Family 211
  ―――― of Wembury, i. 65
  Hearle, Dr. James, and Rev. Mr. i. 298. Family, ib.――ii. 99, 270
  ―――― of Buryan, i. 359, 360
  ―――― of Penryn, John, i. 423.――Mr. ii. 97. Mr. worked Poldice mine,
    and possessed one third of the lands 134. Mr. the last of Penryn 99.
    Family 354.――Betty, iii. 440. Thomas 303. Family 8
  Hearn, ii. 186
  Hearne, i. 307――iii. 332
  ――――’s Appendix to Adam de Domerham, iv. 26
  Heart, Dr. Robert, ii. 151. His arms 152.――Family, iii. 391
  ―――― of St. Germans, ii. 152
  ―――― of Manhyniet, ii. 152
  ―――― of Tencreek family, ii. 152
  Heckens family, iii. 83. Richard, of St. Ives 88
  Hector, iii. 417, 418 _bis_, 420
  Hedgeland, J. P. iii. 264 _bis_
  Hedgeland’s prints of St. Neot’s windows, ii. 396
  Hedingham castle, Essex, iii. 424
  Hedui, i. 107
  Hele family, iii. 250, and heiress, iv. 136
  ―――― of Boscome, Devon, Rebecca and Thomas, iii. 297
  Helen, Empress of Rome, i. 237
  Helena, St. iii. 187.――Mother of Constantine, ii. 153. A monastery
    built by 37
  ―――― St. island, Dr. Maskelyne’s voyage to, ii. 222
  Helfon harbour, i. 38
  Helford channel, iii. 124
  ―――― river, i. 242――iii. 63, 126 _bis_, 127, 138
  ―――― village, iii. 113
  Helie, i. 2
  Heligan, ii. 126
  Heligon, i. 424. Account of 419
  Heliotropium corymbosum, iv. 182
  Hella in Camburne, ii. 141
  Hellanclose, account of, i. 293
  Helland parish, i. 60――ii. 340――iii. 64, 74
  HELLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquities,
    value, patron, land-tax, incumbent, Bocunyan, ii. 151. Barton of
    Helland, etymology of the word barton 152. By Tonkin, etymology 152.
    Saint, Gifford family 153. By Editor, etymology of barton,
    Penhargard manor, Broads barton, Glynn family 153. Statistics,
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Hellas river, ii. 330
  Helldon rectory, Norfolk, ii. 152
  Hellegar manor, account of, i. 264
  ―――― of Hellegar, Sibill, and arms, i. 265
  Hellesbury park, ii. 402.――Helsbury, iii. 223
  Helleston lake, iii. 442
  ―――― manor, iii. 442 _bis_
  Hellman, Miss, iii. 191
  Hellnoweth, nunnery at, iii. 126
  Helston borough, account of, ii. 156. First charter 158. Payment of
    rates 159. Patron, former representatives, letter on the reform as
    affecting it 160. Hospital of St. John 136, 137, 163. A coinage
    town 301. Coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, market house 164.
    Foray, and practice of bowling 165. Road to 215. Alexander
    Pendarves, burgess for 98. Etymology 158. Corporation 8,
    9.――Burgesses of, iii. 15. Road to Falmouth from 63. William Noye,
    attorney-general, M.P. for 152. John Rogers, M.P. 445.――Road from
    Truro to, iv. 4
  Helston castle, iv. 228
  ―――― church, ii. 136 _bis_, 192――iii. 384
  ―――― and Kerrier hundred, i. 38
  ―――― manor, i. 74
  ―――― manor in Kerrier, ii. 137, 401, and its stannaries 155
  ―――― in Trigg, ii. 137, 401, 404――iii. 223
  ―――― parish, i. 1, 3, 77, 115, 123, 136, 153, 356――ii. 140――iii. 47,
    127 _bis_, 128, 421, 441, 442, 443, 446 _ter._――iv. 6
  HELSTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor in Alfred’s
    days, a coinage town _temp._ Edward 1st, privileges, ii. 155. Form
    of writ, Castle-Werre, arms of the borough, Edward 1st frequented it
    for pleasure 156. Chief inhabitants, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, thunder-storm 157. By Tonkin, hospital ibid. By
    Editor, etymology, contest for elective franchise, first charter
    158. Payment of rates, election petition 159. Heraldic visitation,
    patron, representatives of borough, Reform Bill 160. Letter upon
    161. Church injured by a storm, new church, St. John’s hospital,
    removal of the coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, annual festival
    164. The foray 165. Musical air preserved from the British, and
    found in Scotland and in Ireland, statistics, and Geology by Dr.
    Boase 166
  ―――― tenants, i. 75
  ―――― village, ii. 405
  ―――― Chaumond manor, iii. 442
  Helvetians, i. 107
  Helya, prior of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  Helyar, Weston, iv. 9
  ―――― of East Coker, Somersetshire, Rachel, iii. 165. Weston 165
    _bis_, 346. Family 346
  Hemley of Trefreke, John and arms, i. 384
  Hendarsike, etymology, iv. 22
  Hender, i. 369, 370
  Hender, Elizabeth, iii. 233. John 233, 234 _bis_. Family, monuments
    to 233
  Hendersick, lands of, iii. 294
  Hendower family, iii. 198
  ―――― of Court family, heiress of, ii. 109 _bis_
  Hendra, his dream, ii. 300
  ―――― or Hendre, account of, i. 234――ii. 68
  Hendrawne, iii. 327
  Hendre, Mr. iii. 354
  Henemerdon, William de, iii. 428
  Hengar, account of, iv. 94, 98
  Hengist, i. 326 _bis_
  Hengiston Downs, iv. 6.――Abound with tin, lines upon, and a battle
    at, ii. 310
  Henlyn, iii. 177, 178. Possessors of 176, 177
  Hennaclive cliff, its height, iv. 18
  Hennah, Rev. Mr. of St. Austell, iv. 167
  Hennock vicarage, ii. 224
  Hennot, ii. 274
  Henrietta Maria, Queen, i. 398
  Henry 5th, Emperor, iii. 28
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 296――ii. 148, 239, 249――iii. 140, 332, 456, 462,
    463,――iv. 77, 82 _bis_, 169.――His daughter, i. 296
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 87, 147, 155, 170, 249, 415, 422, 426――iii. 139, 140,
    225――iv. 71, 81 _bis_, 82 _bis_, 84, 140
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 69, 89, 95, 118 _bis_, 119, 130, 145 _bis_, 149, 235,
    249, 403, 422――iii. 14, 15, 27, 140, 149, 268, 269, 316, 438――iv.
    15, 105 _bis_, 128.――His charter to Launceston Priory, ii. 426
  ―――― 4th, ii. 93, 107, 180, 235, 260 _ter._, 282, 394, 398――iii. 14,
    22, 27 _bis_, 66, 111, 117, 125, 129, 132, 134, 140, 225, 226, 302,
    307, 323, 374, 437, 438――iv. 16, 22, 43 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 68, 96,
    102, 112, 139, 153
  ―――― 5th, ii. 176 _bis_, 209, 212, 302, 386――iii. 7, 101 _bis_, 111,
    141, 269, 303, 316, 374, 436. Statue of 295――iv. 13, 101, 138, 143,
    144, 145 _bis_
  ―――― 6th, i. 169――ii. 39, 71, 89, 107, 149, 153, 182 _quat._, 183
    _bis_, 209, 235, 251, 260 _bis_, 299, 315, 335, 353, 354――iii. 101,
    116 _ter._, 141, 147, 255 _bis_, 294, 318, 323, 324 _bis_, 459――iv.
    43, 101, 132, 139, 141, 145 _bis_, 146, 156
  ―――― 7th, ii. 2, 43, 100, 108 _ter._, 109 _bis_, 114, 185, 186
    _bis_, 187, 188, 189, 190 _bis_, 191 _ter._, 235, 317, 335, 341,
    363, 386――iii. 27, 65 _bis_, 101, 102 _ter._, 103 _quat._, 104,
    134, 141, 177, 182, 193, 199, 213, 226, 324, 370, 393, 436――iv.
    45, 72, 161.――Insurrection to depose, i. 86.――Gothic architecture
    of his time, iv. 81
  Henry 8th, ii. 53, 66, 70, 71, 72, 76, 87, 91, 94, 96, 109, 113, 119
    _bis_, 123, 139, 149, 157, 163, 169, 170, 171 _bis_, 176, 185, 191,
    194, 209, 235, 259, 275, 276, 277, 327, 335, 341 _ter._, 412, 414
    _bis_, 415, 420――iii. 7, 44, 90, 103 _quat._, 104, 105, 111, 133,
    134 _bis_, 139, 147, 148, 155, 158, 163, 170 _bis_, 181, 199
    _quat._, 206, 208, 210, 211, 214, 232, 238, 253, 278, 286 _bis_,
    317, 326, 370, 417, 437, 441, 446, 453, 459, 460――iv. 9, 15, 42, 57,
    68, 69, 72, 73, 97, 101, 112, 113 _bis_, 134, 155, 156, 161.――Built
    St. Mawe’s castle, tradition of, ii. 280. A frigate sunk in his
    sight near Portsmouth 342
  ―――― Prince, iii. 14
  ―――― Prince, son of the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  ―――― Prince of Wales, iii. 27, 213.――Farnaby dedicated his Horace
    to, iv. 87
  Hensall Cove, ii. 360
  Henshinius, iii. 332
  Henwood, Mr. iii. 100.――Family, i. 420
  ―――― of Lavalsa, Hugh, i. 421
  Herald’s office, iii. 316――iv. 77
  ―――― visitation, iii. 83――iv. 106
  Heraldic visitations, ii. 338, 423
  Heraldry, extract from Upton’s MS. upon, ii. 107
  Herbert, Lady Catherine, i. 265――Jane, ii. 107. John 160 _ter._
    William, Earl of Pembroke 107
  ―――― of Cherbury, Lord, ii. 348
  Herbert’s Festivity of Saints, i. 407
  Hercules, i. 341.――Breaking the horn of Achelous, ii. 161.――Pillars
    of, iv. 168
  Hereford, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― Cathedral, ii. 33
  ―――― and Essex, Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of, i. 63
  Herland, copper mine, i. 226――ii. 143
  Herle family, i. 125, 394, 397.――Sir John the younger, and Polglass,
    iii. 294.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 107
  Herle of Landew, Edward, his character, Mary, Nicholas, Northmore,
    his death, iii. 41. Northmore 42
  ―――― of Prideaux, Edward, iii. 41 _ter._――Family, i. 397
  Herme, St. i. 393. His history 393
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202――ii. 5
  Hernecroft in Stratton, iii. 133
  Heron, Rev. John, of Stoke Climsland, iv. 7
  Herring, Major, J. B. i. 380. His grandson 381
  Hertford, Edward Seymour, Earl of, and Duke of Somerset, iv. 107
  Hertfordshire, ii. 64, 65
  Hertland, recluse of, iv. 158
  Hervey, Rev. Mr. composed his Meditations while curate of
    Kilkhampton, ii. 352
  Herygh, St. iii. 7 _bis_
  Herys of Herys, Henry and family, iii. 202
  Hesse Cassel, Landgrave of, his bargain for letting out troops, ii. 269
  Hessenford, road from Duloe to, iv. 30
  Hewish, Matilda de, iv. 112
  Hexham, battle of, ii. 260
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 43
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― shire, iv. 42, 43
  Hext, Samuel, and arms, i. 44. Mr. 45.――Francis, ii. 393. Rev. F. J.
    154――iii. 66. Nicholas 83
  Hexworthy barton, account of, iii. 2
  Heydon, Mr. an ornament to the country, ii. 388
  Heyes, Thomas, i. 9
  Heylston, by Leland, iv. 288
  Heywood, Anne and James, i. 347.――Sir John’s Chronicle, ii. 198――i. 339
  Hickens, Mr. ii. 124
  ―――― of Poltair, Mr. iii. 91
  Hickes, Cloberry, i. 23. Family 368.――Mr. ii. 259――iv. 74
  ―――― of Trevithick, John, i. 416. His father poisoned ibid. Stephen,
    accidentally shot 417
  Hickman, Mr. iv. 74
  Hicks, i. 61, 62.――Mr. iv. 68
  ―――― of Trenedick, John, iii. 44
  Hicks’s Mill village, iii. 38
  Hidrock, St. ii. 379 _bis_
  Hieroglyphicks of the Druids, i. 192
  Higden, Ralph, his Polychronicon, iii. 163
  Highlands, iii. 240
  Hilarius, Bishop of Poictiers, ii. 338
  Hilary point, i. 295
  ―――― St. i. 294, 395. Bishop of Poictiers 295 _ter._――His history,
    ii. 167
  ―――― or Hillary, St. parish, i. 88, 344, 355――ii. 80, 118, 307――iii.
    46, 306, 312.――vicar of, ii. 144
  HILARY, ST. parish, Hals’s history of the saint, ii. 167. By Hals,
    situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice 169. Tregumbo,
    Treveneage, borough of Marazion, ancient name, situation, Lord,
    court leet, member of parliament, franchise neglected, fair and
    markets 170. Land tax, French invaded, and took Mount’s Bay, burnt
    the town, and fled, defeated at sea 171. History of St. Michael’s
    Mount, former name, description 172. Lines upon, pilgrimages
    performed to, disruption from main land, submarine trees, spring
    173. Another spring, prospect from the top, Porth-horne, priory 174.
    Revenues, chapel, Michael’s chair, tombstones, solidity of the roof
    175. Built of Irish oak, proprietors, privileges, fairs, roads for
    anchorage, landing of Sir Robert Knollys 176. Seized by Pomeroy, his
    confederacy with Prince John 177. Stabs the messenger sent to arrest
    him, enters St. Michael’s mount by stratagem 178. Richard’s return,
    John’s submission 179. Pomeroy surrenders, and dies, Richard
    garrisons the mount 180. Vere family, dispute between the Lords
    spiritual and temporal 181. Wars of the Roses 182. Perkin Warbeck’s
    rebellion 186. Siege of Exeter 189. Priory of St. Michael’s mount
    191. Murder of Edward the 6th’s commissioner, Arundell’s rebellion
    192. Terms sent to the King 194. His answer 195. Second siege of
    Exeter 196. Sir Anthony Kingston, provost marshall 197. Church and
    house struck by a ball of fire, wonderful escape of Mr. St. Aubyn
    Whitaker’s name of the place 199. And etymology, nunnery 200.
    Leland’s notice of it 201. Church built by Edward the Confessor 202.
    The chair 204. Its use 205. History of the mount by Editor, the
    Ictis of Siculus, earliest tradition of the church, lofty situations
    dedicated to the archangel, St. Kenna imparts virtue to the chair
    206. St. Kenna’s well, Keynsham, ammonites at, supposed ancient site
    of the mount, subterranean trees 207. Dugdale’s account 208.
    Oliver’s notices, and tanners, St. Edward’s charter 209. Earl of
    Morton’s 210. King of the Romans 211. Pope Adrian’s bull,
    suppression of the monastery, proprietor since 212. Saint Aubyns
    have improved it, geological description 213. Description of the
    buildings, pier, connection of the mount with romances 214.
    Antiquity and history of Marazion 215. Considerable families there
    216. Treveneage, Tregembo 217. Tregurtha, Ennis, Trevarthen 218.
    Mines, church and its monuments 219. Mr. Palmer a recusant 220. Mr.
    Hitchins 221. Dr. Maskelyne’s astronomical voyage to St. Helena,
    Meyer’s astronomical tables 222. Nautical Almanack 223. Family of
    Mr. Hitchens 224. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    also of St. Michael’s mount 225
  Hilary, St. term, ii. 120, 334
  Hilda, St. petrified serpents, ii. 298
  Hill, Otwell, i. 46. Family 31, 210.――Sampson and his arms, ii. 136.
    Mr. 11.――Alan, iii. 193. Candia and Grace 191. Otwell 191, 193. His
    arms 191. Rev. Mr. of St. Maben 65.――Richard, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carwithenack, i. 241
  ―――― of Constantine, ii. 139
  ―――― of Croan, John and Michael, i. 371
  ―――― of Lancashire family, iii. 191
  ―――― of Lydcote family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Shilston, Oliver, i. 348
  ―――― of Trenethick family, and John, ii. 139
  HILL, NORTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, principal seats,
    Trebatha, ii. 226. Battin 227. By Editor, Trebartha 228. Treveniel,
    patron, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 229
  HILL, SOUTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    ii. 229. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, Manaton
    230. By Tonkin, name, patron, incumbents, Kellyland manor, Manaton
    ibid. By Editor, Whitaker’s etymology of Manaton, proprietors
    of Kalliland, patron, church, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 231
  Hillman, Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 208.――Rev. Mr. iv. 1
  Hills, the highest in Cornwall, i. 132
  Hilton manor, iii. 117 _bis_
  Hingston downs, i. 152 _bis_, 159――ii. 23. Kitt hill, the most
    elevated point of 312
  ―――― hill, i. 189
  Hippesley, Cox, John and Frances Susanna, ii. 250
  Hippia frutescens, iv. 182
  Hitchens, i. 282.――Rev. Malachi, ii. 144, 221, 224, 225. The
    Editor’s notices concerning 221. Filled the office of astronomer
    royal in Dr. Maskelyne’s absence 222. Assisted in compiling the
    Nautical Almanack 223. His family, Rev. Richard, Rev. Thomas,
    Malachy, Fortescue, Josepha 224. Mr. 259, 261.――Rev. Mr. of St.
    Hilary, iii. 34. Family 286
  ―――― of Trungle, Mr. iii. 288
  Hiwis family, ii. 256.――Emmeline and family, iv. 16
  Hoare, Sir Richard, i. 305
  Hoarn, iii. 403
  Hobart, Lord, ii. 361. Family 362.――Lord, iii. 5, 405
  Hobbs, i. 18, 78――ii. 57. Nicholas and his arms 54.――Rev. Thomas,
    iii. 213. William 355
  Hobby, Sir Thomas, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Hoblin, Mr. ii. 143
  Hoblyn, i. 45. Edward 216. John 107. Robert 216. Thomas 223.――Rev.
    Carew, iii. 136. Rev. Edward of Milor 231. Mary 136. Robert 347.
    Rev. Robert 77, 445. Family 192, 197, 445
  ―――― of Bodman, i. 172, 224, 371;――or Hoblin Bridget, ii. 389
  ―――― of Bradridge, ii. 57
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371. Damaris, Edward 376 _bis_. Of Crone, Damaris
    and Edward 260
  ―――― of Egleshayle, i. 224
  ―――― of St. Enedor, i. 224
  ―――― of Gurran, i. 224
  ―――― of Helland, i. 224
  ―――― of Kenwyn, John, i. 224
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 223
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 160, 161, 223, 371. Anne, Carew 224. Edward
    223. Francis, Grace, John, and Mary 224. Richard 223. Robert 210,
    226, 223 _bis_. Rev. Robert 223, 226. Thomas 224. Arms 223.――Family,
    ii. 113――Edward and Richard, iii. 191. Robert 191, 196 _bis_
  ―――― of Penhale, i. 292
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, i. 225
  ―――― of Tregleagh, i. 371
  ―――― of Trewheler, Edward, i. 387
  Hocken, Rev. William, of Phillack, iii. 343, 344
  Hocker, Rev. Mr. ii. 413.――Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii.
    198.――Thomas, iv. 3. Mr. 4 _bis_
  ―――― of Trewanta, William, iii. 39
  Hockin, Miss, ii. 221.――Mr. iii. 223. Mr. of Gwithian 344
  Hockyn of Helland and Helston, iv. 95
  Hoddy of Pennance, Henry, i. 257
  Hodgson, Rev. Charles of St. Tudy, iv. 97
  Hoe, the, iii. 108
  Holcomb, Mr. iii. 211, 212, 215
  Holden, i. 410.――Rev. Mr. ii. 232
  Holinshed, i. 108, 246
  Holland, ii. 52, 270. Coast of 28. Peace of England and France with
    42. War with 245. Tobacco sold cheap in 42.――States of, iii. 186
  ―――― of Devon, family, ii. 304
  ―――― John, Earl of Huntingdon, i. 341.――Thomas, Earl of Kent, and
    Thomas, Duke of Surrey, iii. 27
  ―――― parish, i. 264
  Hollis of Houghton, Notts., Densill Lord Hollis; Gilbert and John,
    Earls of Clare, iii. 148. Sir William, ancestor of the Duke of
    Newcastle 147 _bis_
  Holrode, Eggerus de, ii. 426, 427
  Holwell, Rev. William of Menheneot, iii. 171 _bis_. His collection
    of pictures 171. His marriage and death 172. Rev. William of
    Thornberry, Glouc. and his works 171
  Holy hearth, iii. 90
  ―――― land, iv. 43
  ―――― Trinity churchyard, i. 134
  ―――― Trinity, knights of, i. 338
  ―――― war, ii. 177――iii. 129, 132――iv. 43
  ―――― well in Roach, iii. 393
  Holyhead, i. 295
  Holywell, i. 291. Description of 292
  Homer, iii. 417, 418, 420. Mr. Peters’s Vindication of 68. Holwell’s
    Beauties of 171. A curious translation from 418. Pope’s 420.
    Compared 171.――Macpherson’s, ii. 406
  Homer well, iv. 35
  Honey, Mr. iii. 20
  Honorius, Pope, iii. 284
  Hoo, Baron, i. 224
  ―――― of Hoo, William, i. 224
  Hooker, i 108, 325. Richard 283. Robert 162 _bis_.――Mr. ii. 157, 420
  ―――― Zachariah, of St. Michael Carhayes, iii. 203. His arms 203
  ―――― of Trelisick, in St. Ewe, William and Miss, ii. 279
  Hope, Mr. i. 321
  Hopton, Lord, i. 44. Sir Ralph 113.――King Charles’s general, ii. 343
   _bis_.――iii. 17, 183, 184. Lord, the royalist general 81.
    Surrendered to Fairfax with 5000 men 189.――Sir Ralph, iv. 13, 14
    _bis_. Lord 14. His ancestor 14
  ―――― in the Hole, co. Salop, given to the Norman hunter, whose
    posterity took the name, iv. 15
  Hoquart, a French naval commander, iii. 218
  Horace, translation of, iii. 218.――Farnaby’s, iv. 87
  Horatius, a Roman tragedy, iv. 97
  Hore, of Trenowth, in St. Ewan, ii. 335
  Horestone or Orestone, iv. 28
  Hornacott manor, iv. 39, 41. A free chapel there 39
  ―――― family, iv. 41
  Horsey, Joan and Sir John, i. 65
  Horsham, Sussex, iv. 87
  Horsley, i. 183 _ter._
  Horton, prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  Hosatus or Husey, Henry, iii. 206
  Hosea, reference to, i. 80
  Hosken, Rev. Mr. ii. 89
  Hoskin, i. 364. Jochebed 363.――Rev. Mr. ii. 149 _bis_, 150. Henry 8.
    Miss, of Looe 249. Mr. and his son, Rev. Mr. mistook Schist for gold
    ore 21. Family 8.――Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― of Gwithian family, and Rev. Richard, ii. 147
  ―――― of Hellanclose, i. 293. Joseph 293
  Hoskins, James, iii. 358.――Rev. Nicholas, of Boyton, and Rev.
    Nicholas of Whitstone, iv. 153. John, of East Looe, and his dau. 37
  Hospital of St. James and of St. John at Bridgewater, ii. 412; and
    of St. John Baptist, at Helston 136
  Houghter, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  House of Lords, iii. 405
  Houses, foundations of, discovered under sand, iii. 6
  Hoveden, Roger, ii. 60, 180. His Chronicle 310
  Howard, Elizabeth, and Sir John, ii. 181.――Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
    iii. 293――Sir Charles, iv. 41
  Howeis, ii. 159
  ―――― of Redruth, and Killiou, Edward, John, Reginald, Mr. arms, ii. 304
  Howell, i. 108.――Rev. Joshua, ii. 400. Mr. 142. Rev. Mr. universally
    esteemed 104.――David, iii. 337. Rev. Mr. of Pelynt 291.――Rev. Mr.
    iv. 29. Mr. 114
  Howlett, Sir Ralph, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Howse, Richard, ii. 189
  Hoya carnosa, iv. 182
  Hoyle, copper works at, iii. 343. Iron works 305. Trade of 343
  Hucarius, the Levite, ii. 62
  Huckmore, Miss, ii. 230
  Huddy, i. 243.――Family, iii. 355
  ―――― of Nethoway, i. 257
  Hudson, the botanist, ii. 331――iii. 173
  Hugh, St. history of, i. 414. Miracles done at his shrine 415
  Hugh, St. de Quedyock, parish and church, iii. 373
  Hughes, Rev. Mr. i. 258
  Huish, ii. 292
  Hull, ii. 76
  Hume, Lord, ii. 9
  Humphrey, i. 161
  Hungerford, Robert, Lord, ii. 397.――Elizabeth, Francis, Katharine,
    Mary, Sir Robert, and heiress, iii. 234. Family 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378 _bis_
  Hunkin, John, iii. 16 _bis_
  Hunt, George, i. 101
  Hunt of Lanhidrock, George, ii. 381. George 382, 387. His taste 382
  ―――― of Mellington, Cheshire, Thos. ii. 381
  Hunter, the Norman, his posterity called Hopton, iv. 15
  Huntingdon, ii. 76
  ―――― John Holland, Earl of, i. 341
  Huntingdonshire, i. 369
  Hurlers, i. 178, 179, 183 _bis_, 184 _bis_, 187――iii.
    45.――Descriptions of, i. 184, 196
  Hurling at St. Merryn, iii. 179
  Hurricane, November 1783, i. 318
  Hurris, iii. 202
  Hurston, i. 116
  Hussey, Richard, his Life, and Mary his widow, ii. 34. John 382,
    383. Peter 358.――Rev. John of Okehampton, Devon, iv. 90. Father of
    Richard 89. His death 90
  Hutton, George, iii. 144
  Hy or Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Hy-Conalls, county of, in Ireland, iii. 434
  Hyde, Thomas de la, i. 340.――Edward Earl of Clarendon, iii. 351.
    Advised the imprisonment of Sir Richard Grenville, and gives a very
    unamiable character of him, ii. 345
  Hydrangea hortensis, iv. 182
  Hydrock, St. ii. 383
  Hylesbery castle, iv. 228
  Hypericum monogynum, iv. 182
  Hythe, a cinque port, ii. 38
  Hywis family, ii. 400

  Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Iceland, i. 336
  Ictam island, ii. 4
  Ictis supposed to be St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 20
  Ida or Ide, St. iii. 334
  Idalberga, St. iii. 33
  Ide, St. manor of, ii. 256
  Ideless, de, family, ii. 316
  Igerne, Duchess of Cornwall, i. 327, 329, 330 _ter._, 331, 332
    _sex._
  Ilcombe, account of, ii. 346
  Ilfracombe, i. 131
  Ilia, an Irish saint, ii. 257
  Iliad, iii. 420
  Illigan, Illogan, Illugan or Illiggan parish, i. 160――ii. 380, 388,
    389 _bis_――iii. 145――iv. 128.――Living of, ii. 243――iii. 239
  Illogan parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 234. Lordship of Tyhiddy, Basset
    family 235. Angove family 236. Carne Bray, Carne Kye 237. By Tonkin,
    Tehidy, Carnekie tinwork Nance 238. Tehidy 239. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Illuggen, Tehidy 240. Menwinnion copper mine, and
    populousness of the parish, iron tram-road, commenced by Lord
    Dunstanville on the jubilee 241. Basset family 242. Memoir of Lord
    de Dunstanville 243. Nautical affairs after the seven years’ war
    246. French Revolution 247. Peerage conferred on Sir F. Basset, his
    private character 249. Parish, statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 250
  Illuggen, St. ii. 240
  Impropriation of benefices, the first in England, iii. 114. Present
    number 115
  Inceworth manor, account of, iii. 105
  Index to Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, iv. 381
  Index Rhetoricus and Oratoricus, iv. 87
  India, iii. 187, 188 _bis_, 218.――Mr. Cole distinguished as an
    engineer in, iv. 9
  ――――, East, college, iii. 95
  ――――, East company, iii. 188
  ―――― fleet, iii. 187. Ship 187
  Indian Queens, i. 227 _bis_
  Ingangén, St. village, ii. 385
  Ingham, John de, i. 246
  Ingulphus, Abbot of Croyland, i. 240
  Inis Alga, iv. 67
  Inis Cathaig, iii. 434
  Iniscaw island, by Leland, iv. 266
  Inispriven, by Leland, iv. 287
  Inkpen family, iii. 346
  Inlet, ii. 430
  Inney river, iv. 70
  Innis, account of, i. 396; or Enys, ii. 93
  Innocent 3rd, Pope, i. 110, 312――iv. 36
  ―――― 4th, i. 176
  ―――― 5th, Pope, i. 110
  Inns of court, ii. 71
  Inquisition, i. 312, 315. Establishment of 311
  Inquisition of Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln, and John de
    Pontifexia Bishop of Winchester, into the value of Cornish
    benefices, i. 16, 22, 32, 38, 42, 52, 60, 63, 107, 112, 115, 118,
    129, 135, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230, 236, 246, 253, 261,
    289, 294, 301, 304, 311, 316, 323, 344, 367, 377, 383, 386, 393,
    404, 407, 409, 413――ii. 36, 49, 59, 80, 86, 89, 92, 106, 118, 126,
    129, 141, 146, 151, 157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253,
    257, 273, 275, 282, 291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60,
    64, 75, 78, 101, 110, 118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 176, 182, 190,
    195, 198, 208, 222, 224, 237, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436,
    441, 448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 12, 19, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    70, 93, 99, 110, 116, 124, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 161
  Inquisition, Wolsey’s, i. 22, 28, 32, 38, 42, 52, 61, 63, 107, 112,
    118, 129, 133, 135, 153, 160, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230,
    236, 243, 246, 253, 261, 289, 294, 301, 304, 308, 311, 316, 323,
    344, 367, 378, 383, 386, 393, 404, 407, 410, 413――ii. 36, 51, 59,
    80, 86, 89, 90, 92, 106, 116, 118, 126, 130, 136, 141, 146, 151,
    157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253, 258, 273, 275, 282,
    291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60, 64, 75, 78, 101,
    118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195, 199, 208, 222,
    232, 237, 354, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 436, 441, 448, 462――iv. 1,
    7, 12, 19, 48, 50, 53, 61, 66, 71, 93, 97, 110, 116, 128, 131, 137,
    152, 155, 160, 164, 185
  ―――― post mortem, iv. 56
  Inscriptions made by Leland at St. Mawe’s castle, iv. 273
  Inspeximus, iv. 83
  Intrenchment at Trove, i. 143
  Intsworth, i. 36.――Manor, account of, iii. 251
  Inundations of sand, iii. 6
  Ipswich, ii. 76
  Ireland, I. 115, 295, 336, 373――iii. 277 _bis_, 290, 336, 342, 408,
    431, 433 _bis_, 434――iv. 173.――Kings of, i. 328.――St. Patrick, the
    Apostle of, ii. 65. Perkin Warbeck proclaimed Lord of 188. Cleared
    of serpents by St. Patrick 298. Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to
    people 342. Lord Robarts Lord Lieutenant of 379.――Apostle of, iii.
    364. Missionary saints of 7
  Irish channel, i. 60――iii. 254
  ―――― church, iii. 434
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― kings, ten maintained miraculously by St. Perran, iii. 313
  ―――― men, i. 295
  ―――― oak, St. Michael’s church built of, ii. 176
  ―――― saints, iii. 331
  ―――― sea, i. 230, 245, 289, 322, 382――ii. 48, 86, 145, 234, 257,
    282――iii. 11, 139, 175, 176, 237, 429――iv. 42, 52, 66, 164
  ―――― wars, iv. 75, 116
  Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, iv. 86
  Isaac, i. 325.――His Memorials of Exeter, ii. 189, 196――iv. 111
  Isabel, Princess, i. 130
  Isabella, Queen of Edward 2nd, ii. 142
  Isey, St. iii. 190
  Isidore, Cardinal, ii. 370
  Iske or Ex river, i. 342
  Isle of Wight, ii. 76
  Isleworth, poor of, iii. 153
  Issey or Issy, St. parish, i. 115, 212――iii. 334, 335
  ISSEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Mr. Tonkin’s
    character of Cornish attornies, the Warne suit, ii. 253. Guardian
    saint, St. Giggy’s Well, Halewyn, Cannall-Lidgye 254. Trevance,
    Trevorike 255. Carthew mine 256. By Editor, name of the church,
    impropriators, monuments, St. Ide manor, Blayble ibid. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 257
  Italian people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― romances, ii. 214
  Italy, i. 206――ii. 244, 369, 371 _bis_, 372, 375――iii. 121, 171,
    186, 187, 401――iv. 101――Thomas Paleolagus retires to, ii. 367, 368.
    Removes from 370
  Ithal, King of Gwent, i. 10
  Iva, Dinas, i. 412
  ―――― St. iii. 342
  Ive or Ivo, St. i. 151. History of 412
  Ive’s, St. bay, ii. 150――iii. 5, 339.――Its sand composed almost
    entirely of powdered shells, ii. 262
  ―――― St. borough, ii. 128――iv. 58.――Charters, extent of franchise,
    arms, form of writ, ii. 258. Sir F. Basset’s cup, and inscription
    upon 259, 271. John Payne mayor of 198.――Members of Parliament for,
    Mr. Borlase, iii. 51, 84. James Halse 91. William Noye 143, 152. Mr.
    Praed 9, 10
  ―――― St. lordship, iii. 46, 123
  ―――― St. parish, i. 344――ii. 215, 224, 229, 237, 286――iii. 5 _bis_,
    7, 173, 371, 435――iv. 52, 53 _bis_. By Leland 267.――Its living, i. 354
  IVE’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, ii. 257. Patron, incumbent, rector, land
    tax, former name of the town, Pendennis Island, road for ships,
    Ludduham manor, borough of St. Ive’s, its franchise, arms, form of
    writ 258. Chief inhabitants, first charter, Trenwith 259. By Tonkin,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, former state of
    the town 260. Old chapel, roadstead, fishing, chief inhabitants,
    custom house officers, Trenwith 261. By Editor, present importance
    of the borough, methods of fishing for pilchards ibid. Manner of
    preserving, and nature of the fish 263. Pier, Praed’s Act, mode of
    preserving fishing nets, nets introduced from Dungarvon 264.
    Singular custom, Rev. Mr. Toup 265. Mr. Knill 266. His monument 267.
    Transport from the West Indies driven into St. Ive’s 268. Stephens
    family 269. Effect of reform bill, salubrity of the town, plague of
    1647, escape of the Stephens family, fever of 1786, cup given by Sir
    Francis Basset, inscription upon it, arms of the town 271. Church,
    view of the town, parish feast, St. Eury, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 272
  ―――― St. town, i. 228, 403 _bis_, 412――iii. 6
  Ivonis, St. or St. John Baptist, i. 409

  Jack, Richard, family, ii. 279
  Jackman, Rev. William, ii. 31――Hugh, iii. 327
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177
  Jackson, musical composer, iii. 220
  ―――― of Truro, Jane and John, i. 204
  Jacob, i. 241
  ―――― St. ii. 232
  Jacobstow parish, ii. 86――iii. 275, 352, _bis_, 353――iv. 59, 124,
    125, 131, 136
  JACOBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Penfon, ii. 232. By
    Tonkin, patron saint, etymology ibid. By Editor, from Lysons,
    Southcott ibid. Penhallam, Berry Court, history of Mr. Degory Weare
    233. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 234
  Jago, John, family, i. 10.――John, ii. 136, 137. Rev. E. V. 376. Rev.
    William 136, 137. Family 5
  ―――― of Innis, Agnes and Jane, i. 399. John 397 _bis_, 398 _ter._,
    399 _bis_. Itai 397, 399 _bis_. Arms 397, 399. Etymology 397
  ―――― King, i. 397
  Jagoe, i. 416
  Jamaica, iii. 219 _bis_. Expedition to 86. Mr. Price settled there
    86. Sir Rose Price visited 87.――Sir William Trelawney, Governor of,
    iv. 37
  James, Henry, i. 277.――Thomas, ii. 160 _bis_――Pascoe, iii. 387. Dr.
    Thomas, his Bodleian Catalogue, and Introduction to Divinity 155
  ―――― of St. Columb, Anne and Mr. iii. 445
  ―――― of St. Keverne, W. iv. 33
  ―――― King, ii. 10. His reign and death 100
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 30, 56 _bis_, 65, 66, 93, 95, 155, 213, 269,
    277, 294, 382――iii. 75, 81, 83, 92, 104 _bis_, 132, 134, 142, 163
    _bis_, 183, 184, 212, 239, 281, 303, 314, 318, 337, 350, 449,
    463――iv. 2, 34, 67, 87, 88, 140, 161
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 22, 112, 227, 258――iii. 143, 201, 237, 238, 268, 297,
    298 _ter._――iv. 72, 85.――Distich upon, i. 105
  ―――― 4th, King of Scotland, ii. 186
  ―――― St. the Apostle, ii. 107, 338――iii. 161. His day 161, 309.
    Festival 439. Images of 309
  ―――― St. chapel of, iii. 309
  ―――― St. church at Compostella, ii. 107
  ―――― St. minor church, i. 299, 300
  ―――― St. hospital at Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. hospital, Westminster, ii. 148, 149
  ―――― St. manor, Westminster, ii. 148. How obtained 145. Contradicted
    147. Exchanged for Conerton 140
  ―――― St. palace, Westminster, ii. 149
  ―――― St. priory, Bristol, i. 288――ii. 147, 148
  Jane, Nicholas, i. 215.――Thomas, ii. 16. Dr. William, Rev. Mr.
    Rector of Iron Acton, and Mr. schoolmaster, Truro 17.――Rev. Joseph
    of Truro, iv. 76. Mr. master of Truro school, was a native of
    Leskeard; Dr. William, Dean of Gloucester, his declaration 85
    Epigrams on, and Rev. J. son of the master 86
  J’Ans, Wrey, ii. 416
  Jansen, Cornelius, a picture by, iii. 156
  Janus, image of, iii. 144
  Jasminus revolutum, iv. 182
  Jeffery, Rev. George, of Linkinhorne, iii. 44
  Jeffries, Henry, i. 272. Family 274
  Jeffry, John, i. 10
  Jenkin, Peter, i. 216.――Henry and Perkin, iii. 387. Mr. 91. Family 83
  Jenkins, Grace, i. 363.――Rev. David, ii. 115. Mary 308. Mr. 124
  Jenkyn, James, i. 223
  ―――― of Trekyning, i. 223. Anne and James 262. Peter 223.――Family,
    iv. 139
  Jennings, i. 36
  Jerusalem, i. 307, 382, 411――ii. 414
  ―――― Knights of St. John of, ii. 180
  Jesuit confessor to Louis 14th, ii. 407
  ―――― missionaries, supposed to know Pope Gregory’s letter to St.
    Mellitus, ii. 290
  Jesuits, a college of, iv. 86
  Jesus chapel, St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  Jew, Cornish for, ii. 200
  ―――― family, iii. 270
  Jews, their cruelty and consequent persecution in England, i. 414
  Jews’ houses, ii. 215
  Jewyn, John, i. 83
  Job, Editor’s remarks upon the book of, iii. 69
  John or Ivan, i. 2
  ―――― William, i. 277.――George, ii. 124.――Rev. Ralph, iii. 326.
    Family 94
  ―――― of Gaunt, iii. 65
  ―――― of Rosemorron and Penzance, George, iv. 166
  John, King, ii. 118, 130, 158, 249, 310, 423, 426――iii. 169,
    433――iv. 71 _bis_, 144.――Founder of Beaulieu Abbey, with his
    reasons, ii. 327.――Made Truro a coinage town, iv. 73. Built the
    coinage hall there 72.――Prince, afterwards king, ii. 180. His
    treason, possessed of several castles, pursued, fled, deprived of
    bis estates, submitted, was pardoned 179
  John, King of France, ii. 39
  ―――― a monk of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  ―――― St. the Baptist, iii. 316.――St. Andrew and St. Peter his
    disciples, iv. 100. Pointed out Jesus to them 101
  ―――― St. the Evangelist, ii. 64――iv. 165.――His emblem, an eagle, ii.
    363.――His gospel, iii. 408
  ―――― St. cognizance of the order of, ii. 163.――Knights of, i.
    296――ii. 180――iii. 78, 80
  John’s, St. college, Oxford, ii. 407
  ―――― St. hospital, Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Jerusalem, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital in London, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Sithney, ii. 157――iii. 441 _bis_.
    Account of 441. Little known of, Leland’s account of, site pointed
    out by a stone 446
  ―――― St. parish, i. 32――iii. 101, 374
  JOHN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, ii.
    250. Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax.
    By Tonkin, manor of Intsworth 251. By Editor, Hals’s history of the
    Evangelists, real and legendary ibid. Tregenhawke manor by Lysons,
    patron, excavation in a cliff, church, statistics, rectors, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 252
  ―――― St. street, London, i. 411
  Johns, Henry, i. 273.――Stephen, ii. 55
  ―――― of Trewince, Stephen, ii. 57
  Johnson, Richard, i. 307.――Dr. iii. 49.――His correspondence with
    Macpherson, ii. 406.――Rev. W. M. of Perran Uthno, iii. 312. Mr. of
    St. Paul’s Churchyard 34
  Jolliffe, John, iv. 60
  Jone, i. 2
  Jones, Rev. Cadwallader, ii. 415. Edward, his Relics of the Welsh
    Bards 166.――Henry, iii. 429. Judge 144
  Jones of Wales, i. 416
  Jonson, Ben, ii. 22. His lines to Charles 1st, iii. 146
  Jope, Rev. J. i. 413――ii. 272
  Jordan of Dundagell, i. 331, 332
  Joseph, Michael, i. 86 _bis_.――iii. 388. Hanged, i. 87
  ―――― of Arimathea, St. iii. 262
  Jowle, i. 23
  Jubilee of 1809, ii. 241
  Julette, St. iv. 112
  Julian, St. iii. 55
  Juliana, i. 2
  Juliet, St. ii. 273. Account of 274
  Juliot, St. parish, ii. 86――iii. 232, 275
  Julius, St. Pope and Confessor, ii. 273, 274
  ―――― Cæsar, iii. 79――iv. 169
  Julyot, St. chapel, ii. 274 _bis_
  JULYOT, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, ii. 273. By Tonkin,
    patrons, saint 273. By Editor, saint from Whitaker ibid. Two St.
    Julyots, the present church formerly only a chapel, afterwards a
    parochial curacy, legend of the saint, her day, Rawle family,
    patrons of the benefice, statistics 274. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 275
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 274
  Juncus, St. not in the Roman Calendar, iii. 292
  Junius, letters of, ii. 245
  Jupiter, i. 295.――Ammon, ii. 297
  ――――’s thunderbolt, ii. 132
  Just, St. Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 279, 282. Account of 287
  ―――― St. Archbishop of Lyons, life of, ii. 279. His day 279, 280
  ―――― St. parish, i. 26――ii. 2, 50 _bis_, 265, 272――iii. 51, 242, 425
    _bis_, 428, 429――iv. 117.――Dr. Borlase, Vicar of, iii. 51
  JUST, ST. parish, near Penzance, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    saint, ancient state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriator, land tax, etymology, Pendeyn, Bray, ii. 282. Chapel
    Carne Bray, view from, greatness of the Bray family 283. St. Ewny’s
    chapel, table of the seven kings 284. By Tonkin, Mayne Scriffer. By
    Editor, Pendeen ibid. Excavation near, Cove, Botallock, mines at
    285. Busvargus, impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Rev. J.
    Smyth the curate 286. Parish feast, history of St. Just 287.
    Celebration of birthdays 288. Letter from Pope Gregory to St.
    Mellitus 289. Statistics, vicar, patron, name, Geology by Dr. Boase
    290. Botallock mine, parish affords most specimens of British
    minerals, and abounds in interesting objects 291
  Just in Roseland, ii. 228.――Curacy, iii. 67
  JUST, ST. in Roseland parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient state, value of benefice, endowment, patron, ii. 275.
    Incumbent, land tax, borough of St. Mawe’s, courts leet, lords of
    the manor, two members, market, fair, arms, form of writ, castle,
    ii. 276. Emoluments of its officers, history of its governors 277.
    Lines on Capt. Rouse, emoluments of the officers at Pendennis castle
    278. By Tonkin, patron of living ibid. Treveres, Rosecossa,
    Tolcarne, by Editor, saint, comments on his history, his day 279.
    St. Mawe, his life, the castle, tradition of Henry VIII. Franchise
    conferred by Elizabeth, invariably a close borough till the Reform
    Bill 1832, 280. Corrack road, Leland’s inscription on the castle
    walls, advowson, incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 281
  Just, St. Pool, ii. 281
  Just, St. or Justinian by Leland, iv. 285
  Justicia adatota, iv. 182
  Justinian, Emperor, ii. 37
  Justus, St. Bishop of Rochester, iii. 284
  Jutsworth, i. 203
  Juvenal, iv. 87.――Sentiment of, iii. 273

  Kaine or Kayne, St. parish, iii. 13, 245
  Kainsham, ii. 292
  Kalerso, manor of, in Hilary and Sithney, iii. 359
  Kambton, now Camelford, ii. 402
  Kanane or Lelant, i. 2
  Karentocus, St. church, iv. 112
  Karn Boscawen, i. 141
  Karnbree castle, iv. 228
  Karnedon, ii. 427
  Katherine, Princess, daughter of Edward 4th, i. 64
  ―――― St. i. 157
  Kaye, Rev. Sir Richard, Dean of Lincoln, ii. 286
  Kea parish, iii. 222; or St Kea. Ferry to 212.――ii. 315, 357
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His history 306
  Keate, i. 405. Capt. Ralph 216. Etymology 224
  ―――― of Bosworgy, i. 224. Sir Jonathan, Capt. Ralph, and arms ibid.
  Kebius, St. honoured in his own country, ii. 338
  Keckewich or Keckewitch of Catchfrench, George, ii. 68 _bis_. John
    68. Arms, ib.――iii. 169
  ―――― of Essex, ii. 68――iii. 169
  Keckwitch of Tregleale, and arms, i. 372
  ―――― of Trehawke, i. 372. _See Kekewich_
  Keen, iii. 82. John 395
  ―――― of Roach, i. 234
  Keeper, Lord, ii. 52
  Kegwin family, iii. 216
  ――――of Newlyn, i. 148
  Keigwin, John, i. 109
  ―――― or Keigwyn of Mousehole, James, iii. 444. Jenken, killed by the
    Spaniards, the fatal ball preserved 287. John 86. John, his works
    288. Parthenia 86. Family 90, 288, 328. Estates sold 288
  Keir, Mr. ii. 219
  Kekewich, i. 131.――Mr. iii. 172. Mr. M. P. 19, 20.――Samuel, iv. 97
  ―――― of Hall, Mr. Peter, and arms, ii. 410
  ―――― of Trehawke, Peter, iii. 169. Miss 237
  Kelland Lands, ii. 294
  ―――― of Peynsford, Devon, ii. 385
  Kellaton parish, i. 153――iii. 161
  Kellaway of Egge, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  KELLINGTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor and borough, court
    leet, members to parliament, ii. 309. Arms, market, and fairs, form
    of writ, Hengiston Downs, battle at, tin in, Bray family 310.
    Creation of a knight banneret. By Tonkin, saint, etymology 311. By
    Editor, saint, life of St. Nicholas 312. Proprietors of the manor,
    legal mistake of the Earl of Orford 313. Statistics, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 314
  Kellio, i. 54 _bis_. Richard 54
  Kelliow, in Cornelly, iii. 361
  ―――― John, ii. 398.――Richard, iii. 41
  ―――― of Landlake, Christopher, and his arms, ii. 399
  Kelly, i. 383
  ―――― of Trewint, Thomas, iii. 170
  Kellyfreth, ii. 304
  Kellygreen manor, iv. 97
  Kellyland, account of, ii. 230, 231
  Kellyow, i. 319. Arms 320
  ―――― of Rosillian, i. 53
  Kellysberye castle, iv. 229
  Kelsey, i. 292, 293
  Kemell of Kemell, Elizabeth, Pearce, Pierce, and arms, i. 265
  Kempe, i. 8, 20――ii. 54, 58. Anna Coryton and Admiral Arthur 58.
    Rev. John, vicar of Fowey 48. Nicholas 54. Sir William 58. Mr. 97.
    Arms 54.――Arthur, and Rev. Charles T. of St. Michael Carhayes, iii.
    207. Family 75.――Robert, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carclew, Samuel, ii. 57
  ―――― of Chelsea, Nicholas, ii. 58
  ―――― of Lavethan in Blissland, Humphrey, ii. 56. Richard 58
  ―――― of Newington, Surrey, John, ii. 58
  ―――― of Olantigh in Wye, Kent, family, ii. 58
  ―――― of Penryn, James, i. 17――James and James, iii. 76. Jane 229.
    John 76. Samuel 225 _bis_, 228. Built a house at Cartlew 225, 228.
    Miss 74
  ―――― of Roseland, Miss, ii. 307
  ―――― of Rosteage, or Rosteague, Nicholas, ii. 58――iii. 76
  ―――― of Tregony, Richard, iv. 118
  Kempethorne, family monuments, iii. 255. Name 256
  ―――― of Tonacombe, family, iii. 255
  Kempton, ii. 81
  Ken, Thomas, Bishop of Bath and Wells, iii. 296, 299
  Kendall, i. 211.――Rev. Nicholas, ii. 393. Archdeacon Nicholas 391.
    Rev. Mr. 59. Monuments 391.――Charles, M.D. iii. 41. His daughter 42.
    Family monuments 253.――Rev. Mr. of Talland, iv. 38. Family 38
  ―――― of Killigarth, Archdeacon, iii. 41, 437
  ―――― of Medroff, Miss, ii. 89
  ―――― of Middlesex, Colonel James and his son, Thomas, and
    Archdeacon, iv. 23. Family 23
  ―――― of Pelyn, i. 205 _bis_. Rev. Nicholas 352.――Walter, ii.
    391.――Jane and Walter, iii. 186
  ―――― of Treworgye, i. 244, 318 _bis_, 319. John and Richard 318.
    Arms 319
  Kendred, i. 200
  Kenegie, account of by Editor, ii. 123, 124. Etymology 124
  Kenn, deanery of in Devon, iii. 372
  Kenna, St. ii. 207――iii. 120. A monk 206. She imparted virtue to St.
    Michael’s chair 206. To her well near Liskeard, her history,
    converted vipers into ammonites 207
  ――――’s, St. well, ii. 207
  Kennal manor, iv. 3
  Kenneggy, account of, by Hals, ii. 121, 122
  Kenrick cove, ii. 117, 331 _bis_
  Kensham family, ii. 320
  Kent county, i. 259――ii. 38――iii. 10, 284.――Coast of, iv.
    169.――People brave, i. 88. Rebels enter 87.――Lands drowned in, iii.
    310. Weald of 10
  ―――― Earl of, i. 87.――Hugo de Burgh, ii. 428.――Godwyn, iii. 310.
    Hubert de Burgh 349. Thomas Holland 27
  ―――― Ethelbert, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Nicholas, i. 12. Thomas 260.――John, killed by a thunderbolt,
    ii. 132
  Kentigern, St. i. 306
  Kenwen, Kenwin, or Kenwyn parish, iv. 70, 75, 79, 80, 92 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80. Has a church of its own 76
  Kenwin parish, iii. 313. Three barrows and four barrows in 322
  Kenwyn church, iii. 367――iv. 76, 77, 80
  ―――― parish, i. 177, 202――ii. 298, 299, 302
  KENWYN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, Edles, St. Clare’s well, ii. 315.
    Tregavethan 316. By Tonkin, Tregarvethan ibid. Three barrows,
    Roseworth 317. By Editor, includes old Truro, nature of soil,
    Calenick and Cavedras smelting houses ibid. Manor of Newham,
    Bosvigo, Comprigney, church conspicuous and commanding a fine view,
    bells, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 318
  Kenyon, i. 391
  Keppell, Admiral, court martial upon, ii. 246. Bishop of Exeter 224
  Kerantakers, St. i. 249
  Kerhender, i. 2
  Keri, i. 2
  Kerrier hundred, i. 32, 118, 135, 236, 301――ii. 358――iii. 59, 74
    _bis_, 75 _bis_, 110, 111, 124, 224, 228, 257, 416, 419, 421, 441,
    442 _quat._――iv. 1, 2, 5, 377. _See Kerryer_
  ―――― and Helston hundred, i. 38
  Kerrocus, St. iv. 112
  Kerryer hundred, ii. 1, 80 _bis_, 92, 116 _bis_, 126, 129 _bis_, 136
    _bis_, 155 _bis_, 319. Etymology of 320
  ―――― manor and stannaries, ii. 155
  Kerthen, i. 266 _bis_
  Kestell, i. 370――iii. 110, 113.――Account of, i. 375――iii. 111
  ―――― John, iii. 112. Miss 76. Mr. and two daughters 112. Family 111,
    113. Arms 112, 113.――Edward, iv. 77
  ―――― of Kestell, i. 370. James and John 371, 375. Arms 371, 374.
    Crest 375
  ―――― of Manacow, i. 371
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 371 _bis_. Thomas 375
  ―――― of Wollas, i. 419
  ―――― of Wartha, i. 419
  ―――― river, i. 371
  Kestvaen found near Pelynt, iv. 32
  Keverines, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Keverne, St. visits St. Perran, ii. 324
  ―――― church, its lofty situation, spire destroyed by lightning, ii. 325
  ―――― parish, ii. 250――iii. 332, 419
  KEVERNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, remarkable
    places, Treleage, ii. 319. Treland, Condura, and Tregarne manors,
    Lanarth, singular shipwreck 320. Treatment of the wrecked by the
    French 323. Arrival of a boat from Ireland 324. By Editor, St.
    Keverne, numerous coves, Coverack, Porthonstock, Porthalla, shoal
    of pilchards 324. Situation of church, spire destroyed by
    lightning during divine service, monuments, sarcophagus to the
    memory of Major Cavendish and his companions 325. Supposed cause
    of their wreck, tithes, Kilter 326. Lanarth, former impropriation,
    property of Beaulieu abbey at its dissolution, King John’s charter
    to it 327. With translation 328. Afforded sanctuary to Queen
    Margaret, and to Perkin Warbeck, incumbent of this parish 329.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, geological interest of the
    Lizard, fragmentary rock near Bostowda 330. Cliffs bold, beautiful
    heath in the serpentine formation 331
  Keveryn, St. by Leland, iv. 288
  Kevorall, iii. 119
  Kevorne, St. i. 39――iii. 124
  ―――― parish, iii. 128 _bis_, 416, 421
  Kew, St. his history by Tonkin, ii. 337
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― or Kewe, St. parish, i. 168, 173, 382――iii. 64, 74, 240――iv.
    42, 44, 93, 94, 95 _ter._
  KEW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax,
    chief places, Lanew, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Bokelly, Trearike
    335. Dower bank, Tregeare, Penpons, Chappell Amble, Middle Amble
    336. By Tonkin, patron saint, impropriator 337. Incumbent, ancient
    name 338. By Editor, St. Kew or Kebius, parish fertile, situation of
    church, Skinden, Trewane ibid. Pedigree of Nicholls, impropriation
    of tithes, advowson, monuments in church, Editor the descendant of
    Attorney-General Noye, statistics, incumbent 339. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 340
  Key cross, ii. 300
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 305
  ―――― or Keye parish, i. 76, 241――ii. 129
  KEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 298.
    Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbents, land tax, chief
    places, Nansavallan 299. Guddarne, strange story of Mr. Bauden,
    Kelleho, Trelogas 300. Burrow belles, and three other burrows,
    opened, and stone tomb found within, Curlyghon 301. By Tonkin,
    etymology, church a daughter to Kenwyn, patron, incumbents, manor of
    Blanchland, mines upon, lawsuit about 302. Guddern, Nansavallan,
    Kelliou 303. Trevoster, Kellyfreth, Chasewater 304. Manor of Key
    305. By Editor, saint, his boat, Nansavallon ibid. Farm improved,
    Killiow, removal of church 306. Mr. Reginald Haweis, curious
    coincidence 307. Trelease, Carlian the birth-place of Sir Tristrem,
    Chasewater, its chapel, statistics 308. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Baldue mine 309
  Keyewis, ii. 315
  Keyn, or Keyne, St. i. 316. British, daughter of Braghan King of
    Wales, account of by Hals, ii. 292. By Tonkin 293. Keyne, Saxon,
    account of by Hals 292. By Tonkin 293. Both may be the same 294
  KEYNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, ii. 291. Land tax, saint, her history,
    another St. Keyne, Copleston family 292. By Tonkin, the two saints
    293. By Editor, ancient name from Lysons, proprietors of the manor,
    St. Keyne’s well, lines on, from Carew 294. Remarks by Tonkin,
    Bond’s account of 295. Southey’s lines upon 296. The petrified
    serpents are Cornua Ammonis 297. St. Hilda and St. Patrick’s
    miracles, the snakes had no heads, St. Brechan, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 298
  Keyne’s, St. well, account of by Carew, and verses on, ii. 294. By
    Tonkin and Bond 295. Southey’s verses on 296
  Keynesham, ii. 293. Cornua Ammonis abundant in 297
  Keynock castle, iv. 228
  Khalcondylas’s account of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Kiaran, or Kenerin, St., (Perran) iii. 331
  Kidlacton, ii. 427 _bis_
  Kieran, Bishop, ii. 319
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 319
  Kigan, iv. 76
  Kilcoid lands, ii. 394
  Kildare, Earls of, i. 34. Charles, Earl of 297
  Kilgal family, iv. 36
  Kilgather, ii. 394
  ―――― parish, ii. 398
  Kilkhampton manor, possessed by the Grenvilles nearly from the
    Conquest, ii. 343
  ―――― parish, ii. 413――iii. 118, 254, 256, 349, 351――iv. 15, 19
  KILKHAMPTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Stowe, ii. 340. Grenville
    family, erection of Bideford bridge, loss of the Mary Rose frigate
    341. The Grenvills 342. Battle of Lansdowne, Orcott. By Editor,
    account of the Grenville family 343. Gallant encounter of Sir
    Richard Grenville with the Spaniards of Terceira 344. Mansion at
    Stowe, Ilcombe 346. Alderscombe, Elmsworthy, monuments in the
    church, description of one to Sir Beville Grenville 347. Patron of
    the living, character of Sir Beville 348. His letter to Sir John
    Trelawney 349. Family continued 350. Dispersion of the materials of
    Stowe, Alderscombe 351. Hervey’s Meditations composed here,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 352. Extracts from
    the register 348
  Killaloe, diocese of, iii. 434
  Killas hills, iii. 11
  Killaton parish, ii. 229
  Killcoid, i. 264
  Killiganoon, etymology and history of, ii. 34
  Killigarth, i. 262 _bis_, 264.――Miss, ii. 398
  Killignock, or Checkenock, iv. 139
  ―――― Thomas and his daughter, family, iv. 139
  Killigrew barton, i. 399 _quat._, 403, 411. Account of 398
  ―――― i. 136. John 93. Sir John 136. Sir Peter 137 _bis_. Sir William
    65. Monuments 136――ii. 5, 372, 376. Family descended from Richard
    King of the Romans 8. Lords of Pendennis castle 17. Slighted by Hals
    21. Represented by Lord Wodehouse 23. Founded the hospital of St.
    John at Helston 163. Ann 22. George 5 _bis_. Killed 5. Henry 5, 22.
    Sir Henry 7 _bis_, 15, 372, 373 _bis_, 376. Obtained from the Bishop
    of Exeter, the manor of Kirton, now gone from the name 7. His
    marriage 15. Appointed ambassador to Henry 4th of France, his wife’s
    Latin letter to her sister Lady Cecil 16. His daughter married to
    Sir Jonathan Trelawney 16. Ambassador to Venice or Genoa 372. Jane,
    widow of Sir John, murders two Spanish merchants, tried and
    convicted, pardoned, but her accomplices sentenced to death 6. Gave
    a silver cup to the mayor of Penryn 7, 97. Her story cannot be true
    21. John 5. Built the town of Falmouth 8. Opposed by the
    neighbouring boroughs 9. Proceeded with the King’s approbation 10.
    Sir John 5, 7. Jane his widow 6. Fired his own house 17. Maugan 5.
    Peter 5. Sir Peter 5 _ter._, 6, 147. Built a church at Falmouth 3.
    Annexed the advowson to his manor of Arwinick, buried in the
    chancel, gave a house and garden to the rector, and a pulpit cloth
    to the church 4. Procured a charter of incorporation for the borough
    8. Thomas, jester to Charles 2nd 14. His reply to Lewis 14th,
    Reproof of Charles’ extravagance turned against William 3rd, and his
    court 15. Degraded by common report, his history from the
    Biographical Dictionary 21. Son of Sir Robert 21. An author, buried
    in Westminster Abbey, the reverse of Cowley, epigram upon both 22.
    William 23. Sir William, Bart., wasted his estate 5. Lady 373. Mr.
    20. Arms 7.――Sir Henry and his daughter, iii. 169. M. L. and Sir
    Peter 228. Sir William 75. Mr. founder of St. John’s Hospital,
    Sithney, family 75 _bis_
  Killigrew, of Arwinick, Jane Lady, ii. 97.――George, iii. 417. Sir
    Peter 417 _bis_. Miss 147
  ―――― of Killigrew, i. 398. Sir John 398, 399
  Killington church, ii. 230
  ―――― parish, iv. 6, 7
  Killingworth, iv. 24
  Killiton borough, court leet, members of parliament, and mode of
    election, ii. 309. Election of mayor, arms, market and fairs, form
    of writ. Sir Edward Bray lived at 310
  Killrington, Alice and Walter, i. 262
  Killter of Kevorne killed a royal commissioner, ii. 192
  Killygarth, ii. 181.――Barton, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 38
  ―――― manor, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 36, 38
  Killygrew, Sir Peter, Bart., iv. 72. Mr. 22
  Killyow, account of, by Hals, ii. 300. By Tonkin 303. By Editor 305
  ―――― of Killyow, ii. 303
  ―――― of Lanleke, ii. 303
  ―――― of Rosiline, ii. 303
  Killyquite. _See Colquite_
  Kilmarth, iv. 109
  Kilmenawth or Kilmenorth, iv. 36
  Kilminarth, celt found at, iv. 33
  ―――― woods, iv. 29
  Kilter, account of, ii. 326
  ―――― Mr. concerned in Arundell’s rebellion, ii. 326
  Kilwarby, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 83
  Kilwarth hill, description of, i. 189. Ascent to the highest points
    190, 191. Etymology 193
  Kilworthy near Tavistock, ii. 230
  Kinance cove, iii. 259, 260. Its beauty 259
  King, the, iii. 223
  ―――― or Kings of England, i. 139.――ii. 59, 272. Annals of 60
  ―――― Charles 2nd, at Boconnoc, i. 113, 114 _ter._ His speech to Sir
    F. Basset 114
  ―――― George packet, iii. 229
  King, i. 270, 413. Elizabeth 222. Oliver and arms 204.――Degory, ii.
    253, 254. Edward, his Munimenta Antiqua, and hypotheses of the
    extreme antiquity of Lanceston Castle 423 _bis_, 424. Philip 423.
    Mr. 377. Family 217.――Lord Chanceller, iii. 51
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 204. Henry ibid.
  King’s army, iv. 186
  ―――― books, i. 320――ii. 123, 146, 356, 391, 394 _bis_, 398, 413,
    417――iii. 14, 22, 24, 37, 40, 44, 46, 56, 116, 126, 182, 188, 224,
    255, 257, 260, 267, 276, 284, 291, 306, 313, 334, 339, 345, 347,
    349, 352, 372, 374, 380, 396, 405, 419, 423, 426, 431, 437, 443, 450
    _bis_, 457 _bis_――iv. 7, 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 75, 95, 102, 112,
    117, 118, 129, 140, 153, 157, 162
  King’s College, Cambridge, i. 146――ii. 153, 209, 244
  ―――― road, ii. 1. In Falmouth harbour 275, 281
  Kingdon, Rev. T. H. i. 135.――Robert, ii. 416.――G. B. iii. 351. Rev.
    John of Marham church 117 _bis_.――G. B. character of, iv. 16. Rev.
    John of Whitstone 154
  Kingfisher ship, iii. 187
  Kingills, King of the West Saxons, ii. 284
  Kingston, iii. 108
  ―――― Sir Anthony, i. 88.――Provost marshal, ii. 197. Taxed with
    extreme cruelty 198
  Kirkham, i. 260. Mrs. Damaris 376
  Kirton, Bishop of, i. 116――iii. 1.――Levignus, ii. 60. Lurginus 62
  ―――― bishopric, i. 231――ii. 61 _bis_, 299
  ―――― see of, iii. 456
  ―――― manor alienated from the see of Exeter, ii. 7
  Kist Vaen, iii. 319
  Kit or Kitt hill, i. 122, 159――ii. 314
  Kitson, Rev. Walter, i. 409
  Kivell, Ann, iii. 77.――Thomas, ii. 241
  Knava, Ralph, i. 121. Etymology 122
  ―――― of Godolphin, John, i. 122
  Kneighton’s Kieve, i. 343
  Knicker, i. 317
  Knight, John, iii. 319, 327
  ―――― of Gasfield Hall, Essex, iii. 192
  Knights banneret, mode of creation of, ii. 311
  ―――― hospitallers, iv. 48, 50.――Account of, i. 410
  ―――― of the Round Table, i. 339 _bis_. Instituted 336
  ―――― Templars, iii. 83. Of Jerusalem, iv. 48 _bis_, 49
  Knighton, St. iv. 155
  Knill, John, eccentric, ii. 128. His life and mission to the West
    Indies 266. Privateering, humane, built a pyramid for his own
    burial, but was buried at St. Andrew’s, Holborn 267. His
    character 268
  Kniverton of Treadreath in Lelant, iv. 4
  Kniveton, Thomas, iii. 6
  Knollys, Sir Robert, a valiant commander under the Black Prince, ii. 176
  Kradock ap Ynir, King, iv. 44
  Kurie, St. Eleeeson, i. 315
  Kusterus’ Suidas, ii. 266
  Kynans cove, beauty of its rocks and caverns, and its rare plants,
    ii. 360
  Kynock castle, i. 77, 88, 94
  Kyvere Ankou, i. 9

  Laa, i. 44. Anecdote of Mr. and Mrs. ib.
  Lacy, Walter de, iii. 405
  Ladoca, St. history of, ii. 353
  Ladock manor, ii. 354
  ―――― parish, i. 386――iii. 354, 450.――Rector of, Mr. Pooley, ii. 34
  LADOCK parish, or Lassick, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, ii. 352. Boundaries, name, value of benefice, patrons,
    incumbent, manor of Nanreath, Hay, Boswaydel, Bedoke or Bessake 353.
    By Editor, value of benefice, village of Bedock, Pitt property,
    Trethurfe, Nansaugh, Hay, manor of Bessake, Rev. John Eliot 354.
    Beautiful vale, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 355. Stream
    tin and gold 356
  ―――― valley, iii. 189
  Lady chapel, ii. 201
  Lahe, i. 144
  ―――― Rev. John, Rector of Lanivet, character and memoir of, ii. 388.
    William lost at sea, his brother died of consumption 389.――John
    Bishop of Chichester, iii. 295. One of the seven 299
  Lalant or Kananc, i. 2
  Lamana chapel, iii. 245
  La Mayne, free chapel of, iv. 26
  Lamb, two brothers made a great fortune, ii. 47
  Lambert, William, Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, the last Prior, ii.
    209.――Elizabeth, iii. 86
  Lambessa, in St. Clement’s, family seat of the Footes, iv. 90
  Lambesso, i. 207. Account of 203
  Lambeth palace, iii. 71, 73. Archbishop’s chapel at 296
  Lambourn manor, i. 10――iii. 318 _bis_, 325. Account of 316, 319
  Lambourne town, iii. 318 _bis_, 319, 321, 324
  Lambrigan, iii. 314, 319, 324. Or Lambourne Wigan, account of 314
    Lower town of 315
  Lambron of Lambourn, Amara, iii. 317. John 316 _bis_. Sir John and
    Sir John 316. Sir John 320. William 316. Family 316, 317 _bis_. Arms 316
  Lamburn, Sir William, i. 213.――Family, ii. 80
  Lamburne, heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Lamburne, i. 120
  ―――― parish in Peran, iii. 317
  Lamelin of Lamelin family, Margery, Thomas, arms, ii. 411
  Lamellin manor, ii. 411――iii. 20.――Account of, ii. 411
  Lamellyn, ii. 89――iii. 169
  Lametton, ancient name of St. Keyne parish, ii. 294
  ―――― manor, ii. 294
  Lammana, a cell for Benedictine Monks at, its chapel remains,
    described, iv. 25
  ―――― island, iv. 26
  Lamoran manor, ii. 356. Account of 357
  ―――― or Lammoran parish, iii. 180, 207, 222. Or Lamorran, i. 242
  LAMORAN parish, Hals’s Manuscript by Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, saint, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Lamoran, ii. 356. By Editor, value ibid. Two villages, Tregenna,
    Lamoran manor, advowson, situation of church, monuments, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, rector, patron 357
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Lamorrick village, ii. 385
  Lampeer, i. 204
  ―――― of Truro, his unfortunate end, ii. 30
  Lampen, i. 205.――Rev. Robert, iii. 370
  Lamplugh, Archbishop of York, iii. 296, 297
  Lalant, by Leland, iv. 285
  Lanante, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lanarth, account of, by Hals, ii. 320. By Editor 327
  Lanbaddern, heir of, iii. 140
  Lancar, i. 83
  Lancashire, ii. 112
  Lancaster castle, ii. 179, 257
  ―――― John, Duke of, ii. 259
  ―――― Earl of, Thomas, ii. 363.――Edmund, iii. 19
  ―――― house of, ii. 108, 185, 186
  Lance, i. 394, 395. Richard 205
  ―――― of Penare, i. 204
  Lancells barton, ii. 415
  ―――― house, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 414
  ―――― parish, or Launcells, iii. 111, 118
  LANCELLS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, patron, value, ii. 413. Incumbent, earlier value,
    appropriation, Lancells manor 414. By Editor, cell of Austin canons,
    Hartland abbey, descent of property in the parish by Lysons 415.
    Manor of Norton Rolle, of Yellow Leigh, of Thorlibeer, of
    Mitchell-Morton, Tre Yeo, situation of the church, Chamond monument,
    Lancell’s house, destroyed, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 49
  Lanceston, or Launceston, ii. 87, 98, 377, 378, 430 _bis_. The
    Royalists march into Somersetshire from 343.――Charles 1st. advanced
    to, iv. 185
  ―――― assizes, ii. 333. Trials at 52, 331, 336
  ―――― castle, description of, ii. 421, 423――iv. 229.――Its extreme
    antiquity, ii. 423
  ―――― Court of Common Pleas at, ii. 53
  ―――― domui, i. 112
  ―――― mayor of, his feudal service, ii. 229
  ―――― parish church, ii. 420
  ―――― priory, ii. 377. Account of 425. Its church and monuments, its
    destruction 425. Loss of archives and charters 426. Revenues 428,
    429. Horton and Stephan, priors of 419
  Lancherit, iii. 139
  Lancorla, iv. 138 _bis_
  Landaff, Bishops of, St. Theliaus, i. 321. St. Dubritius and their
    Constat 382
  ―――― cathedral, built by St. German, ii. 65
  ―――― church of, ii. 172
  Landawidnick, ii. 116
  Landegey or Landegge parish, the same as Key, ii. 299, 305, 315
  Landedy and Lanner in St. Key, iii. 359
  Lander, the two African travellers, are from Truro, their discovery
    of the course of the Niger, monument erecting to, iv. 90
  Landeveneck monastery, ii. 129 _bis_
  Landew, ii. 418――iii. 41. Account of 40. Monuments of the possessors 43
  ―――― family, iii. 42
  Landewednack parish, iv. 53
  LANDEWEDNACK parish, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 357. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, value, patron, manor of Lizard. By Editor,
    Church town and Lizard town, villages, manor of Tretheves, Mr.
    Fonnereau, lighthouses 358. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase. Cliffs interesting 359. Perranbonse and Hensall coves,
    geology by Editor, soap rock, native copper, Kynan’s cove, beautiful
    assemblage of rocks, natural caverns, rare plants 360. Instances of
    longevity by Dr. Borlase, spar manufactory 361
  Landigey or Landithy, iii. 83, 90. Account of 80
  Landisfarne, i. 289, 290
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 290
  ―――― bishoprick, transferred to Durham, i. 290
  Landowednack Lizard, i. 348
  ―――― parish, iii. 128, 259, 424
  Landrak, ii. 59
  Landrake parish, i. 103――ii. 277.――Or Lanrake, iii. 345, 347, 461
  LANDRAKE parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, patron, manor of Lanrake, ii. 361. By Editor,
    manor, churchtown, church, monuments in, Wotton cross, Tidiford,
    small river, tradition of Tidiford, Plymouth limestone burnt, its
    value in agriculture, Wotton 362. St. Erney 363. By Editor,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Land’s End, i. 132, 138, 228, 359――ii. 149, 182, 225 bis 237, 247,
    283, 284, 408――iii. 6, 11, 99, 120, 265, 309, 310, 428, 430,
    445――iv. 165, 166, 168, 173, 174. Road to, i. 20.――Anciently
    called Bolerium, ii. 20. Road from London to 317.――Description of,
    iii. 429. District 427. Various names of 431. Granite rocks at,
    scene, latitude and longitude, sun at 432. Its inscriptions 433.
    _See Dartmoor_
  Land tax, iii. 75, 110, 119, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195,
    199, 208, 222, 237, 271, 391, 403, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436, 441,
    448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 13, 19, 20, 39, 43, 53, 59, 63, 66, 68, 71,
    93, 99, 111, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 164, 185.――Act for
    redeeming, i. 403. Fixed for Cornwall 1
  Landulph parish, i. 103, 310――iii. 345.――Rev. F. V. J. Arundell,
    rector of, ii. 387
  LANDULPH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 364. Etymology, value, patron 365. By Editor, situation of
    church, monuments, one to Theodore Paleolagus, history of him by Mr.
    Arundell ibid. His dynasty 366. Causes of his removal from Italy
    370. His marriage, issue, and residence at Clifton in this parish
    372. Death 373. Chasm in the register, discrepancy in the dates of
    Theodore’s death, account of his children 374. Manors of Landulph
    and Glebridge, Clifton 375. Lower family, life of Dr. Bradley,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 376
  Landuwednac, name explained, iv. 314
  Landy, St. ii. 358
  Lane, Rev. Mr. and his wife, died of a violent fever raging at St.
    Ives, ii. 271
  ―――― village, i. 20
  Laneast parish, i. 197――iii. 461――iv. 63 _bis_, 69, 70
  LANEAST parish, MS. of Hals lost, ii. 376. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, impropriation 377. By Editor, villages, Tregeare,
    impropriation, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase, Letcot mine of
    manganese 378
  ―――― village, ii. 377
  Laner castle, iv. 228
  Lanescot and Fowey Consols, iv. 110
  Laneseley church, ii. 118
  ―――― manor, ii. 118, 119 _ter._, 176. Account of 120, 121
  Lanest, ii. 430 _bis_
  Lanew barton, account of, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Sold 334
  Lanewa, account of, i. 418
  Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 110
  Langden, Walter, iii. 358
  Langdon of Keverill, Walter, iii. 123
  Langford, Humphrey, and daughters, iii. 116. Family 116
  ―――― of Swadle Downes, Devon, Walter, iii. 116
  ―――― of Tremabe, Samuel, i. 177
  ―――― hill, iii. 116
  Langhairne, De, family, ii. 316 _bis_. Arms 316. Lost their property
    in the civil wars 317
  Langherne of Trevillon, i. 400. Thomas ibid.
  Langland, John, Bishop of Lincoln, i. 233
  Langley, Mr. of York, ii. 286
  Languit, etymology of, ii. 332
  Lanhadern, account of, i. 415
  ―――― of Lanhadern, i. 415 _quat._ Serlo de, and Serlo Lord 415
  Lanhearne, Alice, John de, iii. 149
  Lanhedrar, account of, i. 419
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Serlo de, Baron, i. 419
  ―――― Lower, account of, i. 419
  Lanhengye chapel, i. 218
  Lanher, etymology of, and bishop’s palace at, i. 15
  Lanherne, i. 213.――Manor, ii. 145.――Account of, iii. 139,
    149.――Butler or Pincerna, Lord of, ii. 145
  ―――― Roman catholic establishment at, a refuge for nuns, iii. 150.
    Descended lineally from before the Conquest 151. Church near it
    ibid.
  Lanhidroc, i. 113
  Lanhidrock church, iii. 177.――Or Lanhydrock, i. 74
  ―――― house, account of, Editor remembers it, ii. 382. Housekeeping
    at 383
  ―――― manor, ii. 383
  ―――― parish, ii. 384, 390. Or Lanhydrock 187――iv. 74, 161, 187.
    Essex quartered at 185
  LANHIDROCK parish, MS. of Hals lost, by Tonkin, situation, ii. 378.
    Boundaries, saint, manor, residence  built by Lord Robarts, Earl
    of Radnor 379. His pedigree, Trefry 380. By Editor, Robarts family
    381. Lanhidrock house, impropriation of benefice 382. Hospitality
    of Lord Radnor, possessors of the manor, statistics 383. Geology
    by Dr. Boase 384
  Lanhudnow, i. 349
  Lanick, i. 199
  Lanisley or Lanistley, ii. 121. Etymology 123
  Lanivet church tower has no pinnacles, ii. 386
  ―――― hill, ii. 390
  ―――― parish, ii. 379, 390――iii. 55, 395
  LANIVET parish, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patrons, incumbent, Tremere estate,
    ii. 384. By Editor, several villages 385. Church, monuments, patron
    and rector, St. Bennet’s convent 386. Landed property of the parish,
    select vestries, Rev. John Lake, rector 388. His family, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 389. Lanivet hill 390
  ―――― village, ii. 385
  Lank Major, i. 131
  ―――― Minor, i. 131
  Lankinhorn, ii. 428
  Lankinhorne, vicar of, iii. 457
  Lankynhorne, ii. 430
  Lanlaran (now St. Lawrance), i. 77
  Lanleke, in South Pederwyn, ii. 398, 418
  Lanlivery parish, ii. 41, 88, 379, 384――iii. 24, 26, 29, 55, 56――iv.
    99, 110
  LANLIVERY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 390. St. Vorch, value of benefice, patron, incumbent. By Editor,
    conspicuous monuments in church, Pelyn house, summer house, St. Chad
    391. Portrait and inscription, Restormel castle, Richard King of the
    Romans kept his court there, titles, palace at Lestwithiel 392.
    Restormel house, statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 393
  Lanmigall, ii. 169, 175
  Lanmigell, i. 118, 261――ii. 80
  Lannan, i. 292
  Lannant parish, iii. 5
  ―――― or Lelant town, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lannar, Miss, iii. 125
  Lannyvet parish, iv. 160
  Lanowe, the ancient name of St. Kew parish, ii. 338. Etymology 332
  Lanrake manor, account of, ii. 361, 362
  Lanreath manor, account of, ii. 395. Sold 396
  ―――― parish, iii. 291, 302, 347――iv. 29, 110, 111, 115, 155.――Or
    Lanethon, ii. 398
  LANREATH parish, otherwise Lanraithow, Lanrayton, Lanrethan, or
    Lanrethon, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 393. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, rectory, value, patron, incumbent, court, Sergeaux
    family 394. By Editor, Lanreath manor, court 395. Church, Grylls
    family 396. Botelett manor, Treyer manor, Trewen, Treean,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 397
  Lanredock, ii. 379
  Lanreth, i. 316
  ―――― manor, iv. 22, 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 291
  Lansagey, ii. 299
  Lansallas manor, ii. 399, 400
  ―――― parish, ii. 409, 412――iii. 291――iv. 19, 36 _bis_, 38
  LANSALLAS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value in King’s books, patron, incumbent, residents, ii. 398. Manor
    399. By Editor, church, latitude and longitude, manor ibid. Raphel
    manor, Tregavithick, Polvethan, Polperro, its trade and situation,
    statistics, rector 400. Geology by Dr. Boase, copper mine, blue
    slate, Polperro harbour 401
  Lansalwys, ii. 394
  Lansan manor, iii. 456
  Lansdowne, i. 113
  ―――― battle of, ii. 343, 345, 347, 350――iii. 40, 199――iv. 162, 172
  ―――― collection, ii. 426
  ―――― Lord, ii. 98. George Granville Lord, erected a monument to his
    grandfather, Sir Beville Grenville 348
  Lansen, iv. 50
  Lan Stephen, the ancient name of Lanceston, ii. 417
  Lanstoun, by Leland, iv. 256
  Lansulhas, iv. 22
  Lantallan, i. 77
  Lanteagles by Fowey, ii. 36
  Lantegles or Lanteglos, by Camelford parish, i. 1, 3, 304, 322――ii.
    48, 274――iii. 81, 222 _bis_, 291――iv. 20, 42, 44.――Rev. Wm.
    Phillipps, rector, ii. 399
  Lanteglise juxta Fawey, by Leland, iv. 279
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA CAMELFORD parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of rectory, patron, incumbent, in manor
    of Helstone in Trigg, ii. 401, and deanery of Trigg minor, the
    manor, a castle and two parks at Helstone, Camelford town,
    etymology, Arthur slain there, relics dug up, tradition of the
    battle 402. A later battle, Roman coins found, Carew’s etymology,
    insignificance of the borough, had a charter from Richard Earl of
    Cornwall, market and fairs 403. Constitution, revenues and seal of
    the borough, only one street, formerly a chapel 404. By Editor,
    extent of manor ibid. Vestiges of a camp, villages in the parish,
    Fentonwoon, Wallis the circumnavigator, Lord Darlington proprietor
    of the borough, it was close till extinguished in 1832, Lord
    Camelford, Mr. Macpherson 405. His correspondence with Dr. Johnson,
    Mr. Phillipps rector, his monument, Dr. Lombard his predecessor 406.
    Memoir and anecdotes of him 407. Statistics, present rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 408
  Lanteglos juxta Fowey parish, ii. 41, 398――iv. 38, 110, 111, 115, 188
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA FOWEY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of living, patron, incumbent, manor of Hall,
    Fitz-William family, ii. 409. Description of the seat, Bodenick 410.
    Lamellin manor. By Editor, situation of church, monuments, value,
    tradition of Charles 1st being fired at, Polruan 411. Once a
    corporate town, appropriation of benefice 412. Statistics, and
    Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Lantenny, i. 40
  Lantiant, by Leland, iv. 277
  Lantine, i. 415――ii. 89
  Lantreghey, iv. 25
  Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, iii. 311
  Lanvorch, ii. 391
  Lanwhitton or Lawhitton manor, iii. 2, 42
  ―――― parish, ii. 95――iii. 40, 43, 335, 338, 456
  LANWHITTON, parish of, Hals deficient. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, origin of the name, value of benefice, patron, manor,
    iii. 1. Farming of, remarkable places, Hexworthy 2. Bullsworthy 3.
    By Editor, church, monuments 3. Lease of the manor, Rev. Mr. Walker,
    statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 4
  Lanwordaby, Thomas, ii. 189
  Lanyhorn castle, iv. 228
  Lanyhorne by Leland, iv. 273
  ―――― creek, iii. 404
  ―――― or Lanihorne manor, iii. 406
  Lanyon, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― cromlech, stone replaced, iii. 32
  ―――― i. 125, 405.――John, ii. 32 _bis_. Built Trelisick house 32.
    Miss 259.――John, iii. 242. John 242, 243 _bis_. John 242 _bis_.
    Richard and William 242. The golden Lanyon 243. Family 242,
    427.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Lanyon, ii. 142, 143 _ter._ Tobias and arms 142
  ―――― of Madern, ii. 143
  ―――― of Normandy, and arms, ii. 143
  ―――― manor, possessors of, ii. 89
  Laran bridge, ii. 41.――Etymology, iv. 157
  Larmer family, iii. 47
  Larnake, iii. 371
  Larnick, Little, iv. 29. Curiosities found near 33
  Laroche, James, i. 101.――Sir James of Bristol, iii. 193
  Lateran, church of St. John, at Rome, iv. 165
  ―――― council, i. 110 _ter._, 318――ii. 125.――Councils, iv. 165
  Latin church, i. 115.――Its difference from the Greek, ii. 370
  ―――― service for churches, books of, called in, iii. 170 Latitude of
    Falmouth, ii. 23. Of the windmill near Fowey 48. Of Lansallas church 399
  ―――― and longitude of Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376. Of the Land’s
    End 432. Of St. Minver spire and Pentire point 281. Of the Ram head
    375. Of Trevose head 281
  Latur, de, John and Richard, iv. 28
  Laud, Archbishop, iii. 71. His library and palace given to Mr.
    Peters 73
  Launcell’s manor, iii. 353.――House, iv. 18
  ―――― parish, i. 133――iv. 12, 15, 18, 23. Healthiness of, specimens
    of longevity in 18
  ―――― prior of, iv. 13
  Launceston borough, iii. 14――iv. 51.――Burgesses and charter, iii.
    15. Duke of Northumberland’s influence in 460. John Buller, M.P. for
    249. Edward Herle, M.P. for 41. Two Mr. Landews, M.P.s for 42
  ―――― Brygge, iv. 255
  ―――― castle, i 188――iii. 458
  ―――― church, iii. 45
  ―――― gaol, i. 345
  ―――― honor of, iii. 406
  ―――― manor, iv. 50
  ―――― parish, iii. 1, 2, 180, 335, 338, 457, 458 _bis_, 459, 461――iv.
    50, 51, 52.――Name, iii. 458
  LAUNCESTON or LANCESTON, St. Mary Magdalen parish, Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Dunhevet, ii. 417.
    Its ruins, wells, rivulet, present town scantily supplied with
    water, inhabitants transferred to Launceston, privileges 418.
    Leland’s description, market place, St. Stephen’s church, castle,
    priory, tombs, St. Catherine’s chapel, Carew’s account, two boroughs
    419. Parishes of St. Thomas and St. Stephen, foundation of the town,
    increase of wealth, corporation, fairs, markets, assizes, a
    sanctuary, Castle Terrible, gaol, leather coins, friary and abbey
    420. Tonkin’s description of the castle, held by the Piper family,
    story of Sir Hugh Piper 421. Willis’s history of the borough,
    privileges granted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, assizes appointed by
    Richard 2nd, the property in the Duke of Cornwall 422. Corporation
    of 1620, market changed. By the Editor, magnificent remains of the
    castle, King’s hypothesis of its antiquity 423. Compared with
    Trematon and Tunbridge, the building 424. Etymology, also of
    Launceston, extent and wealth of the priory, wanton devastations of
    the 16th century 425. Destruction of documents, charters of Bishop
    Warlewast and Henry 3rd 426. Revenues of the priory 428. The same
    from the Augmentation office 429. Long the capital of Cornwall, the
    Earl’s residence transferred to Lestwithiel, the sessions to Truro,
    the county gaol and assizes to Bodmin, improvements in the town,
    roads through it 431. Effect of the Reform Bill, view magnificent,
    new iron bridge, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 432
  Launceston priory, iii. 14, 20, 44, 457――iv. 9, 17, 23, 60, 64. No
    remains of, St. Thomas’s church stands on its site 51.――Prior of, i.
    378 _bis_――iii. 457――iv. 15
  ―――― town, i. 77, 108, 163, 201, 283, 359, 381――iii. 358 _bis_, 388,
    417 _bis_, 456 _ter._, 461――iv. 81.――King’s audit at, i. 78.
    Insurgents march to 86.――Church of St. Stephen’s in, iii. 358.
    Friary in 457. Lines on the gate 295.――North gate of, iv. 51.
    Monastery at 11. Finer buildings in than Truro 71. Road from St.
    Columb’s to 46
  Launston, by Leland, iv. 291
  Laurence, Captain John, ii. 33. Built Trelisick house 32.――Rev.
    Thomas, of St. Winnow, iv. 155, 157
  ―――― St. etymology of name and his history, i. 88
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 261
  ―――― St. chapel, i. 88. Duty at 96
  ―――― St. village, i. 89. Court leet and market 90. Fairs 91
  Laurens, Rev. John, iii. 324
  Lavington, Dr. George, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 3, 42. His daughter 42
  Law, Noye’s Grounds, &c. of, iii. 154
  Lawanack parish, i. 21――iv. 68
  Lawanyke, ii. 430
  Lawarran, James, iv. 77
  Lawhitton parish, ii. 417
  Lawrance, St. i. 77
  Lawrence, Humphrey of Launceston, iii. 42
  ―――― St. chapel at Lezant, iii. 42
  ―――― St. village, ii. 385
  Lawry, i. 223――ii. 255.――Miss, iv. 117
  Lawyer, “Noye’s Complete,” iii. 154
  Lax’s tables of latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Lazarus, parable of, iii. 400
  Lea, family changed their name to Kempthorne, iii. 255, 256
  ―――― farm, iii. 255
  Leach, Simon, i. 222.――Nicholas, iii. 358. Mr. executed 184
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408. Sir Simon and arms 408
  Lee, Francis, ii. 375
  Leeds, Francis and Thomas Osborne, Dukes of, i. 127.――Duke of, ii. 218
  Le Feock, ii. 25
  Lefisick manor, iii. 195, 196
  Legard, i. 370
  Legarike, ii. 256
  Legenda aurea, iv. 117
  Legge, Henry; William 4th Earl of Dartmouth, iii. 206
  Le Greice, Sir Robert, governor of St. Mawe’s castle, ii. 277
  Le Grice, his dispute with Cotterell, ii. 277.――Rev. C. V. iii. 58
    _bis_, 97. Family 90, 243
  Leicester, ii. 76
  Leigha, i. 145
  Leland, i. 73, 79, 146, 266 _bis_, 295, 355, 360, 372, 373――ii. 201,
    239, 402, 411, 425――iii. 5, 15, 16 _bis_, 17, 24, 26 _bis_, 277,
    278, 357, 404, 431――iv. 23, 24, 76 _ter._, 102.――His Itinerary, ii.
    2, 281――iii. 402, 404, 444.――Through Cornwall extracted, Appendix
    VII. iv. 256 to 292.――His inscription on the walls of St. Mawe’s
    castle, ii. 281. Account of Launceston 418.――His Collectanea, iii.
    332 _bis_, 385――iv. 117. Has well described the town of Truro 76, 78
    _bis_, 80. The description 76
  Lelant parish, i. 355, 364――ii. 119, 257 _bis_, 258 _ter._, 260,
    265, 270, 271, 272 _bis_, 284――iii. 46, 339, 384――iv. 52, 53 _ter._,
    58.――Valley in, iii. 59
  LELANT parish, Hals, lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, value of benefice, patronage, rectory, saint. By Editor,
    situation of church, overwhelmed with sand, iii. 5. Mr. Davies
    subscribed towards its erection, several inundations of sand,
    checked by planting rushes, town buried, name, division, Treadreath
    6. Villages, value of benefice, glebe, vicarage house buried, no
    resident clergyman, new house building, appropriation of tithes, St.
    Uny buried here, parish feast, Trembetha 7. Families of Praed,
    Hoskin, and Pawley, the last of the Pawleys, a great heiress, died
    in the workhouse, Praed estate inherited by the Mackworths 8.
    Character of Mr. H. Mackworth Praed 9; and of his son William. The
    Grand Junction canal, its utility, chalk ridges crossing England 10.
    Death of Mr. W. Praed, situation of Trevethow, Trencroben-hill,
    house improved by Mr. H. M. Praed, fine plantations 11. Statistics
    and Geology by Dr. Boase 12. Whele Reath 13
  Lelizike in Probus, iii. 423
  Lemain hamlet, iv. 25. Or Lammana seems to have been of importance 36
  Lemon, i. 58 _bis_. Caroline and Sir William 423.――Harriet, ii. 250.
    Col. John 85. William, his life 81. Saved several lives, was a tin
    smelter 82. Established a mine at Whele Fortune, his marriage 83.
    Made £10,000 by his mine, removed to Truro, principal merchant in
    Cornwall, a classical scholar, sheriff, magistrate, and M.P.,
    received a piece of plate from Frederick, Prince of Wales, called
    the great Mr. Lemon 84. His family, anecdotes of him 85. William,
    jun., 85 _bis_. Sir William 85, 100, 250. Mr. 33 _bis_, 134, 214,
    219.――John, iv. 33. Mr. 89 _bis_. Made a fortune at Truro, began his
    career at Penzance, chosen as partner by Mr. Coster of Truro 89
  ―――― of Carclew, Anna, iii. 230. Anne 249. Sir Charles, improved
    Carclew 230. Caroline, Harriet, and Jane 230. Colonel John, memoir
    of 229. A proficient in music 230. William 229. William, jun. 159.
    Sir William, memoir of 229. Improved Carclew, was a proficient in
    music 230. Sir William 249. Mr. 47. Mr. and Mrs. 229. The great Mr.
    Lemon the younger 159. Family 113
  Lennan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Lennard, i. 266
  Lentegles by Camelford, ii. 372
  Lentyon, ii. 91
  Leo, Pope, ii. 110 _ter._
  Leofric, the first Bishop of Exeter, ii. 69. Chaplain to Edward the
    Confessor 61 _bis_.――The last Bishop of Crediton, iii. 416
  Leofrick, dedicated a church to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  Leon, city of, iii. 285
  Leonard, St. lepers of, at Launceston, ii. 422
  Leonitus leonurus, iv. 182
  Leopards changed to lions, iv. 71
  Lepers, hospital for, i. 89. Laws relating to 90
  Lepomani, Aloysi, Bishop of Seville, i. 82
  Leprosy, its prevalence in England, i. 89
  Lerchdeacon, heir of, iii. 437
  Lerneth, i. 264
  Leryn barton, iv. 29 _bis_
  ―――― creek, iv. 30 _bis_
  Lescaddock castle, iii. 82
  Lescar’s castle, iv. 228
  Lescard, ii. 430
  Leschell, iii. 110
  Lescor, heir of, iii. 140
  Le Seur’s Histoire de l’Eglise et de l’Empire, iv. 117
  Leskeard castle, iii. 169
  ―――― church, i. 33
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 14
  ―――― parish, i. 195――ii. 291 _bis_, 388――iii. 167, 245, 260, 347,
    348 _bis_, 360
  LESKEARD parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, iii. 13. Patronage, value of benefice, appropriation of
    tithes, manor, town, privileges granted 14. Royalty in the duchy,
    charter 15. Elective franchise, great market, ancient castle 16.
    Conduit, extent of the town, a coinage town, defeat of the rebel
    army, market day, town hall, clock erected by Mr. Dolben,
    corporation plate 17. By Editor, trade and market, villas around,
    ib. Improvement of roads and canal, distinguished persons resident
    there, families of Jane and Taunton, Mr. Haydon, Dr. Cardew 18.
    Longitude determined by Mr. Haydon, Mr. Trehawke, his eccentric
    character, left his property to Mr. Kekewich, nunnery of Poor
    Clares, castle, schoolhouse, church 19. Towers taken down,
    appropriation of tithes, patron, monuments in church, memorials of
    Charles 1st, chief proprietors, Editor’s manor of Lamellin, borough,
    Reform Act, etymology 20. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    quarries. By Editor, fancied gold ore 21
  Leskeard prison, iii. 246
  ―――― town, iii. 173, 187, 246, 248. A coinage town, ii. 301――iv.
    186, 188.――Account of, iii. 14. Canal from East Looe to 120, 252.
    Road from Looe to 253. From Tor Point 439.――Roman causeway between
    Looe and, iv. 30. Charles first advanced to 185. Parliamentary
    officers brought prisoners to, King’s army marched out of 186
  Leskeret church, ii. 428
  Lesnewith hundred, i. 1, 60, 197, 304, 322――ii. 48, 86, 273, 401,
    402――iii. 22 _bis_, 222, 232, 274, 276, 352――iv. 61 _bis_, 66 _bis_,
    124, 125, 376
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 22, 23
  ―――― parish, i. 304――ii. 273 _bis_――iii. 232, 236
  LESNEWITH parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, hundred divided, value of benefice, incumbent, Trevygham.
    By Editor, Trewonell, iii. 22. Grylls manor, advowson, principal
    proprietor, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 23
  Lestormel castle, iii. 25
  L’Estrange’s Life of Charles 1st, iii. 145
  Lestwithiel parish, iv. 6, 29 _bis_, 30 _bis_, 109, 158
  LESTWITHIEL parish, Hals lost. Situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbents, borough, name of the river,
    iii. 24. Ruins of the castle, Trinity chapel, old buildings used
    for the stannary court, Camden’s description, county town, prison
    25. Edmund Earl of Cornwall had his palace here, privileges
    conferred by Earl Richard, antiquity of its franchise, revenues of
    the corporation, damage done by the parliament army 26. The lords
    of the manor 27. Rent payable to the Duke, lies between hills,
    river navigable. By the Editor, locality, its beauty, seat of the
    duchy court, indebted to Richard King of the Romans, palace
    converted into a prison, charter of George 2nd 28. Its invalidity,
    church, town extends beyond the parish, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 29
  Lestwithiel town, ii. 391, 392, 393――iv. 186.――A coinage town, ii.
    301. The residence of the Earl of Cornwall and called the county
    town 431. Mr. Vincent, M.P. for 227. Palace at 392.――Duchy exchequer
    at, iv. 99. Essex marched to 185. Encamped near 185, 186. The King
    did the same 186. Essex was surrounded near 187
  Letcot mine, ii. 378
  Lethbridge family, ii. 397.――Rev. C. H. iii. 461.――Rev. C. of Stoke
    Climsland, iv. 12. Rev. C. of St. Thomas 52
  ―――― of Madford, Christopher, ii. 377
  Letters to and from Mr. Moyle, ii. 76.――Various, to learned persons,
    by Farnaby, iv. 87
  Leucan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Levalra, i. 421
  Levan, St. parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 89, 290, 427, 428, 431
  LEVAN, ST. parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, saint, daughter church to St. Burian, iii. 30. By Editor, fine
    scenery, Trereen Dinas, the Loging Rock, natural ibid. Dr. Borlase’s
    account of it, stone removed by Lieut. Goldsmith 31. Sensation
    excited, Editor’s communication with government successful,
    subscription raised by him, replacing of the rock; Lanyon Cromlech
    also replaced, walk from Trereen Dinas to the church, Porth Kernow,
    church, St. Levina 32. Her relics, monument in the church, history
    of Miss Dennis 33. Her poetry, and Sophia St. Clare, a novel 34.
    Tol-Peder-Penwith, singular cavern under it, danger of two visitors,
    disinterestedness of a neighbouring farmer; Bosistow village,
    smallness of poor rate, and its cause 35. Parish feast, statistics;
    Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting construction and romantic
    appearance of the rocks, Logan Rock at Trereen and Tunnel Rock at
    Tol-Peder-Penwith. Editor’s explanation of the name Loging Rock 36
  Leveale, i. 142, 143. Lewis 142. Arms 143
  Leveddon family, ii. 399
  Levela family, iii. 216
  Levignus, Bishop of Kirton, i. 60
  Levina or Levine, St. iii. 30. Her history 32. Relics 33
  Levine Prisklo, by Leland, iv. 271
  Lewannack parish, ii. 226――iii. 40, 335
  LEWANNICK parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    value of benefice, patronage, a poor parish, manor of Trelask, its
    etymology, Lower family, iii. 37. By Editor, gothic ornaments of the
    church and monuments ibid. Villages, manor of Trelaske and its
    possessors, Tinney Hall manor, etymology of Trelaske 38. Pollyfont
    manor, chapel, impropriation, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 39
  Lewellen in Gwythian, ii. 141
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Minver, iii. 237
  Lewis 14th, King of France, ii. 112, 407. Mr. Killigrew’s repartee
    to 14. His generosity to the English driven on his coast 322
  Ley, i. 10. Hugh 10.――Rev. Samuel, ii. 356.――Rev. Hugh, of Redruth,
    iii. 380.――Rev. T. H. of Rame 379
  ―――― of Ponacumb family, iii. 226
  ―――― of Treworga Vean, Andrew, and arms, i. 396
  Leyden University, iii. 72. In Holland 188
  Lezant parish, ii. 226――iii. 1, 43, 335, 338――iv. 6. 7
  LEZANT parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, dedication, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    Trecarell, Landew, family of Trefusis, iii. 40. Of Herle 41. By
    Editor, hundred, Trecarrel ibid. Ancient hall and chapel at, Landew,
    Mr. Northmore Herle, chapel at Landew, and a third within the
    parish, Carthamartha, church 42. Monuments, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 43
  Lhuyd, Mr. i. 220.――His Archæologia, iii. 386
  Lhwyd, iv. 8
  Lichfield, St. Chad patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― and Coventry, Bishop of, William Lloyd, iii. 299. William Smith 141
  Lidain, mother of St. Perran, iii. 331
  Lidford borough, i. 170.――Versesm on, iii. 184
  ―――― castle, Devon, iii. 184 _bis_, 185
  ―――― law, iii. 184
  ―――― prisoners, iii. 184
  ―――― town, iii. 185
  Lidgate, John, i. 338
  Lidley, i. 412
  Lifton, Devon, ii. 122, 123
  Lighthouse, on St. Agnes island, ii. 358
  Lighthouses on Lizard Point, account of, ii. 358
  ―――― a triangle of in Guernsey, ii. 358
  Lightning, damage done to a church by, i. 216, 217.――Superstition
    connected with, iii. 48.――Warleggon church suffered from, iv. 130.
    And St. Wenn’s tower 138. Neglect of precautions against, and many
    church towers in Cornwall struck by 130
  Lightstone hundred, i. 369
  Ligusticum Cornubiense, iv. 178
  Lillo, author of George Barnewell, ii. 102, 104
  Lilly, William, i. 84 _bis_
  Limerick diocese, iii. 434
  Limestone burnt for manure, and extremely valuable, ii. 362
  Limmet, Nicholas, ii. 196
  Lincoln, i. 414, 415
  ―――― William Smith, Bishop of, iii. 141
  ―――― Clinton, Earl of, iii. 216
  Lincoln’s Inn, iii. 143, 152, 154
  Lincolnshire, chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Line, Samuel, i. 418
  Linkinhorne parish, iii. 40, 167――iv. 7, 9
  LINKINHORNE parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, iii. 43. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Carnadon Prior, the rocky hill 44. By the Editor, manors of Millaton
    and Carnadon Prior, Carraton downs, highest hill but one in
    Cornwall, royalist army there, manor of Trefrize, ib. Many elevated
    points and their prospects, Sharpy Tor, Cheesewring, the Hurlers,
    described in Bond’s sketches of East and West Looe, church rebuilt,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 45
  Linkynhorne, ii. 229
  Linnæus, ii. 331――iii. 49 _bis_
  Linnus, i. 197 _bis_
  Lionesse country, iii. 430. Its destruction 309. Editor’s opinion,
    attempt to restore it by an incantation 310
  Lisart, ii. 116
  Lisbon, iii. 423.――Fortune made at 17.――Packet boats receive
    despatches for, at Falmouth, ii. 11. Regular communication with
    Falmouth 18
  Liskard, by Leland, iv. 280
  Liske, Paganus de, i. 383
  Liskeard, i. 174, 177, 318, 411――ii. 76, 154
  Lisle, Alice de, iii. 92. Family 90.――Sir John, one of the original
    Knights of the Garter and his arms, ii. 137
  ―――― Thomas, Viscount, ii. 108
  Lismanock, ii. 203, 211
  List of the Dukes of Cornwall from the time of Edward 3rd, iv. 373
  Lister Killigrew, Mr. iii. 417 _ter._
  ―――― Martin, of Liston, Staffordshire, ii. 6
  Litchfield, Earl of, his letter, iii. 50
  Lithony, i. 420
  Lithospernum erubescens, iv. 182
  Littlecot, iii. 82
  Littleton, Miss, iv. 161
  ―――― of Lanhidrock, William, and arms, iii. 227
  Livesay of Livesay, i. 302. Mary 302
  Livings, five held by one clergyman, iii. 451. Accounted for by Mr.
    Whitaker 452
  Livingus, Abbot of Tavistock, and Bishop of Crediton, nephew of
    Burwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Lizard or Lizart district, iii. 110, 126, 127, 180, 311, 418, 420,
    421. Etymology 422. Geology 424
  ―――― manor, ii. 126, 358
  ―――― peninsula, ii. 359
  ―――― point, ii. 106, 172, 247, 358 _bis_――iii. 423, 445. Anciently
    called the Ocrinum promontory, i. 20. Geological interest of 330,
    331. Lighthouses on 358. Description of them, latitude and
    longitude 359.――Name, iii. 375. Rocks at 283. High water at 98
  Lizard town, ii. 358
  Llan, Welch, i. 192
  Llan Badern Vaur, iii. 336
  Llewellin, Martin, his epitaph on Sir Beville Grenville, ii. 348
  Lloyd, William, Bishop of St. Asaph, Lichfield and Coventry, and
    Worcester, iii. 299
  Lluyd, ii. 173
  Llwyd, Edward, ii. 122
  Llwyn, Welch, i. 192
  Lo Poole, by Leland, iv. 268
  Lobelia crinus, iv. 182
  Lock, i. 211
  Lockyer of Roach, iii. 82
  Lodeneck, iii. 277
  Loe Bar near Helston, i. 136
  Loffyngeo, ii. 430
  Logan, Logging, or Loging Rock, i. 148――iii. 30, 36, 89――iv.
    164.――Name, iii. 36. Description and history of 31
  Loire, i. 107
  Lombard, Daniel, D.D. ii. 406. Vicar of Lanteglos 401. His history,
    had his living from George 2nd, was member of a German club with
    some of the royal family, visited Mr. Gregor, had no other
    acquaintance in Cornwall, a profound scholar, some anecdotes of him
    407. His death, he left a valuable library to his successors 408
  London, i. 242, 341, 356, 404――ii. 28, 30, 47, 98, 101 _bis_, 177,
    192, 213, 227 _bis_, 266, 267, 407 _bis_――iii. 85, 96, 142, 188,
    189, 264, 288, 316, 450――iv. 86.――Bath free stone brought to, i. 58.
    Rebels approach 87.――Two brothers from Bodmin went to seek their
    fortunes at, ii. 34. The owners of the Virginia fleet in 42. King
    Richard after his imprisonment returned to 179. St. Mellitus, Bishop
    of, its two cathedrals founded by him 288.――Hospital of the Knights
    of St. John in, iii. 78. Society for purchasing advowsons in 399.
    Mr. Peters arrives, as commissioner of grievances from America in
    73. Richard Chiverton Lord Mayor of 162.――Sir John Collet and Sir
    John Percivall Lord Mayors of, iv. 134. Thomas Bradbury, Hugh
    Clopton, Stephen Jennings and John Percivall, sheriffs of 134
  London architecture reaching to Cornwall, iv. 81
  ―――― Bishop of, iii. 73. Mellitus the first Bishop 167
  ―――― bridge, partly built of Cornish stone, iii. 63. High tide at
    98. Time occupied in flowing to it round the southern coast 99
  ―――― coffers, iii. 248
  ―――― Gazette, iii. 143
  ―――― newspapers received daily at Penzance, i. 59
  ―――― port of, iii. 450
  ―――― road, to Falmouth, ii. 104, 355. To Land’s End 317. Through St.
    Bennet’s valley 387. Through Launceston 431
  ―――― stools and tables, iii. 248
  ―――― tower of, ii. 170
  ―――― wall, iii. 298
  Londonderry, Thomas Pitt Earl of, and Ridgeway Earl of, i. 69
  Long, Thomas, iii. 38
  ―――― of Penheale, J. S. i. 379, 380. Margaret 380. Thomas 378, 379.
    Arms 378.――Thomas, ii. 398, 399 _bis_;――or Penhele family, iv. 45
  Longbound, Thomas, i. 373 _ter._, 374
  Longbridge, ii. 120, 176
  Longchamp, William, Bishop of Ely, Regent for Richard 1st, his
    misgovernment, deposed, ii. 177. His escape 178
  Longer of Tregonnebris, Mr. anecdote of, iii. 427
  Longeville, Mr. ii. 120
  Longinus, by the Rev. J. Toup, ii. 266
  Longitude of Pendennis castle, ii. 23. Of the wind-mill near Fowey
    48. Of Landsallas church 399
  ―――― board of, published Meyer’s tables, ii. 222
  Longitudes, derived at sea from the moon’s place, ii. 222
  Longman and Co. iii. 96
  Longporth, now London, i. 338
  Longships, iii. 432
  Longstone downs, ii. 271
  Longunnet barton, iv. 29
  Lonsallos, i. 264
  Loo bar, ii. 129
  ―――― river, i. 179 _bis_, 318, 320――ii. 291.――Source of, i. 184
  Looe bar, iii. 447
  ―――― borough, iii. 119.――Account of 119
  ―――― bridge, iv. 30
  ―――― church, iii. 378
  ―――― cove, iii. 129
  ―――― harbour, iv. 19
  ―――― haven, iii. 118, 119
  ―――― island, iv. 25, 28
  ―――― parish, ii. 85, 400
  ―――― pool, ii. 126, 155, 158――iii. 126, 441. Description of 443.
    Sand bank across 443, 444. Account of the trout in 442, 443
  ―――― river, iii. 119, 121, 128, 245, 252, 291――iv. 23.――Royalty of,
    iii. 442
  ―――― town, i. 379――iv. 29, 30 _ter._, 36, 124.――Marble rock near, i.
    187.――Canal to Leskeard from, iii. 18. Road to 439 _bis_. From
    Leskeard 253.――Trade of, iv. 36
  ―――― East, borough, by Hals, etymology, commerce, chapel, manor,
    charter, members of parliament, jurisdiction, iii. 119. Market,
    fairs, arms, writ 119. Tonkin 120. Editor, Bond’s topographical
    sketches, disfranchisement, canal, projected road over Dartmoor
    ibid. Situation, built on a beach, Mr. Bond 121. John Buller, M.P.
    for 249
  ―――― East, town, iii. 119――iv. 20, 21. A celt found at 33. Bridge
    from West Looe to 20
  ―――― East and West, iii. 229, 246.――Boroughs, iv. 29.――Bond’s
    history of, iii. 246, 378.――Surrounded by water, iv. 35
  ―――― West, borough, corporation, and history, iv. 28. Constitution
    20, 28. Writ 20. Seal and arms 21. Inferior to East Looe 20. Mayor
    and burgesses 34. Poor 35. Admiral Sir Charles Wager, M.P. for
    38.――John Rogers, M.P. for, iii. 445
  ―――― West, down, iv. 29 _bis_, 31, 32, 33. Its inclosure desirable
    34. Part of, let 35. Thunderbolt found in 32
  ―――― West, town, i. 84――iii. 119, 300――iv. 25; or Portuan,
    etymology, bridge to East Looe 28
  Loow, Est and West, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lords Spiritual, their precedency disputed, denied by parliament,
    ii. 181
  Lorraine, St. Dye’s church in, ii. 131
  Lostwhythyel, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lostwithiel, i. 78, 127.――ii. 38, 41 _ter._, 422.――By Leland, iv. 277
  Louer, West, or Consort Hundred, i. 38
  Louis, i. 247 _bis_.――Family, iii. 64 _bis_
  Louisberg harbour, iii. 218
  Love of Penzance, Mr. iii. 84
  Lovell, John, i. 246
  Lovice, William, William, Leonard, iv. 41
  Low Countries, iv. 86
  Lowbrygge, iv. 255
  Lower, Dr. Richard, Thomas, i. 257.――Sir Nicholas, ii. 372 _bis_,
    373 _sex._, 374, 376. Lady 373. Major 375. Family 372, 373, 397.
    Distinguished 376.――Humphrey, iii. 358. Thomas 38. Family 37, 38,
    223. Monuments to 225.――Dr., Physician to Charles II. and his three
    daughters, iv. 94
  ―――― of Trelaske, in Lawanack, Sir Nicholas, his marriage and dau.
    William, and William, iv. 156
  ―――― of Tremeer, Richard, M. D. his works, iv. 98. Sir William, his
    works 97. His death 98
  ―――― of St. Wenow, or Winnow, Sir Nicholas, iii. 200. Heir 201.
    Family 133.――Mr. iv. 94
  ―――― Town, of Lambrigan, iii. 315
  Lowlands, iii. 240
  Lowlog river, source of, iv. 237
  “Lucan’s Pharsalia,” notes on, iv. 87
  Lucas, Elizabeth, i. 222
  ―――― of Warwickshire, Mary, iii. 147
  Lucca, iv. 126
  Lucian, ii. 76
  Lucies manor, account of, ii. 358
  Lucius, i. 335 _ter._
  Lucy family, iv. 121; or Lacan, Richard 77, 81 _quat._, 82 _bis_,
    83, 84 _bis_
  ―――― of Charlecote, George, bought the manor of Fowey, M.P. for it,
    ii. 46
  Lud, King, ii. 50
  Luddra, Robert, iii. 253
  Ludduham, now Lugian-lese manor, ii. 257. Account of 258
  Ludewin, or Ludevaulles, by Leland, iv. 265
  LUDGEAN, LUDGVAN, or LUDGVEN, parish, Hals lost. Situation,
    boundaries, name, value of benefice, patron, manor of Ludgian
    lease, iii. 46. By Editor, extent and consequence of the manor
    ibid. Treassow, Castle-an-Dinas, very lofty, produces china-clay,
    entrenchment, Rosevithney, Trowell, the mine of Whele Fortune,
    well resorted to for restoring sight 47. Collurian farm, Varfull,
    belonging to the Davy family, notice of Sir Humphrey Davy, the
    church, rectory house, church tower, a pinnacle thrown down by
    lightning, imputed to a perturbed spirit, a legend of St. Ludgvan,
    and a stream of miraculous water 48. Dr. William Borlase, rector,
    his learning and works, diploma from Oxford 49. Earl of
    Litchfield’s letter upon it, extract from the university official
    register 50. Memoir of Dr. Borlase from the Biographical
    Dictionary 51. List of his works 52. His death, correspondence
    with pope, communications to the royal society, pupils, tomb,
    inscription illegible, Editor’s reflections on him in Greek, his
    two sons 53. Two rectors since, present incumbent, chief
    proprietors of land, parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 54. Ludgvan stone, marshes 55
  Ludgian, ii. 260
  ―――― or Ludgvan Lease manor, iii. 123. Account of 46 _bis_
  Ludgvan parish, i. 355――ii. 118 _bis_, 121 _bis_, 169――iii. 5,
    343――iv. 52, 53 _bis_, 54.――Rev. John Stephens, rector of, ii.
    270.――Rev. H. Praed, iii. 9, 54
  ―――― St. a stream endowed with miraculous powers by, iii. 48
  ―――― stone, iii. 55
  Ludlow of London, i. 255. Elizabeth 259
  Luffe, ii. 427
  Lugacius, Bishop, iii. 331
  Lugad, Bishop, iii. 331
  Luggan, Mr. ii. 252
  Luggyan Lese manor, ii. 258
  Luke, Robert, iii. 83. Dr. Stephen 96, 337 _bis_
  ―――― of Trevilles, William, and family, iii. 406
  ―――― St. ii. 240. His day 117, 276
  Lukey, Mr. i. 271
  Lunar tables, ii. 223
  Lundy island, i. 188.――View of, ii. 49
  Lupton, in Brixham parish, Devon, iv. 156
  Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, ii. 64
  ―――― St. ii. 73, 74
  ―――― Hugh, Earl of Chester, iv. 125
  Lure, i. 221
  Lurginus, Bishop of Kirton, iv. 62
  Lusus naturæ, supposed, ii. 297
  Luther, Martin, i. 312
  Lutterell, i. 247
  ―――― of Polsew, i. 393
  Luttrell, i. 400, 402.――Sir Andrew, iii. 103
  ―――― of Dunster castle, Andrew and his daughter, iii. 342
  Luxemberg, John of, King of Bohemia, iv. 72
  Luxilian church, iv. 100
  ―――― parish, ii. 93, 155, 384, 390; or Luxillian, iii. 391, 395
  LUXILIAN or LUXULIAN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. Situation, boundaries,
    name, change of saint, iii. 55. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, manor of Prideaux, etymology, Prideaux castle, and family
    56. By Editor, chief landowners, Rashleigh family, situation of
    church, taste of Mr. Grylls the present vicar, beauty of church and
    tower, room in the tower, archives preserved there in the civil
    wars, vale leading to St. Blazey bridge, Tonkin’s Geology, “Lyell’s
    Principles of Geology,” parish, statistics 57. Geology by Dr. Boase,
    stream-works, quality of the tin, subterranean trees and plants 58.
    By Editor, unsightliness of Cornish valleys, Mr. H. M. Praed
    restored a valley in Lelant to beauty 59
  Luxmoore, Rev. Coryndon, ii. 408
  Luxton, John, i. 399
  Luxulion, i. 52
  Lyda, or Lides, St. island, iv. 230, 266
  Lydcott, iii. 252
  Lyddra, Robert, iii. 257
  Lydford Brygge, iv. 255
  Lyell, Charles, on Geology, iii. 57
  Lyle, John, rang the bells on the accession of George III. George
    IV. and William IV. iv. 18
  Lynar, or Lyner river, iii. 119, 437, 438
  Lyne, Rev. Charles, of Roach, iii. 401. Rev. Richard, of Little
    Petherick 335. Rev. Dr. of Mevagissey, his singularities 194. Mr.
    made a fortune at Lisbon 17. His grandfather 19
  Lynkinhorne, ii. 430
  Lyonness, i. 198
  Lyskerde, ii. 430
  Lysons, i. 135, 146, 356, 369, 399, 402――ii. 86, 87, 91, 100, 147,
    149 _bis_, 153, 217, 229, 231, 232, 252, 256, 281, 294, 330, 348,
    358, 362, 363 _bis_, 383, 388, 395, 397 _bis_, 400, 404, 412,
    415――iii. 7 _bis_, 19, 20, 38, 46, 77, 90, 117 _bis_, 126 _bis_, 138
    _bis_, 150, 172, 192, 223 _bis_, 232, 234, 239, 240, 248, 255 _bis_,
    258, 261, 274, 276 _bis_, 288, 289, 295, 309 _bis_, 332, 334, 335,
    342, 346 _bis_, 350 _bis_, 352, 372 _bis_, 373, 398, 399 _bis_, 405,
    406, 419, 424, 427, 439 _bis_, 445, 458――iv. 3, 4, 9 _bis_, 16
    _bis_, 26, 41, 44, 51, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 97, 107, 114, 121, 127,
    130, 136, 141.――His Cornwall, i. 228, 266 _bis_, 315 _bis_, 340――ii.
    343――iii. 80――iv. 141, 163.――His Magna Brit. ii. 47――iv. 26.――His
    account of the repulse of the French from Fowey, ii. 46. His
    descents, &c. of manors 47
  Lythe, John Robert, iii. 387
  Lyttelton, Christiana, and George, Lord, i. 69
  Lyttleton family, ii. 383

  Mabe hill, iii. 63
  ―――― parish, i. 137, 236, 416――ii. 92, 94, 104――iii. 64――iv. 2
  MABE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name, iii.
    59. Ancient jurisdiction, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    amount of land tax, Tremough, Tremayne 60. By Tonkin, name, Carnsew,
    and family, removed to Trewoon, Carverth 61. Tremogh, large house
    built, Hantertavas 62. By Editor, Hals’s mistaken etymology of
    Tremogh, Tremogh sold 62. Trees cut down, granite quarries, road
    turned, rare plant, origin of the Tremayne family, statistics 63.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 64
  MABEN, or Mabin, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, iii. 64. Incumbent, land
    tax, St. Mabiana, Collquite, Treblithike, Haligan 65. Penwyne 66.
    Tonkin, nothing new. By Editor, Tredeathy, church monuments 66. Mr.
    Peters, his controversy with Warburton, his ancestry, and life 67.
    Traits of character, extracts from his meditations 68. Opinions on
    the Book of Job 69. Remarks on Hugh Peters, his history 71.
    Settlement in America, a popular preacher, deputed to England 72.
    Entered the parliament service, obtained Lambeth palace and Laud’s
    library, his death 73. Parish statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 74
  Mabiana, St. iii. 65
  Mabilia, a countess, monument to, ii. 419
  Mabin, i. 2
  Mabyn, St. church, iv. 135
  ―――― St. parish, i. 84, 367, 371, 375――ii. 150 _bis_, 332――iv. 93, 95
  Macarmicke, Colonel, i. 208
  Macclesfield, Fitton Gerard, Earl of, i. 67.――Lord, iii. 378 _bis_
  Macculloch, Dr. ii. 115
  M Gregor, i. 13
  Machinery, curious piece of, i. 55
  Mackworth, Mr. singular story of, and family, iii. 9
  Macpherson, the producer of Ossian, ii. 405. His quarrel with
    Johnson 406
  Madan, a British king, iii. 79
  Madaran, or Maddern parish, ii. 118, 122, 174
  Madarne church, i. 296
  ―――― parish, iv. 164 _bis_
  Maddarns, St. or Maddern well, account of, iii. 91. Extraordinary
    cure from 79
  Maddern, John and William, iii. 83
  ―――― parish, iii. 46, 242 _bis_, 243, 283, 289, 425 _bis_
  MADDERN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint, unknown, iii. 78.
    St. Maddarn’s well, a cripple cured by it, Alverton 79. Mayne
    Screffes, inscription on the stone, Landithy 80. Penzance, town
    burnt by the Spaniards, charter, taken and pillaged by the
    parliament army 81. Rich booty, a coinage town, principal
    inhabitants, arms, writ, Lescaddock castle 82. By Tonkin, a
    vicarage, patron, incumbent ibid. Penzance, a separate parish, but
    daughter-church, incorporated, corporation in 1620. By the Editor,
    situation of the church, its connection with the Templars,
    monuments, mild air of the Mount’s Bay, Castle Horneck 83. Dr.
    Walter Borlase, memoir of him, built the house at Castle Horneck,
    Trereife, memoir of Dr. Frank Nicholls 84. Trengwainton used as a
    farm-house, Sir Rose Price, the present owner, has made it a
    splendid residence, origin of the Price family 85. History of Mr.
    Vinicombe 87. His picture, Rosecadgwell, Nanceolvern, Poltare,
    Trenear, notice of Captain H. P. Tremenheere 88. Rose hill,
    Lariggan, Mr. Pope and the Vatican, Lanyon, a cromleigh 89.
    Cromleigh at Malfra, and others in the parishes of Morva and
    Zennor, conjectures respecting them, description, etymology,
    Landithy, impropriation of tithes, patronage of the vicarage,
    Alverton 90. Its magnificence lost, Maddern well, its copiousness,
    Penzance flourishing, its gradual rise 91. Market house, a coinage
    town, adverse events of the civil war, pier, character of the
    corporation 92. Chapel of ease, endowed by Mr. Tremenheere, new
    church, exertions of Mr. Vibert, Mr. Edward Giddy, and the
    Tremenheere family, for the benefit of the town 93. New market
    house, distinguished families of the place, the Tonkins, Sir
    Humphrey Davy, introduced by the Editor to Dr. Beddoes 94. His
    Life by Dr. Paris, Dr. Batten, Mr. Carne, Dr. Boase 95. Mr. Thomas
    Giddy, Dr. Luke, Admiral Pellew, a grammar-school, Editor there
    under Dr. Parkins 96. Mr. Morris, the present master, Penzance
    much resorted to by invalids, Mr. E. Giddy’s observation on the
    climate, Dr. Paris’s medical account of it, Algerine corsair
    wrecked there 97. Inhabitants alarmed, afterwards visited the
    strangers, they were sent home in a man-of-war, latitude and
    longitude of Penzance church, establishment of the port, and at
    various other places 98. Parish statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    the Wherry mine 99. Sand bank and submarine forest, parish covered
    with metallic veins, account of the Cornwall Geological Society at
    Penzance 100
  Madders parish, ii. 284
  Madford near Launceston, iii. 337
  Madras, Fort St. George, and government house at, iv. 11
  Madron parish, iii. 245
  Maen Tol, i. 141
  Magdalen Ball in Gluvias, iv. 3
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 87
  ―――― hall, Oxford, Mr. Lake entered of, ii. 389
  Mahomet’s character of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Mahometans, ii. 37
  Mahon, Sir Reginald, ii. 376. Family 339, 353, 354, 396. Property
    353, 376.――Family, iii. 8. Property 207
  Mahun family, iv. 54
  Maids, the nine, iv. 2
  Maidstone frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25.
    Sailed to the Sound 27
  Mail coaches established, i. 57
  Maine and Loire, department of, in France, iv. 105
  Maiowe, Philip, iii. 123
  Majendie, Ashurst, instituted the Geological Society of Cornwall,
    iii. 100. His Geology of the Lizard 424
  Major, Peter, of Foye, ii. 110. Mr. 43. Mr. a tobacco merchant 43
  Maker parish, ii. 250, 251――iii. 374
  MAKER parish, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, Mount Edgecumbe, history of
    the Edgecumbe family, Sir Richard an adherent of Henry 7th, iii.
    101. Obliged to abscond, concealed himself in a cave, and deceived
    his pursuers by throwing his cap into the sea, rewarded by Henry
    with the lands of Bodrigan 102. Built a chapel in commemoration of
    his escape, he or his father founded a Benedictine priory, family
    have spent their fortune in service of the crown 103. Carew’s
    description of Mount Edgecumbe, part of it and of Millbrook in
    Devon 104. Millbrook once possessed of the elective franchise,
    inhabitants in Elizabeth’s time addicted themselves to piracy,
    Cremble passage, its danger 105. Tonkin does not notice this
    parish. By Editor, beautiful situation, church ibid. Signals from
    it, observations on signals, value of the benefice 106. Inceworth,
    Millbrook formerly an important town, government naval brewhouses
    removed, advantage of the new buildings, Vaultershome, or West
    Stonehouse, now Mount Edgecumbe, its beauty 107. Kingston and
    Cawsand, Plymouth harbour, divisions of, the Breakwater or
    artificial reef, description of 108. Comparison of its bulk,
    weight, and labour with the great Pyramid of Egypt, parish
    statistics, population fluctuates with war or peace, vicar 109.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 110
  Makertone manor, ii. 251
  Malachi, the Hebrew prophet, ii. 224
  Malachy, St. Archbishop of Armagh, ii. 225
  Malaga, i. 161
  Malivery, Helvethus, iv. 41
  Mallett, i. 262
  Malmsbury, iv. 155
  ―――― William of, iii. 385――iv. 96.――His chronicle, i. 407
  Malo, St. iii. 257. His day 258
  Malo’s, St. ii. 123
  Malta island, i. 411
  ―――― knights of, i. 411 _bis_
  Mama Tidy, a name of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Man, Isle of, i. 339. King of 339
  Manaccan parish, i. 417――iii. 124, 127, 128, 138
  MANACCAN parish, situation, boundaries, name modern, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iii. 110. Once
    called Minster, alien monasteries, etymology, Kestell 111. By
    Tonkin, name. By Editor, etymology, church pleasantly situated, town
    neat, vicarage house good, Mr. Polwhele 112. Helford, passage at,
    Kestell, Halvose, statistics, parish feast, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, titanium found in the streams 113
  Manackan, i. 38
  Manacles point, ii. 331
  Manaton, account of by Hals, ii. 230. By Tonkin ibid. By Whitaker
    and Lysons 231
  ―――― of Manaton family, ii. 230. Francis 230 _bis_. Henry 230. Arms
    and memorials in church 231.――Francis, iii. 2――iv. 64. Family 65
  Mane mine, i. 226
  Manely manor, iv. 112
  ―――― Coleshill manor, iv. 114
  Maneton, Mr. entertained Charles 1st, iii. 42
  Manley, John and Mrs. iii. 347
  ―――― Coleshill, i. 319
  Manlius, iii. 71
  Manly, John, iv. 74
  Mann, Rev. H. of St. Mawgan, iii. 138
  Mannering, i. 350
  Manning family, iii. 255
  Mannington, Sampson, iii. 358
  Manor courts, proceedings of, iv. 55. Subjects of presentment 56
  Manufactory for Spa ornaments, ii. 361
  Manuscripts in the British Museum, extracts from, iii. 409
  Manwaring, Charlotte, i. 67
  Mapowder, i. 402――iv. 161 _bis_
  Marazion, the name of St. Hilary parish, ii. 200, 214, 215 _quat._,
    224 _bis_
  ―――― borough and manor, ii. 170
  ―――― parish, iii. 289――iv. 10.――Road to Helston from, iii. 446. From
    Redruth to 308.――Name explained, iv. 316
  March ab Meircyon, i. 338
  March, Earl of, i. 168 _bis_
  March and Ulster, Roger Mortimer Earl of, i. 64
  Margaret, Queen, i. 169.――Took sanctuary in Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  ―――― St. family, ii. 362
  Margaret’s, St. church, Westminster, ii. 98
  Margate, high water at, iii. 98
  Marghessen foos, iii. 323 _bis_, 324 _ter._ Account of 323
  Marham or Marwyn church, manor of, iii. 116, 117
  Marham Church parish, i. 133――ii. 413――iii. 254, 352――iv. 12, 15,
    131, 152
  MARHAM CHURCH parish, situation and boundaries, name and antiquity,
    the Conqueror’s charter of appropriation, iii. 114. Confirmed by the
    pope, number of vicarages in England, and in Cornwall, Walesbury
    115. Longford hill 116. By Tonkin, name, value, manor of Marwyn
    Church ibid. By Editor, antiquity of the church, manor, Walesborough
    manor, Hilton manor, Wood-Knole, patron, nature of the soil,
    abundance of wood 117. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 118
  Marhasdeythyou, or Market Jew, by Leland, iv. 287
  Marianus the historian, ii. 403
  Mark St. his day, iv. 140
  ―――― well, i. 199
  Marke of Woodhill, i. 143
  Markesju, by Leland, iv. 264
  Market Jew, ii. 200
  Marks of St. Wenn, Miss, iii. 237
  Markwell manor, ii. 363
  Marlborough, ii. 76
  ―――― administration, ii. 217
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 307.――John Churchill, i. 126 _bis_,
    234.――Churchill, iii. 217, 297.――Henrietta, Duchess, i. 126
  Marney of Colquita, Henry first Lord Marney, i. 369
  ―――― of Essex, Henry, family and arms, iii. 65.――Family, iv. 22
  Maroons of Jamaica, treaty with, iii. 300
  Marperion rock, iii. 73
  Marre, Lord, ii. 9
  Marrifield, i. 215
  Mars, i. 295.――Camelford sacred to, ii. 403
  Marsh, Rev. William, ii. 134
  Marshal, Earl, his court, iii. 129, 130 _ter._
  Marshall, Miss, iii. 239
  Martial’s epigrams, notes on, iv. 87
  Martin, i. 386. John, Archbishop of Canterbury 87.――John and Thomas,
    iii. 323
  Martin of Hurston, Anne and John, iii. 186
  ―――― of Pittletown, Dorset, family, iii. 186
  ―――― St. his feast and history, ii. 125.――His day, iii. 310
  ―――― Bishop of Tours in France, iii. 118, 126, 127, 138. His history
    122. Festival 127
  ―――― Pope and martyr, iii. 126
  Martin’s, St. church, iii. 252 _bis_. At Leskeard 16
  ―――― fields and woods, i. 15
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― parish by Looe, i. 320――ii. 265――iii. 13, 245.――Its church and
    rectory, ii. 266
  MARTIN’S, ST. parish, near Looe, situation, boundaries, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, iii. 118. Incumbent, land tax, East Looe town,
    etymology, haven, chapel, charter, jurisdiction, market and fairs,
    arms and writ, Kevorall 119. Tonkin’s quotation of Willis, and
    conjecture respecting the name of the chapel 120. By Editor,
    reference to Bond’s Sketches, elective franchise lost, canal to
    Leskeard, granite hills ibid. Road over the hills, projected new
    road, expence will probably prevent it, situation of East Looe, Mr.
    Bond 121. History of St. Martin of Tours, legends of him, his death
    122. Festival, advowson of the living, monuments in the church. Dr.
    Mayo, statistics 123. Geology by Dr. Boase 124
  ―――― St. parish, in Meneage, i. 301――ii. 318――iii. 110, 127, 128
  MARTIN’S ST. parish, in Meneage, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, daughter to Mawgan, founder, patron, incumbent,
    land tax, Tremayne, iii. 124. Mudgan 125. By Tonkin, saint, daughter
    to Mawgan, value, patron, incumbent 126. By Editor, Tremayne,
    Helnoweth nunnery, doubtful, Meneage district, Hals’s history of St.
    Martin, pope and martyr ibid. Parish feast, notice of Pope St.
    Martin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, the dry tree 127
  Martin, St. of Tours, ii. 125
  ―――― ancient chapel of, i. 15.――Church, ii. 125
  Martine’s, St. isle, iv. 266
  Martyn, i. 28.――Thomas, ii. 221 _bis_. His map of Cornwall ibid. and
    iii. 454.――W. W. iii. 255
  Martyn’s, St. parish in Kerrier, iii. 61
  Martyr’s church, iii. 180
  Martyrology, iii. 385
  Mary, Queen, ii. 255, 336, 404, 423――iii. 103, 104, 125, 133, 140,
    370――iv. 2, 140.――A design to rob her Exchequer, ii. 198
  ―――― 2nd, called Mary Take-all, ii. 15
  ―――― Rose frigate, loss of, ii. 341, 344
  ―――― the Virgin, ii. 276――iv. 26
  ―――― St. iii. 285.――Truro church, dedicated to, iv. 80, 81
  ―――― St. bell, iii. 210
  ―――― St. chapel, Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. chapel in Quethiock, iii. 373
  ―――― St. church, Savoy, London, ii. 98
  ―――― St. island, iv. 172, 174, 230. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. manor, ii. 275
  ―――― St. parish, old Truro, iv. 92
  ―――― St. of Grace’s Abbey, i. 134
  ―――― St. de Theresa, i. 83
  ―――― Magdalen, St. a chapel at Trecarrell, dedicated to, iii. 42
  ―――― Magdalen, St. church at Launceston, ii. 417, 420――iv.
    132――Parish, statistics, ii. 432
  ―――― de Plym, St. ii. 2, 275, 276
  ―――― de Vale, St. convent, prior of, ii. 275 _bis_, 276. Monastery
    2.――Priory, iii. 395
  ―――― Wick, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 114
  ―――― Wike, St. i. 215
  Maskelyne, Rev. Dr. Nevill, astronomer royal, his voyage to St.
    Helena, published Meyer’s Tables, ii. 222. Devised the Nautical
    Almanack 223
  Mason, Rev. J. H. of Treneglos and Warbstow, iv. 63.――The poet, i. 71
  Masterman of Restormel, William, i. 244 _bis_
  Matilda, Queen, ii. 211 _ter._
  Matthew of St. Kew family, arms, ii. 337
  Matthew Paris, i. 414
  ―――― of Westminster, his story of the Irish sailing to England in an
    ox-skin boat, ii. 324
  ―――― St. his Gospel, ii. 168
  Matthews of Tresangar, i. 225. John 383 _bis_
  Maugan, i. 209, 212, 301――ii. 155
  ―――― in Meneage, ii. 136
  Maunder, i. 256, 396.――Henry, ii. 195.――Miss, iv. 116
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Mary, Priscilla, and Thomas, i. 420
  ―――― of Rosecorla, Edward, i. 420
  Maurandia Barclayana, iv. 182
  ―――― semperflorens, iv. 182
  Maurice, Prince, iii. 44.――A commissioner for the King, iv. 189
  Mausa, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Maw’s, St. castle, inscription made by Leland at, iv. 274
  Mawe, St. his history, ii. 280
  Mawes, St. borough, ii. 279. Account of and arms 276
  ――――’s, St. castle, ii. 1, 2, 27, 279, 280. History of 280. And of
    its governors 276. Its governors and officers salaried by the crown 278
  ――――’s, St. manor, ii. 275
  ――――’s, St. town, ii. 2, 17
  ――――’s, St. village, ii. 280
  Mawgan, John de, iii. 148
  ―――― of Essex family, and arms, iii. 148
  ―――― or St. Mawgan parish in Kerrier, or Mawgan Meneage, ii.
    126――iii. 110, 124, 126, 148, 257, 324, 332, 419
  ―――― in Pider, i. 161, 230, 404, 407――ii. 256――iii. 398. The poor of 153
  ―――― St. iii. 148
  ―――― St. church, iii. 132
  MAWGAN, St. in Meneage parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, iii. 127. Value of benefice, patron, founder,
    incumbent, land tax, description of Meneage district, its
    fertility and breeds of cattle, Goonhilly downs, stones on them,
    Carmenow 128. Its etymology, and the family of Carmenow, singular
    trial between them and the Lord Scrope for their arms 129. Reasons
    on each side 130. Earl Marshal’s sentence, Carmenow’s displeasure
    131. Domestic chapel, burial place and monuments, cross-logged
    figures used before the crusades 132. Reskymer family, Trelowarren
    133. Vyvyan family 134. Tonkin has no additions. By Editor, the
    three distinguished families, Sir Richard Vyvyan a Cavalier 135.
    Committed to the Tower by George 1st, had a daughter born there
    136. Sir R. R. elected for Bristol, antiquity and splendour of
    Trelowarren house, view in Dr. Borlase’s Natural History, manor of
    Carmenow, account of the trial in Anecdotes of Heraldry 137.
    Another controversy for the same coat, church, monuments, patron
    of benefice, saint, feast, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, the dry tree 138
  MAWGAN, ST. parish in Pyder, by Hals, boundaries, ancient name,
    antiquity of the parish, founder, dedication, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Lanherne, iii. 139. Arundell
    family 140. Origin of their arms 142. Mr. Bishop, a Roman Catholic
    prelate, Carnanton, history of Attorney-General Noye 143. Approved
    the ship-money tax 144. Hammon Le Strange’s character of him, his
    death and family, amusing story of the court dining with him 145.
    Ben Jonson’s lines, and Charles’s answer, anagram, Noye, a
    promoter of the Civil War, counselled the imprisonment of the
    members of parliament 146. Densill, Densill barrow, Chapel Garder,
    Densill family 147. Tonkin, the saint, an Irish Missionary,
    patron, ancient name 148. Manor of Lanhearne, Camden and Carew
    upon the Arundells 149. Called the Great Arundells 150. By Editor,
    etymology of Arundell, Lysons’s notice of the family, Popery
    fostered at Lanhearne, house now a Carmelite nunnery ibid.
    Situation of church, monuments 151. Manor of Carnarton, memoir of
    the Noyes, the Attorney-General’s will 152. Some of his works
    published 153. List of them 154. A cause he gained for his
    college, their thanks 155. His picture, a copy of it presented by
    the Editor to Exeter college, his family, marriage contract of his
    son Humphrey 156. Issue of the marriage 159. Works of the Rev.
    Cooper Willyams, anecdote of his grandfather’s marriage, Hals’s
    abuse of Colonel Noye, parish statistics, and rector 160. Geology
    by Dr. Boase, parish feast 161
  Mawnan parish, i. 135, 137, 236
  MAWNAN, parish of, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    court baron, barton of Penwarne, iii. 74. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, Penwarne and family 75. By Tonkin, manor of
    Trevose ibid. Advowson appendant to it, Penwarne 76. By Editor,
    Lysons’s account of the manors, Tresore, patron of living and
    incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting rocks,
    Rosemullion Head 77
  Mawnoun, St. church, by Leland, iv. 269
  Maws, St. J. Tredinham, M.P. for, i. 416
  Maxentius, i. 237 _bis_
  Maximian, Emperor of Rome, iv. 100
  Maximilian, Emperor, wars against the Turks under, ii. 342, 344
  Maximus, the 2nd Emperor, ii. 37
  May, i. 78, 414.――Elizabeth and Rev. Dr. iii. 356. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Mewan 196.――Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth and St. Mewan, iv. 102
  ―――― of High cross, i. 45
  ―――― of Truro, i. 396
  Maye, Dr. iv. 74. William 187
  Mayer, Tobias, of Gottingen, ii. 222. His tables 222, 223. His widow
    allowed a premium of £3000, 223
  Maynard, i. 36――ii. 361. John 196. Sir John Sergeant 362 _bis_.――Sir
    John, iii. 5, 405, 406
  Mayne, Rev. Cuthbert, iii. 357, 360, 369, 370 _bis_. Suffered death 358
  ―――― Screffes, iii. 80; or Scriffer, ii. 284
  Mayo or Mayow, John, M.D. iii. 123 and note 250 _bis_. Memoir of
    251. His works 251, 252. Philip of Looe 250 _quat._ P. W. 250.
    Family 223, 250, 252. Monuments to 253
  Mayo of Clevyan, ii. 198
  ―――― of Truro, John, ii. 302
  Mayors of Exeter, ii. 189, 196
  Mayow, Dr. iv. 30. Mr. 74. Family 37
  ―――― of Bray, i. 354
  Mayson, Rev. Charles and Rev. Peter, rectors of Lezant, iii. 43
  Mead, Dr. iii. 85
  Mean in Sannen, seven Saxon Kings said to have met at, ii. 284
  ―――― village, iii. 433, 435. Story connected with 433
  Meath county, iii. 86
  Medhop of Trenant, i. 320 _bis_
  Median castles, ii. 423
  Mediterranean sea, iv. 168.――Regular communication with Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  Medland of Tremail in St. Petherwyn, iii. 137
  Megara in Greece, Bishop of, i. 75.――Thomas Vivian, Bishop of, iii.
    279.――Bishopric, arms of, i. 75, 94――iv. 161
  Megavissey, i. 413
  Mehinnet parish, ii. 371
  Mein Egles rocks, transport lost on, ii. 326
  Melaleuca hypericifolia, iv. 182
  Melania, St. iii. 164, 165
  Melanius, St. iii. 257
  Melgisy manor, iii. 382
  Melhuish, near Kirton, Devon, etymology, iii. 135
  ―――― Mr. ii. 97
  ―――― of Northan, Devon, family, iii. 61
  ―――― of Penryn, Jane, iii. 134. Thomas 61, 134
  Melianthus, iv. 182
  ―――― coccineus major, iv. 182
  Melianus, King or Duke of Cornwall, iii. 59, 224
  Melina, St. iii. 257, 258
  Meliorus, St. iii. 224
  Mellen, St. i. 310
  Mellin, St. parish, ii. 309
  Mellingy bridge, account of, iii. 327
  ―――― mill, iii. 326
  Mellion, i. 316.――St. parish, ii. 375, or Mellyn, iii. 161, 345,
    347, 371
  MELLION, OR MELLYN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Newton
    manor, Mr. Coryton, one of the members imprisoned by Charles 1st,
    iii. 161. Coryton family, Crocadon 162. John Trevisa translated the
    Bible, comparison with Wickliffe’s and Tyndall’s, Westcot,
    Pentillie, or Pillaton 163. Sir James Tillie’s singular will 164. By
    Tonkin, saint, patron, Newton ibid. By Editor, Hals’s history of St.
    Melania, Coryton family 165. Vindication of Sir James Tillie 166.
    St. Mellitus, Bede’s life of him, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 167
  Mellior, St. i. 151
  Mellitus, first Bishop of London, afterwards Archbishop of
    Canterbury, iii. 167
  ―――― St. Pope Gregory’s letter to, ii. 288
  Mellyn, St. i. 409
  Menabilly, account of, iv. 101, 107
  Menadarva, i. 161 _quat._, 164
  Menage, i. 192
  Menagwins, etymology and possessors of, i. 43
  Mendicant friars, i. 83――iv. 145
  Meneage, i. 350.――Part of Kerryer hundred, ii. 358
  ―――― district, in Lizard, iii. 257, 419, 422. Described 128
  Menevia, St. David, Archbishop of, iii. 292.――Bishopric, i. 305
  Menfre, i. 2
  Menheniot manor, iii. 170
  ―――― or Menhinnet parish, iii. 13, 373
  MENHENIOT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, iii. 167.
    Manor, jurisdiction, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, etymology, the manor, Poole, described by
    Carew 168. Fair, Tencreek, an oven fourteen feet in diameter,
    unknown tree, Trehavock 169. Curtutholl, Trewint, Dr. Moorman
    first taught the offices of religion in English, the Latin
    service, books called in, hospital for lepers 170. By Tonkin,
    Pool, Menheniot or Tregelly manor ibid. By the Editor, size of the
    church, its tower and monuments, patron of the benefice, the
    incumbent to be of Exeter college, vicarage endowed with the great
    tithes, the incumbents, Mr. Holwell and his works 171. Cartuther,
    other places noticed by Lysons, the most fertile parish in the
    county, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Clicker Tor 172. The
    Geology interesting. By the Editor, errica vagans, phenomena of
    flowers, no wild rose in the southern hemisphere, nor heath in
    America 173. Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries, remarks on the system
    of nature and succession of the various species 174
  Menhynet, ii. 59
  Menhynyet, i. 409
  Mentz, Archbishopric, founded by St. Boniface, iv. 126
  Menvor, i. 168
  Menwhilly, ii. 91
  Menwinnion, ii. 241
  Meny, St. iii. 190
  Mepham, Simon, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 115
  Meran, St. iii. 177
  Merchant Tailor’s school, ii. 407
  Mercia, King of, i. 49.――Penda, King of, ii. 284――iii. 284
  Merewenna, i. 2
  Merina, St. iii. 177 _bis_
  Merionethshire, i. 382
  Merivale priory, i. 27
  Merlin, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 322 _bis_, 334, 339.――His prophecy, iii.
    433.――Of Arthur, i. 326, 336 _bis_
  Merran, St. parish, ii. 265
  MERRAN, ST. Merin, Meryn, or Merryn parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name and etymology, church, cemetery of St.
    Constantine, converted to a dwelling house, modern church, St.
    Constantine’s well, Trevose, iii. 175. Productive, but dangerous to
    shipping, Harlyn, Peter family, the parish modern 176. Saint,
    festival, his death, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, donation of Mrs. Tregoweth 177. Tonkin adds
    nothing but a notice of the saint’s name. By the Editor, no Saint
    Merina, Harlyn, Perthcothen ibid. Manor of Trevose, church,
    Catacluse stone, ornamented fonts of it here, at Padstow, and in St.
    Constantine’s church, description of St. Constantine’s, font and
    pillars handsomely carved 178. Catacluse cliffs and a pier, feast of
    Constantine, and of St. Merryn, impropriation of tithes, the three
    Mr. Gurneys, hurling, account of it in Carew, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 179. Trevose head 180
  Merrifield, i. 134
  Merrin, or Merryn, St. church, iii. 178. The living held by the name
    of Gurney above a century 179
  ―――― parish, iii. 277
  Merryan, St. i. 404
  Merther, i. 113. Situation and possessor 44
  ―――― or Merthyr manor, i. 241 _bis_
  ―――― parish, i. 242, 417――ii. 2――iii. 207, 209, 210, 214, 354
  Merthyn, in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Merthyr church, iii. 182
  MERTHYR parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, saint,
    his well and chapel, etymology of Eglos-Merthyr, daughter to Probus,
    mode of nomination to the benefice, iii. 180. Contests respecting
    it, deed of agreement 181. Variation in value, ancient name,
    consolidation with Probus, endowment, incumbent, land tax,
    Tresawsan, James Hals 182. His history, Governor of Montserrat,
    recalled by the King, gained over to the rebels, made prisoner at
    the siege of Plymouth, and committed to Lidford castle 183. His life
    spared, comparison of Sir Richard Grenville with Richard 3rd, James
    1st, and Caligula, Hals detained at Lidford, and released by the
    arrival of Essex, Dr. Brown’s verses on Lidford castle 184. Custom
    of executing criminals before trial in Germany, Switzerland, and
    Carinthia, Hals’s family 186. Trewortha Vean and its possessors 188.
    By Tonkin, a daughter church to Probus ibid. Cornelly held with it,
    incumbent, manor of Fentongallen 189. Editor, Trevilian bridge, its
    situation, new road from Bodmin to Truro, Earl of Falmouth’s new
    road to Tregothnan, fairs, surrender of Lord Hopton’s army, church
    small, wooden tower, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 190
  Merton college, Oxford, iv. 86
  ―――― convent, i. 300
  Mervyn, St. parish, iii. 282
  Merwyn, Sir Edmund, iii. 206
  Meuthion, i. 11
  Mevagissey parish, iii. 194, 319
  MEVAGISSEY parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name,
    saints, ancient name and its etymology, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, original name, iii. 190. Penwarne
    Trelevan 191. By Tonkin, church, tower, bells sold by the rebels
    ibid. Editor, Tonkin’s details omitted, Lysons’s additions, lately
    a poor fishing village, pier, convenient for the pilchard fishery,
    number of houses, Porthilly, manor of Trelevan and of Penwarne,
    capacity of the pool, Porthmellin cove, account of the manor and
    barton of Trelevan 192. Manors of Petuan and Penwarne 193. Barton
    of Trewincy, disposal of the tithes, a station for fishing with
    the seine nets, nature of the bay, fish tithed, vicarage house,
    glebe improved, singularities of Dr. Lyne, statistics 194.
    Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 195
  Mevaguisey, ii. 105
  Mevassary, i. 419
  Mevennus abbey, i. 98
  Mewan, i. 41
  ―――― St. Beacon, iii. 401
  ―――― parish, i. 251, 413――iii. 190, 401, 448, 450, 455. Mr. Borlase
    rector of 54
  MEWAN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax,
    Polgoth mine, iii. 195. Lefisick 196. Tonkin, patronage, incumbents,
    manor of Trewoone ibid. Editor, Hals’s various etymologies, pleasing
    appearance of the church, road from Truro to St. Austell improving
    ibid. Polgoth mine, increased working of mines, manor and village of
    Burngullo, manor of Trewoon, statistics 197. Rector, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 198
  Mewla, i. 11
  Michael, St. Abbot of Glastonbury, iv. 26
  ―――― St. the Archangel, ii. 172, 174, 283――iii. 198, 200, 208,
    222.――Painted with wings, ii. 206. Vision of him 206, 208
  ―――― St. bells christened after, iii. 210. Churches dedicated to
    240, 398
  ―――― St. chapel at Rame Head, iii. 375
  ―――― St. Carhayes church, iii. 450
  ―――― St. Carhayes parish, i. 310, 413.――Or Carhays, iv. 117
  MICHAEL, ST. CARHAYES parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, endowment, dedication, impropriation,
    patron, incumbent, iii. 198. Value of benefice, land tax, Trevanion
    and family 199. Tonkin, name, manor of Carhayes, Trevanion family
    200. Description of the house 201. Trevanion, house and park, Porown
    Berry, Hurris, Treberrick, church, situation, description 202.
    Tower, tablet to Mr. Hooker 203. Editor, motives of the civil wars,
    part taken in those of York and Lancaster by the families of
    Edgecumbe, Trevanion and Bodrigan ibid. The two first on the winning
    side, division of Bodrigan’s property, the Trevanions unsuccessful
    on behalf of Charles, and compounded for their state, letter from
    Mr. John Trevanion to Mr. Henry Davis 204. Trevanion’s issue 205.
    Parishes of Rogate and Selburne in Sussex, Arun river and dale,
    manor of Fyning, parish church, etymology 206. Consolidated with St.
    Stephen and St. Dennis, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 207
  ―――― St. de Lammana island, iv. 26 _bis_
  ―――― St. de Loo island, iv. 238
  ―――― St. Penkivell church, Fentongollan aisle in, iii. 187
  ―――― St. Penkivell manor, iii. 189
  ―――― St. Penkivell parish, i. 140, 141, 215――ii. 356――iii. 180, 354,
    464.――School at, ii. 32
  MICHAEL, ST. PENKIVELL parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, antiquity, iii. 207. Dedication, value, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, endowment, Fentongollan aisle and chantry
    208. Fentongollan, its buildings, remembered by the writer, marble
    tomb-stone, the church a quarter cathedral 209. Bells baptized,
    form of the ceremony 210. Tonkin, hundred and situation, should
    have been named Fentongollan ibid. Fentongollan manor, its
    possessors 211. Once magnificent house now pulled down, Mopas
    Ferry, oysters spoiled by the copper ore, Treganyan, church tower,
    rectory house, Tregothnan 212. Boscawen family 213. Editor, Hals’s
    history diffuse ibid. That of Lysons substituted, Lysons, manor of
    Penkivell and of Fentongollan, hospitality of John Carminow 214.
    Tregothnan, Nancarrow ibid. Editor, Boscawen family, their origin
    215. Took the liberal side in the rebellion and revolution 216.
    Hugh Boscawen arrested Sir Richard Vyvyan, Mr. Basset and others
    on the accession of George 1st, feuds occasioned by that step,
    Boscawen ennobled, imbecility and marriage of the 2nd Lord
    Falmouth 217. Admiral Boscawen, the Nelson of his time, his
    popularity in the navy 218. His marriage and issue, memoir of Dr.
    Walcot 219. His lines on the death of W. G. Boscawen 220.
    Situation and advantages of Tregothnan, old house of great
    antiquity, beauty and convenience of the new one, old church and
    massive tower, statistics, incumbent 221. Geology by Dr. Boase 222
  Michael, St. rectory, i. 72
  ――――’s hold, iii. 298
  ――――’s, St. borough, Mr. Hussey, M.P. for, ii. 34
  ――――’s, St. chair, ii. 175 _bis_, 200, 205, 207
  ――――’s, St. chapel, ii. 201
  ――――’s, St. mount, i. 88 _bis_, 261――ii. 80, 169, 170――iii. 274,
    287, 298, 311――iv. 147, 165. By Leland 287. Its history. (_See St.
    Hilary parish_).――Cornish name for, ii. 200.――Abbot of, ii. 136,
    169, 170
  ――――’s St. Mount’s bay, iii. 81 _bis_, 82
  ――――’s St. Mount island, iv. 238
  ――――’s St. Mount monastery upon, iii. 136.――Priory of, ii. 208.
    Dissolved 191. Its property 208.――Priors of, i. 261――ii. 127, 209
    iii. 124, 128――iv. 164, 165
  ――――’s St. Mount in Normandy, ii. 176; and abbey in Periculo Maris
    208 _bis_, 210
  ――――’s St. shrine, ii. 215
  ――――’s St. well, iii. 211
  Michaelstow beacon, ii. 405
  ―――― Mary, and family, iii. 222
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 401――iv. 42, 44, 93, 95
  MICHAELSTOW parish, Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, land-tax, Michaelstow family, iii.
    222. Tonkin, name, patron, incumbent ibid. Editor, Helston in Trig
    manor, Helsbury park, ruins of an ancient castle, monuments in the
    church, Treveighan village, Trevenin, advowson, present rector,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 223
  Michel manor, i. 389. Account of 392
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 262
  Michell borough, i. 391――iv. 20.――Account of 388. Members for 389.
    Compact for elections 391. Last election 391. F. Scobell, M.P. for
    410. Illustrious representatives 390.――Humphrey Courtenay, M.P. for,
    ii. 385
  ―――― Christopher, iii. 319. Paul 382. Richard 387.――John, iv. 77.
    Matthew 98 _bis_. His widow 98. Robert 55. Samuel 98. Mr. 74
  ―――― of Harlyn, Miss, iii. 176. Heiress and family 177
  ―――― foundation, Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139
  ―――― or Mitchell parish, ii. 280. An adjective 171
  Middle ages, ii. 215
  ―――― Amble, ii. 336
  Middleham church, iii. 114
  Middlesex county, ii. 147
  Middleton church, i. 248
  Midhope, Rev. Stephen, of St. Martin’s, near Looe, turned
    anabaptist, iii. 123
  Midhurst, Sussex, iii. 206
  Midinnia, St. iii. 442
  Midmain rock, iv. 28
  Midshipmen subjected to ten years’ service, iii. 218
  Midwinter, Robert, ii. 196
  Milbrok, by Leland, iv. 282
  Mileton of Pengersick, Miss, iv. 22
  Milford haven, ii. 182
  Militon, ii. 169. Job 193
  ―――― of Pengerwick, i. 136
  Millaton manor, iii. 44
  Millett, i. 268. John 365.――Grace, Humphrey and Mary, ii. 218. Rev.
    Mr. 282. Family monuments 219.――Rev. John Curnow and Robert Oke,
    iii. 343
  ―――― of Gurlin, St. Erth, William, ii. 224
  Millington of Pengersick in Breage, ii. 212
  Millinike, account of, ii. 67
  Millinoweth, iii. 319
  Milliton, i. 124. Story of Mr. 125. Job and William ibid. Arms ibid.
  Mills, Rev. Mr. of Veryan, iv. 122
  ―――― of Exeter, Miss, iii. 162
  Milor church, iii. 59. Churchyard, Milorus buried in 59
  ―――― parish, ii. 2, 92, 337――iii. 305. _See Mylor_
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ――――’s, St. by Leland, iv. 271
  Milorus, a Cornish prince, iii. 59
  Milton, John, i. 310
  Miners, lines upon, ii. 131
  ―――― militia, ii. 85
  Minerva, i. 295
  Mingoose, i. 12
  Minheneth, by Leland, iv. 281
  Minors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, i. 211
  Minster church, iii. 111
  ―――― parish, ii. 48, 49 _quat._――iii. 22, 39, 112――iv. 66, 68
  MINSTER parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, iii. 232. Editor, ruins of a monastery,
    Tanner calls it an alien priory ibid. Dugdale’s additions, manor of
    Pollifont an appendage to the living, profits of the manor,
    situation of the church, monuments, epitaph 233. No church tower,
    legend of the bells, Botreaux castle and honour 234. Cotton and
    Phillipps family, attempt on the life of George 3rd, site of
    Botreaux castle, the great house, port of Botreaux castle,
    exportation of slate, and importation of coal and lime 235.
    Capabilities of the place for an extensive commerce, patrons of the
    living, late incumbent, manor of Worthy vale, inscribed stone
    marking the site of King Arthur’s death wound, statistics, present
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 236
  ―――― priory, iii. 39――iv. 105.――Prior of, ii. 49
  ―――― in Kerrier, iii. 111 _bis_.――An alien priory, iv. 101. Prior of 168
  ―――― in Tolcarne, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Minver, St. Church, i. 74.――Spire, latitude and longitude of, iii. 281
  ―――― or Minvor, St. parish, i. 367, 382――ii. 67, 332.――Rev. William
    Sandys, vicar of, iii. 10
  MINVER, ST. or St. Mynfer parish, Hals, a vicarage, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    land-tax, Trevillva barton, iii. 237. MS. here deficient. Tonkin
    only repeats part of Hals. Editor, former impropriation, value of
    benefice, manor of Bodmin bestowed on Sternhold for his version of
    the Psalms, Mr. Sandy’s 238. Travelled with Lord de Dunstanville,
    called the Cardinal, monument to Mrs. Sandys, manor of Penmear,
    Trevernon 239. Monument to Thomas Darell, Pentire point, Trevelver,
    dangerous estuary, bridge over it, two district chapels, highlands
    and lowlands, sale of the bells 240. Though inscribed Alfredus Rex,
    lines on bells, especially Great Tom of Oxford, statistics, present
    vicar and patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 241
  Miracle of transporting St. Catherine’s body, ii. 3. Of the
    thundering legion 76
  Misall Romanorum, i. 393
  Mitchel of Hengar, i. 131
  Mitchell borough, i. 61――iii. 81, 322, 324. Description of 268.
    Constitution 271
  ―――― Robert, ii. 96. Rev. Mr. 299, 302, 315.――Rev. Mr. of Maker,
    iii. 101. Rev. Mr. of Merthyr 190. Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan
    195.――James, John, and Thomas, brothers, iv. 73. Captain 94
  ―――― of Truro, i. 398 _bis_
  ―――― Humphrey Borlase, Lord, iii. 268
  ―――― Morton manor, ii. 416
  Mithian manor, i. 7――ii. 192. Free chapel in 12
  Moddern, ii. 286
  Moderet, John, i. 283
  Modeton, iii. 438
  Modford in Launceston, iii. 136
  Modishole manor, iii. 269
  Mogul’s country, ii. 227
  Mogun bridge, by Leland, and trajectus, iv. 269
  Mogun’s, St. church, iii. 332
  ―――― creek, iii. 332
  Mohammed, the Sultan, interfered in the contest of the Paleolagi,
    took Constantinople, &c. ii. 367. Puts an envoy in irons 368
  Mohun, i. 63, 302. John 65, 255. Reginald 65, 255, 301, 356 Sir
    Reginald 7, 65 _bis_, 345, 346 _quat._ 356. Sibella 8. William 7,
    301. Arms 351, 356. Pedigree from the Conquest 66.――John de, ii.
    409 _bis_. Sir John 410. Sir John or Sir Reginald, story of 402.
    Reginald 56, 409 _bis_. Sir Reginald 410. Family 409, 410 _bis_,
    412. Monuments 411.――Reginald de, iii. 293, 303. Family 303.――Sir
    William, iv. 15. Family 44. Arms 96.――Lord, i. 65――ii. 410――iii.
    315――iv. 14, 186.――Charles Lord, i. 65. His duel with the Duke of
    Hamilton 66 and 67. His character 67. Wife drowned ibid.――John,
    Lord 65, 255.――John, Lord, of Dunster castle, Somersetshire, ii.
    409 _bis_.――Warwick, Lord, i. 65――ii. 410
  Mohun of Hall, Sir William, ii. 56
  ―――― of Lithony, i. 420. Warwick, ib.
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 255. Warwick, William, and arms 255
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356 _bis_
  Mola, ancient chapel at, i. 12
  Molesworth, i. 61 _bis_, 74, 266 _bis_, 397. Hon. John 368. Sir John
    399. Sir William 117. Rev. William 117, 406.――Rev. H. ii. 364. Sir
    John 273. Sir W. 88. Family 151, 273, 356, 357.――Hender, iii. 214.
    John 234. Sir William 335. Family 334.――Sir John, iv. 64. Rev. W. of
    St. Winnow 159 _bis_. Family 44, 65, 127
  ―――― of Molesworth, Sir Walter, a crusader, i. 369, 375
  ―――― of Pencarrow, i. 416. Hender 370 _bis_. Sir Hender 370 _bis_,
    375. John 370 _ter._, 375, 397. Sir John 116, 370, 374, 375. Arms
    370.――Family, ii. 274, 334――iii. 170――iv. 163
  ―――― of Pendavy, Sir William, i. 377
  ―――― of Tretane, John, i. 369, 370
  Molton, ii. 76
  Mona, i. 194
  Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 168――ii. 62, 176――iii. 103, 111――iv. 6,
    100, 156
  Monck, Mr. of Devon, ii. 251.――General, his conduct characterized,
    iii. 460
  ―――― of Potheridge, Devon, Humphrey, ii. 251
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186
  Monckton, Henry de, i. 383.――Family, ii. 354
  ―――― Arundell, Robert, Viscount Galway, ii. 354
  Monheere, George, iii. 387
  Monk, General, i. 116――ii. 26――iv. 75 _bis_.――His refusal to give or
    take quarter, and victory over the Dutch, entertained by Capt.
    Penrose, ii. 26. Again defeats the Dutch 27. Sir John Grenville, the
    bearer of the King’s letters to 345. Rev. Nicholas, brother of the
    general 345.――Family, i. 36, 302――ii. 5
  ―――― frigate, ii. 28. Discharged unpaid 29
  Monks of St Benedict, i. 73; or Benedictine, ii. 208
  Monmouth, Jeffery of, Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of, his invasion, iii. 160
  Monotholites, ii. 125
  Monpesson, Sir Giles, i. 223
  Montacute, William, Earl of Salisbury, i. 339.――Earl, ii. 91.
    Marquis 182
  ―――― priory in Somersetshire, iii. 261 _bis_――iv. 112 _ter._, 113
    _bis_, 122. Monks of 112
  Montagu, Lady Anne and Edward, Earl of Sandwich, iii. 104
  Montague, M. A. Browne, of Cowdray castle, Sussex, Lord, iii. 231
  Montgomery, Arnold de, i. 34.――Roger de, Earl of Arundell, iii. 142
  ―――― iv. 8
  Monton, David de, i. 246
  Montpelier, iii. 400
  Montreuil, ii. 127. In France, siege of 196
  Moone, Thomas, iii. 346
  Moor, Mr. i. 254
  Moore, Sir Thomas, ii. 53
  Moorman, Dr. John, Vicar of Menheniot, iii. 170
  Moorwinstow parish, iv. 16
  Mopas passage, iii. 212
  Moran, St. iv. 277
  Morden, by Leland, iv. 270
  Mordred, cousin of King Arthur, i. 337, 372.――His battle with
    Arthur, ii. 402. Mortally wounded 403
  Morea, ii. 366 _bis_, 367. Attacked by the Turks 367. Despots of 367
    _bis_
  Morehead family, property sold, iii. 20
  Moreland in Lesnewith, iii. 133
  Moreps, ii. 121
  Moreri, i. 111.――His Dictionnaire Historique, ii. 207――iv. 157
  Mores manor, i. 202, 203, 204
  Moresk manor, iii. 354
  MOREWINSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    and saint, a vicarage, value of benefice, patron, impropriation,
    iii. 254. Editor, later value and impropriation, present
    impropriation, rise of the river Tamar, west part rugged, situation
    and size of church ibid. Monuments, villages, Stanbury manor, error
    of Lysons, Stanbury, Bishop of Hereford, Tonacombe Lea farm 255.
    Cleave house, Chapel house, statistics, late vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Dunstone rocks, cliffs of Stanbury creek 256
  Morgan, Rev. W. A. of Lewannick, iii. 38.――Of Tresmere, iv. 65
  Morice, Barbara and Sir William, i. 116.――Family, ii. 256. Sir
    Nicholas 175. Sir William, family and property 334
  ―――― of Werrington, Catherine, i. 265, 266. Sir Nicholas and Sir
    William 265.――Family, iii. 178.――Edward, iv. 94
  ―――― St. Oratory of, ii. 75
  Morike church, iii. 190
  Moris manor, i. 396――ii. 2.――Duchy manor, iv. 72
  Morisk castle, iv. 228
  Morrice, i. 74
  Morris, Sir William and his family, iii. 460. Rev. Mr. 97. Mr.
    executed 184
  ―――― town, i. 266
  Morrison, Rev. F. H. ii. 416
  Morsa parish, ii. 282
  Morshead, Rev. Edward, i. 159.――William, ii. 154. Mr. 87. Family,
    iii. 172――iv. 60
  ―――― of Cartuther, Sir John, i. 321
  Mortaigne or Morton, Earl of, ii. 208, 358, 399. His market 70.
    Robert 175, 176, 202, 203 _bis_, 211, 235, 238, 379, 384, 422. His
    charter to St. Michael’s mount 210. William, Earl of, said to have
    built Lanceston castle, and to have drawn the inhabitants from
    Dunhevet to that town 418
  Mortayne, iii. 438
  Morth, John and William, iv. 22
  Mortimer, Eleanor, i. 64. Roger 339. Roger, Earl of March and Ulster 64
  Morton, iii. 14, 65――iv. 22
  ―――― Earl of, i. 134――iii. 261, 264, 276. John 296. Robert 112, 203
    _bis_, 418, 419. William 203 _ter._――Robert, iii. 14, 27, 44, 46,
    117, 291, 346, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam 462.――Robert, iv.
    15, 67. William 110, 122.――Matilda, Countess of, ii. 211
  ―――― Earl of Cornwall and, iii. 22
  ―――― and Cornwall, Earl of, William, ii. 175.――Robert, iv. 102, 118,
    153. William 100
  ―――― Thomas, mayor of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 2, 3. Family
    and arms 3
  ―――― honor, iv. 96, 112
  ―――― manor, ii. 235――iv. 68
  ―――― prior of, ii. 49
  Morun, St. unknown, ii. 356
  Morva or Morvah, parish, iii. 82, 89, 425 _bis_――iv. 164
  MORVA parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, daughter to
    Madderne, etymology, Tregamynyon, iii. 242. The Golden Lanyon, his
    improvement in roofing houses, Carvolghe manor 243. Editor, church
    re-built, its situation, patron, curious entrenchment 243.
    Described, called Castle Chiowne, destroyed by depredations, a
    Cromleigh, Carn Galva, statistics 244. Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Morval manor, iii. 246, 248, 361. House 249
  ―――― parish, iii. 427, 463. By Looe 118
  MORVAL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, a vicarage, value, etymology, iii. 245. Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology mistaken, Sir Hugh de Morville one of Becket’s
    murderers, state of Cornwall during the wars of the roses, murder
    and robbery of John Glynn 246. His widow’s petition to parliament,
    schedule of property stolen 247. Buller family 248. Morval manor
    house, improved 249. Bray, epitaph on Philip Mayow, Dr. John Mayow
    250. Dr. Beddoes, Sir Humphrey Davy introduced to him by the
    Editor, Wood’s memoir of Dr. Mayow 251. His works, Polgover,
    Lydcott, Wringworthy, Sand Place village, situation of church,
    monuments 252. Impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Bindon
    hill, prospect from it, road passes nearly over its summit,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 253
  Morval town, iii. 247
  Morvall, i. 316――ii. 59
  Morville, Sir Hugh de, iii. 246
  Morwell, by Leland, iv. 282
  Morwen, St. iii. 116, 254
  Morwenna, i. 2
  Morwinstow, ii. 340
  Morysk castle, iv. 229
  Moses, ii. 65
  Motiled, ii. 427
  Moune, William, i. 65 _bis_
  Mount of the tomb, ii. 208
  Mount or Mount’s bay, i. 227――ii. 118, 120, 169, 174, 176, 182, 207.
    Trees found in 173――iii. 46, 48, 78, 83, 97, 98, 215, 283, 375. _See
    St. Michael’s, Mount’s Bay_
  ―――― Calvary, a Cornish poem, i. 109――ii. 99 _bis_, 152. Extract
    from 99; and Keigwyn’s translation of, iii. 288. Both published by
    Editor 329
  ―――― Charles, i. 368
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 108, 110. Account of 107. Partly in Devon 104.
    Described by Carew ibid. Possessors of 101. House built 103. The
    only seat in Cornwall superior to Tregothnan 221
  ―――― Edgecumbe, cliff at, iii. 380
  ―――― Edgecumbe, Countess of, ii. 364.――Earl of, iii. 29, 195,
    379――iv. 92.――Lord, i. 154――ii. 100, 393
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Sinai, monastery upon, ii. 37
  ―――― Stephens, John, his life and tragical death, and speculations
    upon the latter, i. 84
  ―――― Toby, i. 158
  Mountague hill, Somersetshire, ii. 283
  Mounts, i. 84
  Mountserat island, iii. 183
  Mourton, James, ii. 193
  Mousehole manor, iii. 91
  ―――― village, iii. 286, 288, 290, 291. Account of 286. Destroyed by
    the Spaniards 91
  Moushole, ii. 174
  Mowne, William, i. 66 _bis_. Reginald, Lord Dunster 66. William,
    Lord Dunster 66. William, Earl of Somerset 66 _bis_
  Mowpass passage, iii. 464
  Mowsehole, by Leland, iv. 286
  Moyes, J. R. ii. 160 _bis_
  Moyle, i. 44, 45, 74. Ann and David 260. Nathaniel 371.――Family, ii.
    67. Thomas 67. Miss 77, 255. Mr. 77 _quin._, 78, 350
  Moyle of Bake, i. 222. Sir Walter 375.――Walter, ii. 76, 77. His
    works 76.――Sir Walter and his daughter, iii. 2
  ―――― of Beke, John, Sir Walter, and arms, ii. 67
  ―――― of Bodmin, ii. 67
  ―――― of Boke, Elizabeth and Sir Walter, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― of Oxford, ii. 67
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 375. Nathaniel ibid.
  ――――of Trefurans, ii. 67
  Moyn, Reginald, Earl of Somerset, i. 66
  Mudgan, iii. 126. Account of 125
  Mudge, Colonel, iv. 31
  Mullion cove, iii. 259
  ―――― parish, i. 301; or Mullyan, ii. 116, 126――iii. 128, 416, 419,
    424. In Kerrier 164
  MULLION parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    dedication, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, endowment,
    value, the saint, iii. 257. Editor, church ancient, painted glass
    ibid. Monument and epitaph to Mr. Favell, tower, tithes, manor of
    Pradannock, divided into higher and lower, Clahar manor, parish
    feast, St. Malo’s day, late vicar, statistics 258. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Kinance cove, Mullion cove, Bolerium cove. Editor, beauty of
    Kinance cove, description of it and of the Cornish rocks generally
    259. Erica vagans and asparagus officinalis 260
  Mundy, i. 232 _ter._ John, _bis_, Sir John and arms 232
  ―――― of Rialton, Anne and John, iii. 186
  Mundye, Anthony, ii. 10
  Murray, Mr. of Albemarle-street, iii. 251
  Murth, Jeffrey and John, iv. 25. Mr. 24. Family ibid. Arms 25
  Musgrave, Dr. W. letters to, ii. 76
  Musical air, ancient, found in Scotland, Ireland, and Cornwall,
    supposed to be British, ii. 166
  Muttenham, etymology and resident, i. 104
  Mydhop of Essex, Henry, Roger and arms, i. 320
  Mylbrooke, iv. 291
  Mylor manor, iii. 228 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 11
  MYLOR parish, Hals lost, situation, boundaries, saint, value of
    benefice, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Carclew
    barton and its possessors, iii. 224. House built by Mr. Kempe, tin
    225; and antimony, Restronget manor, and passage with a ferry boat,
    part of Penryn manor, Trefusis and Tregoze manors 226. Trefusis
    family, house, &c. Nankersy, its etymology, town of Flushing, the
    Dutch would have made it commercial, Mr. Trefusis improved it at
    great expense 227. Better situated for packets than Falmouth, Mylor
    manor, situation and description of the church 228. Editor, error in
    the valuation, monuments in the church 228. Westmacott’s to Reginald
    Cocks, Carclew, the Lemon family, Polvellan described 229. Colonel
    Lemon a proficient in music, Sir William improved Carclew, Sir
    Charles’s further improvements, erica ciliaris, Trefusis family 230.
    Situation of Trefusis, Flushing an elegant town. Tonkin’s etymology
    of Restrongel, present vicar, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 231
  ―――― pool, iii. 224, 228
  Mynor, Anne and Henry, i. 222
  Mynors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, iii. 135
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Anne 249
  Myra, in Lysia, St. Nicholas, Archbishop of, iv. 172

  Naal or Natal Abbot, iii. 432
  Naboth’s vineyard, i. 329
  Nacothan, John, iii. 387
  Nampara, iii. 326, 327
  Nampetha, iii. 319
  Nancar, account of, i. 256
  Nancarrow estate, i. 19――iii. 215
  ―――― family, i. 20
  Nance in Illogan, iv. 129
  ―――― i. 298.――Family and arms, ii. 239.――John, iv. 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Chester family, iii. 382
  ―――― of Nance, ii. 337
  ―――― Mellin, iii. 326
  Nanceolvern, possessors of, iii. 88
  Nanfan of Trethewoll, John, Richard and arms, i. 408
  Nanfon, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Nankersy, tenement, account of, iii. 227. A Dutch town on it ibid.
  Nankivell, Rev. Edw. of St. Agnes and Stithians, iv. 5
  Nanquitty, ii. 57
  Nansant church, ii. 256
  Nansanton, Nassington or Naffeton, iii. 334, 335
  Nansaugh barton, account of, ii. 354
  Nansavallan, account of, by the Editor, ii. 305. By Hals 299. By
    Tonkin 303
  ―――― farm, improvement of, ii. 306
  Nanskevall or Typpel, of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard and arms, iv. 139
  Nansloe, account of, ii. 139
  Nansoath manor, account of, ii. 353
  Nansperian, i. 349 _ter._ Arms 349
  Nanswhiddon, account of, i. 223
  Nanswidden in St. Colomb, ii. 143
  Nantellan, i. 257
  Nants, ii. 236. Account of 238
  Nantval, i. 413
  Napleton, Rev. John, ii. 33
  Napoleon’s use of the Pitt diamond, i. 69
  Narbonne, general chapter of, i. 81
  Nare, the, i. 330
  ―――― point, i. 330
  Nash, the architect, iii. 205
  Nation, Rev. Mr. ii. 332
  Natural history, the learned Dr. Lombard ignorant of, ii. 408
  Naunton’s, St. chapel and well, i. 257
  Nautical Almanack, description of, conducted by Dr. Maskelyne, since
    improved, ii. 233
  Nava family, ii. 80
  Naval affairs after the seven years war, ii. 246
  ―――― power, iii. 154
  Navarre, Blanche, Queen of, iii. 19
  Naw Voz or Naw Whoors, i. 220
  Nectan, i. 2――iv. 156
  ―――― St. or Nighton, iv. 155. His history 155
  ―――― chapel, iv. 157
  Nelson, Admiral Boscawen compared with, iii. 218
  Neocæsarea, i. 388
  Neot, St. iii. 261, 262.――His body stolen, i. 99.――His life, ii.
    396――iii. 262. A relation of Alfred, Alfred visited him, was
    advised by him in founding the university of Oxford, his
    remains 263
  Neot’s, St. church, iii. 20. Its windows 363.――Curious painting in,
    ii. 298
  ―――― manor, iii. 260, 261
  ―――― parish, i. 174, 178――ii. 395――iii. 111, 347――iv. 48, 128,
    129.――Alfred’s visit to, iii. 241
  NEOT’S, ST. parish, Hals’s, MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patrons, incumbent, iii. 260.
    Manor of St. Neot 261. By Editor, error in Tonkin’s valuation,
    Lysons on the manors of this parish, manor and advowson united ibid.
    Mr. Grylls restored the church, its situation, St. Guerir, performed
    a miraculous cure on Alfred, St. Neot related to Alfred, his
    singular penance and miraculous powers, Alfred frequently visited
    him, his death 262. Appeared after death to Alfred, led his armies,
    and advised him to found Oxford university, his relics stolen, the
    monastery suppressed after the Conquest, his memory cherished,
    diminutive stature, painted glass preserved for his sake,
    description of the church 263. Windows, voluntary contributions,
    preserved through the Reformation and Civil War, since falling into
    decay till restored by Mr. Grylls, “Hedgeland’s Description, &c.”
    264. Dozmere, marvellous tales relating to it, story of Mr. Tregagle
    condemned to empty it with a limpet shell having a hole bored in it,
    his roaring 265. Etymology of Dozmere, statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 266
  ――――’s, St. an alien priory, iv. 101
  Neotston or Neot’s place, iii. 261
  Nero, the Roman emperor, i. 329――iv. 101
  Nesta, Princess of Wales, i. 34
  Nettlebed manor, iv. 4, 5 _bis_
  Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, iv. 114
  Neustria pillaged by the Normans, ii. 90
  Neville, Richard, Earl of Salisbury, and Margaret his daughter, ii.
    182. Richard Earl of Warwick 38. His cognizance on Fowey church 38.
    Grants the Foy men commissions for privateering 40. His commission
    to punish the Foy pirates 41
  Nevres, St. Dye, Bishop of, ii. 133
  New bridge, i. 138
  ―――― Cambridge, iii. 72
  ―――― Holland, captain Bligh, governor of, iv. 45
  ―――― York, ii. 268
  Newcastle, ii. 28
  ―――― Hollis, Duke of, iii. 147
  Newcome, i. 160
  Newcomen, Mr. of Dartmouth, ii. 83
  Newenham, Devon, Cistercian abbey at, iii. 293
  Newham abbey, Devon, its dissolution, iv. 15
  Newhaven, Charles Cheney, viscount, iii. 458
  Newlan, Newlin or Newlyn parish, ii. 174, 270――iii. 81, 97, 99, 112,
    313, 317, 324, 333, 358――iv. 20.――Vicarage, i. 130
  Newland parish, i. 230, 245, 386, 393
  NEWLIN, or ST. NEWLIN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, a vicarage, value, patron, tithe
    appropriation, incumbent, manor of Cargol, ruins and prison there,
    Treludra, iii. 267. Humphrey Borlase adhered to King James 2nd,
    Treludra or Borlase Pippin, borough of Mitchell, described by
    Browne Willis, manor 268. Degembris, Palmaunter, Tresilian,
    Treworthen manors 269. Trerice manor 270. By Editor, valuation,
    impropriation, situation and description of church, carved work,
    Arundell vault ibid. Monument to Mr. Pooley, incumbent Mr.
    Polwhele, manor of Cargols, and Treludra, borough of Michell, its
    constitution 271. Remarks upon it, close boroughs in general and
    the Reform Act, Shepherds, Sir C. Hawkins’s lead and silver mine
    272. Mr. John Giddy a memoir of him, his death, quotation from
    Juvenal 273. Manor of Newlyn, story of Sir John Arundell, John for
    the King and his son the first lord of Trerice, the house at
    Trerice, Tresilian improved, statistics 274. Present vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Trevemper bridge, Black Lime rock, the town
    a village in the parish of Paul 275
  Newlin, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Newlyn, James de, iii. 287
  ―――― manor, iii. 274
  ―――― town, iii. 275, 286. Account of 288, 289
  Newnham manor, ii. 318
  Newport borough, ii. 420, 432.――Its history and small extent, iii.
    458. Bought by the Duke of Northumberland 460. Charles Cheyney, M.P.
    for 458
  ―――― town, iii. 461――iv. 51
  Newquay, i. 236. Account of 234, 235
  Newton, Sir Isaac, iii. 174.――His theory of gravitation, &c. ii. 222
  ―――― account of, iii. 161
  ―――― Ferrers, West, iii. 164. Its possessors 165
  Nicene Creed, i. 252
  Nicholas, Mrs. of Looe, i. 286
  ―――― Pope, ii. 354, 356, 365, 384, 394, 398, 411, 412, 414――His
    taxatio Beneficiorum, iii. 5, 7, 41, 44, 46, 56, 106 _bis_, 172,
    228, 232, 238, 257, 261, 270, 276, 278, 291, 400, 453 _bis_――iv. 113
  ―――― 2nd, Pope, i. 110
  ―――― 4th, ―――― iv. 152
  ―――― 5th, ―――― iv. 148
  ―――― St. supposed by Tonkin to be the patron saint of Kellington
    parish, ii. 311. A popular saint, held in high veneration in Russia,
    his history, kept the Roman fasts when an infant 312. His festival
    celebrated by the boy bishop 313.――The patron of infants, iv. 172.
    Of mariners 171. His history 172
  ―――― St. church, Bodmin, belonging to Franciscan friars, great
    dimensions, converted into a house of correction and market place,
    i. 79, and court-house 80. Its font 80. Revenues 83
  ―――― island, iii. 101――iv. 238
  ―――― St. in Scilly, priory and prior, iv. 171
  ―――― Shambles, London, i. 83
  Nicholl of Penrose, Anthony, ii. 384
  Nicholls, i. 74, 305 _bis_――ii. 130.――Frank, M. D. iii. 84. Walter
    16. William 85 _bis_. Mrs. 85. Family 83, 84, 90
  ―――― of Penrose, ii. 153
  ―――― of Trewane, ii. 338. John 335, 339 _quat._ Arms 339
  Nichols, J. and Son, Parliament-street, ii. 295, 296――iii. 45, 120,
    264――iv. 25
  ―――― i. 109, 178, 221.――Family, iii. 243, 343
  ―――― of Trewane, i. 173, 416
  Nicholson, Margaret, i. 134――iv. 45
  Nicolas, Sir Harris, iii. 138
  Nicoll, Anthony, iv. 96. Humphrey 97
  Nietstone, iv. 48
  Nightingale, i. 144
  Nikenor, by Leland, iv. 265
  Nile, battle of, iii. 160
  Nine maids, i. 221. Account of 220.――In Gwendron, ii. 137
  Ninnis, ii. 218
  Niveton, i. 174
  “Noble ingratitude,” iv. 98
  Noles, Mrs. Elizabeth, ii. 84
  Norden, J. i. 341, 350――ii. 336, 414, 417――iii. 75, 360, 361――iv. 41
  Norfolk, iii. 248
  ―――― Thomas Howard, Duke of, iii. 293
  Norman Conquest, ii. 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 126, 129, 151, 155, 165,
    258, 291, 299, 319, 335, 381――iii. 33, 56, 59, 74, 78, 114, 118, 130
    _bis_, 151, 168, 175, 207, 208, 209, 222, 264, 363, 391, 393, 402,
    403, 419, 425, 428, 436, 456――iv. 66, 71 _bis_, 99, 100, 140, 160, 164
  ―――― French, life of Guy Earl of Warwick in, iii. 113
  ―――― magnificence, ii. 423
  Normandy, i. 335 _quat._, 336――ii. 179 _bis_, 202――iv. 103, 144
  ―――― Duke of, iii. 130. Robert and William 462.――Rolle, ii. 344, 347
  Normans, i. 256――iv. 99
  ―――― petition for and obtain letters of marque against Fowey and
    burn it, ii. 39. Pillage Neustria 90. Their castles, the keeps
    spacious 423
  North, Lord, ii. 245. Lord Keeper 255 _bis_. Mr. Tregenna married
    his relation 255
  ―――― hill parish, ii. 230――iii. 37, 43
  Northampton, John, i. 341
  Northcott, i. 108, 111
  Northill, i. 21, 409
  Northmore of Oakhampton, Devon, Mr. iii. 41
  Northumberland, i. 289, 290 _ter._――iv. 42
  ―――― Hugh 1st Duke of, iii. 460 _bis_. Josceline Percy, Earl of 460
  ―――― Ethelfred, King of, ii. 284
  Norton manor, iv. 15
  Norton Rolle manor, ii. 416, 427
  Noseworthy, Edward, ii. 260――iii. 5, 238. William 83.――Francis, iv. 77
  Nosworthy, Edward, i. 36 _bis_. John 36.――Edward, ii. 51, 55 _ter._
    His lawsuit 51. Family 55 _bis_
  ―――― of Truro, Jane, i. 243
  Notitia Monastica, i. 200
  ―――― Parliamentaria, i. 200
  Nottingham, ii. 76
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  Nowell, Mr. made a fortune at Falmouth, ii. 19.――Michael, of
    Falmouth, iii. 77
  Noy, i. 143 _bis_. Edward 147. Hesther and Humphrey 144. William 144
    _quat._ Attorney-general 147
  Noye, William, Attorney-general, ii. 66, 160. Bought the estate of
    Lanew, Colonel Humphrey his son dispossessed after an expensive
    litigation by the Earl of Bath 333. Sold his title to Davies 334.
    The Editor their descendant and heir at law 339
  ―――― of Pendrea, in Burian, Bridgman, iii. 145, 159, 160. Catherine
    152 _bis_, 159. Edward 145 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 153, 156. His duel 152,
    156. Humphrey 145. Colonel Humphrey 145, 152 _bis_, 153 _quat._,
    156, 159 _bis_, 160. His marriage contract 157. His monument 151.
    Katherine 145. William 145. William, Attorney-general 143, 145, 151,
    152, 161, 342. Memoir of him 143. L’Estrange’s character of him, his
    death, and descendants, entertaining Charles 1st 145. Upheld the
    extreme prerogative 146. Received the thanks of his college, having
    pleaded its cause gratis, with the report from the college register
    155. His picture, a copy presented by the Editor to Exeter college
    156. Anagram on his name 146. His will 152. His works 153. Catalogue
    of them 154. His MSS. in the British Museum 154. His “Reports”, 145,
    154. Family 216.――Arms, i. 361――iii. 145, 151. Crest and motto
    151.――Hester, widow of Humphrey, her petition, iv. 57. Colonel
    Humphrey served Charles 1st 58. William, Attorney-general 57 _bis_,
    58. Family 57
  Nugent, iii. 192.――George Lord, his life of Hampden, ii. 77. His
    account of the quarrel of Eliot and Moyle 78. His memorials of
    Hampden 349.――Lord 349
  Nunn, St. mother of St. David, iii. 292
  Nunn’s, St. pool, method of cure, i. 21
  Nunne, St., day dedicated to, i. 25
  Nuns, Benedictine, i. 73
  Nutcell, St. Boniface, Abbot of, iv. 128
  Nutcombe, Rev. Nutcombe, Chancellor of Exeter, iii. 4
  Nutwell, i. 168, 169
  Nympha bank, iii. 6

  Oak bark, decoction of, preserves fishing nets, ii. 264
  Oakeston, Sir Alexander, ii. 8, 109――iii. 448.――Joan, his widow, ii. 109
  Oakhampton, i. 170. Borough 65
  Oakstone, Sir Alexander, i. 36
  Oate of Peransabulo, i. 348
  Oats, John, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas 318 _quat._ Mr. and origin of
    name 318
  Observatory, Royal, Mr. Hitchins and his son assistants at, ii. 222, 224
  Ocrinum, ii. 94, 199. Of Ptolemy 174. Promontory supposed to be the
    Lizard 20
  Octa, i. 326
  Octanett family, ii. 341
  Odin, i. 341
  Odo, Mr. ii. 426
  Œdipus Tyrannus, ii. 103
  Ogbere or Ugbere tenement, iv. 41
  Okeford, Devon, Mr. Haden, incumbent of, iii. 19. Rev. James Parkin,
    rector 96
  Oklynton Brygge, iv. 255
  Olea fragrans, iv. 183
  Oliver, Thomas, ii. 189.――Dr. iii. 88. Mr. of Falmouth 159.――Rev.
    Mr. of Zennar, iv. 164
  “Oliver’s Historic Collections,” iii. 372
  Oncomb, Rutland, ii. 89
  Opie, i. 368.――The artist, iii. 88
  ―――― of Ennis, i. 399 _bis_. John and Robert ibid.
  ―――― of Towton, i. 399. Arms ibid.
  Oppie, Thomas, iii. 387
  Orange, Prince of, ii. 112――iii. 216, 297
  Orcett, ii. 340
  Orchard, Charles, iii. 349. Family 415, 416. Paul 413, 414, 416
  ―――― of Alderscombe, ii. 347. Memorials in church 347
  ―――― of Hartland Abbey, Paul, ii. 347
  ―――― of Orcott family, and Charles, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 343
  ―――― Mauvais, East, manor, iv. 136
  Orcot, account of, ii. 343
  Ordgar, Duke of Devon, iv. 6.――Earl of Devonshire, iii. 384, 460
  Ordnance, Mr. Call’s improvements in, iv. 11
  Ordulf, Earl of Devonshire, iii. 385
  Orestes, iii. 265
  Orford, George Walpole, Earl of, iii. 230 _bis_
  Origen, i. 193, 388
  Orleans, Duke of, Regent of France, purchases the Pitt Diamond, i.
    68. Wears it in his hat 69
  Ornithologum longibracteatum, iv. 182
  Orosius, ii. 237
  Osbaldeston, Miss, ii. 34
  Osbert, i. 383.――Mr. iv. 44, 46
  Osborne family, iv. 173
  Osca, a town in Spain, i. 88
  Oseney Abbey, iii. 241
  Osmunda Regalis, iv. 181
  Osraig clan, iii. 331
  Osseney North, near Oxford, iv. 5
  Ossian, ii. 405. His poems 406
  Ossory, Bishop and Archdeacon of, iv. 146 _bis_
  ―――― county, ii. 94――iii. 331
  Ossuna, Don Diego, Bishop of, i. 311
  Oswald, St. iii. 33
  Otaheite, discovery of, i. 359――iii. 405
  Otham or Othram manor, iii. 276
  Other half stone, i. 178 _bis_, 180, 182 _bis_, 183
  Othonna pectinata, iv. 182
  Otterham parish, ii. 86 _bis_, 232, 273 _bis_――iii. 22――iv. 61, 125, 127
  OTTERHAM parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 275.
    Value, ancient name, a rectory, patron and incumbent 276. Editor,
    manor, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase ibid.
  Ottery St. Mary, i. 394
  Ottomans destroyed the wall of Constantinople, ii. 366
  Oughtred, Sir Anthony, defeats the French fleet, ii. 171
  Ovid, passage from, i. 189.――Notes on, iv. 87
  Owen, G. W., iv. 60, 276
  Oxalis, iv. 182
  Oxenham of Oxenham in Devon, iv. 25
  Oxford, i. 84, 247――ii. 60, 65, 138, 139, 221, 241, 389――iii. 52,
    160, 329――iv. 14.――Bath stone brought to, i. 58.――Arms of, and
    tradition connected with them, ii. 404
  ―――― near Sevenoaks, iv. 87
  ―――― county, iii. 156
  ―――― Earl of, John de Vere, i. 262, 402. Richard de Vere 262,
    263.――Aubrey last of the De Veres, ii. 395. John 12th Earl 181
    _bis_. John 13th Earl 182, 183 _bis_, 184. John 14th Earl 185.
    Richard 11th Earl 181. Richard 395.――Richard de Vere 11th Earl, iii. 65
  ―――― press, iii. 123.――Delegates from, ii. 266
  ―――― University, ii. 147, 233, 266――iii. 72, 155, 163, 221, 239, 300
    _bis_, 336 _bis_, 344, 352――iv. 69, 144, 145.――Founded, iii.
    264.――J.P. Rigaud, Professor of Astronomy at, ii. 376
  ―――― verses, ii. 348
  Oxnam, Richard, iii. 89
  Oysters poisoned by the copper, iii. 212

  Pabenham, John de, i. 370
  Pacific Ocean, coral reefs in, iii. 108
  Padestock, iii. 324
  Paddistow, by Leland, iv. 284
  Padestow, by Leland, iv. 260
  Padstow church, i. 74.――Font in, iii. 178
  ―――― harbour, ii. 253――iii. 236, 382, 423
  ―――― haven, i. 372, 373 _bis_, 376 _bis_, 381
  ―――― parish, i. 377――ii. 79, 256 _bis_, 299――iii. 175, 334 _bis_,
    435.――Rev. William Rawlings, rector, ii. 400.――Etymology, iii. 176
  PADSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Leland’s
    account of the town, privileges derived from Athelstan, ancient
    names, value of benefice, St. Petroc born there, Fuller and
    Collier upon St. Petroc, church a vicarage, value, iii. 277.
    Patron, incumbent 278. Editor, named from St. Petroc, value of
    benefice, Whitaker’s conjecture that Mr. Prideaux lived on the
    site of St. Petroc’s monastery, character of him ibid. Carew’s
    account of the house, its erection and improvements, church 279.
    Prideaux monuments, town not large, harbour inconvenient,
    prospects of its improvement, Mr. William Rawlins brought a
    considerable trade, tithes split, several chapels, St. Sampson’s
    280. Account of St. Sampson, a beautiful walk, St. Saviour’s
    chapel, origin of that name, domestic tragedy contained in a black
    letter pamphlet, trigonometrical survey, Stepper point 281. Time
    of high water, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, slate at
    Dinah’s Cave and Rock Ferry 282. Singular crystalline rock,
    Penniscen bay, Yealm bridge in Werrington 283
  ―――― rock, i. 74, 94
  ―――― town, iii. 331
  Pagan army employed by the Christian Emperor of Rome, ii. 75
  ―――― inhabitants of Cornwall converted, iii. 304
  Pagans, iii. 285
  Page, i. 263
  Paget, Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan, iii. 196.――Rev. Simon of Truro, iv. 76
  Pagett, Rev. Mr. of Truro, iv. 71
  Painter, i. 344――ii. 316
  ―――― of Antrim, i. 351
  ―――― of Trelisick, ii. 99
  Paldys tin mine, ii. 131
  Paleolagi of Montferrat, ii. 369 _bis_
  Paleolagus dynasty, account of, ii. 366. Andronicus 1st and 2nd,
    John 1st and 2nd, quarrels of Theodore, Constantine, Demetrius, and
    Thomas, death of John 2nd, death of Andronicus, Demetrius possessed
    Silybria and aspired to the throne 366. Thomas supported
    Constantine, dissensions of Demetrius and Thomas, Mohammed’s
    advantages therefrom, death of Constantine 367. Thomas retires on
    the taking of Constantinople, Demetrius submits, his death and
    account of his two sons, Thomas’s pension from the pope, Gibbon’s
    contemptuous account of the family fate 368. Refuted 369
  Paleolagus, Andrew, son of Demetrius, ii. 368. Andronicus 366.
    Camilio 365. Camillo 369, 370 _bis_. Constantine 366 _bis_, 369.
    Eighth of that name, and last Emperor 365. Demetrius 366 _bis_.
    Dorothy 365. Daughter of Theodore 374. Her marriage and death 375.
    Emmanuel 366 _bis_. Ferdinando 365, 369. Son of Theodore 374. Lost
    sight of 375. Isidore, a monk 366. John 365 _bis_, 369, 370. Third
    son of Demetrius 369. John 2nd 370. Son of Theodore 374. Lost sight
    of 375. Manuel son of Demetrius 368. Maria 365. Daughter of Theodore
    374. Died unmarried 375. Martha, wife of Theodore, jun. 375. Michael
    366. Prosper 365, 369 _bis_. Theodore 365 _bis_, 366 _bis_, 369,
    375. His life by Mr. Arundell 365. Birth, parentage, reasons for
    leaving Italy 370. In England, and married in 1615, register of his
    marriage imperfect, his issue, did not settle at Landulph before
    1622 with his family 372. Connected with the Arundell or Lower
    family, probably lived at Clifton with Sir Nicholas Lower, his death
    373. Burial, discrepancy of dates, vault and coffin opened,
    appearance of the body 374. His monument, its inscription, arms 365.
    Account of his issue 374. Theodore son of Theodore 374. Died at sea
    375. Thomas 365, 366 _bis_, 369, 370. His character from
    Khalcondylas by Recaut, and by Mahomet 368.――Constantine, iv. 148
  Palestine, i. 130, 411――iii. 129.――Guy, Earl of Warwick’s journey
    to, iv. 113
  Palfer castle, Normandy, iv. 141
  Pallamaunter of Palamaunter family, iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Pallamonter, i. 247
  Pallas, i. 183
  Pallephant, i. 159
  Palmer, Roger, Earl of Castlemaine, ii. 11. Rev. Mr. refused to
    subscribe the Act of Uniformity 220. His prophecy 221
  Palmerias, Matthias, iv. 148
  Pancras, St. Truro church dedicated to, iv. 8
  ―――― church, London, iii. 148
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80, 81
  Panicum dactylon, iv. 180
  Par, near St. Austell, ii. 18
  Paraguay, ii. 290
  Parc, i. 52
  Paris, iv. 145.――Council of, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains removed
    to 90
  ―――― Dr. i. 150, 151. William de 83.――Dr. instituted the Geological
    Society of Cornwall, iii. 95. His works 97. His life of Sir Humphrey
    Davy 95
  Parishes, number of in Cornwall, iv. 166
  Park, i. 367, 369. Account of 205
  Park of Park, i. 207
  ―――― Erisey, iii. 383
  Parke, by Leland, iv. 258
  Parker, i. 61 _ter._ Francis and Sir John 302. Sir Nicholas 125,
    136. Arms 136.――Rev. James, iii. 96
  ―――― of Burrington, Sir Nicholas, Governor of Pendennis castle, his
    arms and character, ii. 12. Death, and burial in Budock church 13
  ―――― of Rathow, arms, ii. 12, 130
  Parkinge family, iv. 138. Heir of 139
  Parkings, Francis, family and arms, iv. 140
  Parliament, memoirs of, ii. 277. Commons House of 38. Camelford
    sends members to 403, 404. Launceston sent two members to 432.
    Favoured Mr. Peters, iii. 73
  Parliament army injured Leskeard, iii. 26. Defeated 17
  ―――― Roll, ii. 170
  Parliament street, Westminster, ii. 295
  ―――― wars, iii. 73
  ―――― writ to Truro, iv. 74
  Parmenter, Mr. of Ilfracombe, iii. 343
  Parr, Queen Catherine, i. 16. Thomas 24
  Parsons, John, iii. 260
  Partridge, Cornish for, i. 243, 244, 245
  Pascentius, i. 326
  Pascoe, Captain, ii. 318. Rev. Mr. 329, 330.――Erasmus, iii. 343.
    Thomas 89. Family 83
  Pashley family, ii. 395
  Passiflora cærulea racemosa, iv. 182
  Passio Christi, an ancient MS. in Cornish, observations upon, App.
    5, iv. 190
  Patagonia, Admiral Byron wrecked on the coast of, iii. 205
  Patefond, William de, i. 246
  Paternus, St. i. 321.――His history, iii. 336
  Patras, a city of Achaia, ii. 367, 369
  Patrick, i. 295.――Mr. iv. 33 _bis_
  ―――― St. i. 250――iii. 331 _bis_, 431.――Cleared all Ireland at once
    of serpents, ii. 298. His meeting with St. German 65
  Patrick’s, St. church, Dublin, iv. 138, 147
  Patten, Miss, iii. 279
  Paul, the Apostle, iii. 284 _bis_.――St. i. 108, 122 _ter._, 198,
    206――ii. 53. His conversion 112
  ―――― Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― parish, ii. 174――iii. 78, 79, 84, 275. Church burnt by the
    Spaniards 91
  PAUL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 283. St.
    Paulinus, Archbishop of York, memoir of, a vicarage, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, earlier value 284.
    Editor, parish has not the prefix of St. ibid. Notice of St. Paul
    de Leon, parish feast, attached to Hailes abbey, dedication of
    that abbey by Richard, King of the Romans, relic presented to it
    by his son 285. Its value and history, church and monuments,
    Mousehole town 286. Destroyed by the Spaniards, the church burnt,
    register of the event, Spanish ball preserved, chapel at
    Mousehole, and on St. Clement’s island 287. Change of name from
    Porth Enys, Newlyn, Keigwin family, Godolphins at Treworveneth,
    Trungle 288. Chiowne and the Chinese wall, view from above Newlyn,
    new road, monument to commemorate the finding of a ring 289.
    Curious British ornaments, other similar ones, supposed to have
    been worn by the Druids, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 290
  Paul pier, iv. 23
  ―――― St. de Leon, notice of, iii. 285.――Name explained, iv. 313
  Paul’s, St. cathedral, London, iii. 167
  ―――― St. church, Covent Garden, iii. 252
  Paulet, Sir John, ii. 363.――Henry, last Duke of Bolton, iii. 47.
    Family 47, 123
  Paulin parish, iii. 425
  Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester, and first Archbishop of York, iii.
    284 _bis_, 285. His history 284
  Paulet, ii. 292
  Pawley, Jane, account of, iii. 8. Family 8 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 74
  Pawton, ii. 362――iii. 175 _bis_
  Paxton, Richard, i. 283
  Payne, John, of St. Ives, ii. 192. John, mayor of St. Ives, his arms 198
  Paynter, i. 359, 360. Rev. C. H., 251. Francis 145, 148 _bis_. John
    348. William 145.――Rev. Thomas, ii. 142. Miss 300. Family 228,
    270.――Mr. iii. 441. Family 445
  ―――― of Boskenna, Francis, i. 359
  ―――― of St. Erth, i. 423
  ―――― of Trelisick, i. 145. Arthur 348, 350. Francis 349, 350 _bis_,
    351, 359. James 350, 359. Mary 359. William 350. Arms 349, 350
  Paynter’s Consultation, i. 148
  Payton, i. 405
  Peace and taxes, commissioners for, John Rame, iv. 129. John Robins 117
  Pearce, James, i. 112.――Family, iii. 60, 83.――Nicholas _ter._ iv. 3.
    Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth 109. Rev. Mr. of Broadoak 185
  Pearce of Penryn, Mr. and Miss, iii. 445
  Pears, John, iii. 6
  Pearse, Rev. Thomas, ii. 92.――Mr. and Miss, iii. 9
  ―――― of Helaton, Thomas, i. 303, 304 _bis_
  Peck, ii. 428
  Peckwater hall, iii. 155
  Pedenandre mine, iii. 382
  Pederick, Little, church, i. 74
  ―――― Little, parish, i. 404
  Pederwin, Pedyrwyn, or St. Pederwin parish, i. 37,――iii. 457――iv. 69
  ―――― north, parish 336; or Pedyrwyn, i. 107――iv. 59, 131
  ―――― south, iii. 335; or Pederwyn, ii. 398, 417.――Pedyrwin, or
    Petherwin, iv. 50, 51, 52, 68, 69 _bis_
  Pedyr hundred, i. 230, 245――ii. 253 _bis_――iii. 175
  ―――― St. chapel at Treloye, i. 231
  ―――― St. priory at Bodman, iv. 160
  Pedyrick, Little, parish, ii. 253, 256
  Peel, Sir Robert, ii. 112
  Pegwill church, iii. 349
  Pelagianism, ii. 65. St. Dye opposed to 131
  Pelagians, ii. 63. Of Britain 73
  Pelagius, i. 305――ii. 72, 74. A Briton 63. His doctrines 72. Council
    at St. Albans to consider them, St. German preached against him 64.
    His doctrine contrary to the law and prophets, Britons convinced of
    his errors 65
  ―――― first pope, ii. 90
  ―――― second pope, i. 393
  Pelham, Bishop, iii. 275
  Pellew, Admiral, iii. 96.――Cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18.――Family,
    iii. 94
  Pelniddon, account of by Tonkin, i. 47
  Peloponnesus, ii. 366
  Pelsew, i. 393, 403. Account of 402, 417
  Pelton, i. 116 _bis_
  Pelvellan described, iv. 37
  Pelyn house described, and summer house at, ii. 391
  Pelynt manor, iii. 293
  ―――― parish, ii. 394, 398――iii. 39, 170――iv. 19, 23
  PELYNT parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, manor of Plynt, iii. 291. By the Editor, ancient
    name ibid. Church spacious, monuments, burial-place of St. Juncus,
    Whitaker says the parish is dedicated to St. Nunn, St. David
    distinguished his followers by a leek 292. Church belonged to
    Newenham Abbey, value, Pelynt manor, Hale Barton and ancient
    remains upon it, Trelawn, its history by Bond 293, and that of its
    possessors, three generations of the Grey family annihilated by
    the civil wars, Trelawny family 294. Henry 5th’s partiality for
    Sir John, lines on Launceston gate, Cornish saying of the
    Godolphins, Trelawnys and Glanvilles, Lord Bonville built the
    house, rebuilt by Sir John Trelawny, and after a fire by Edward
    Trelawny, family portraits, chapel built by Bishop Trelawny 295.
    His history, the seven bishops committed to the Tower by James II.
    tried, and acquitted 296. Bishop Trelawny’s part in the
    Revolution, observation on the Duke of Marlborough, the bishop’s
    popularity in Cornwall 297. Cornwall disposed to rise in arms on
    his imprisonment, song upon it, universally sung at the time 298.
    Names of the seven bishops, statue of Cardinal Wolsey at Christ
    Church, Oxford, erected by Trelawny, his son Edward, governor of
    Jamaica, his judicious conduct there 299. History and fanaticism
    of Sir Harry Trelawny 300. Turned papist, priests arrived from
    Italy to celebrate masses for his soul, parish, statistics 301.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 302
  ―――― Church town, iv. 32 _ter._
  ―――― vicarage, iv. 29
  Pembre, Henry de la, ii. 119
  Pembro, by Leland, iv. 267
  Pembroke college, Oxford, ii. 233, 286, 287, 377――iii. 87, 88, 251
  ―――― Jasper, Earl of, ii. 182
  Pembrokeshire, ii. 173
  Pen, word explained, iv. 317
  ―――― Uchel Coit, iii. 25
  Penalmick barton, iv. 2, 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2
  ―――― of Penalmick family, iv. 2
  Penaluna family, iii. 61
  Penare, account of, i. 204
  Penarth, i. 240.――Walter, iv. 77
  Pencair, by Leland, iv. 264
  Pencaranowe, iii. 326 _ter._, 327, 328
  Pencarow, i. 368. Account of 374
  ―――― of Pencarow, i. 369
  ―――― village, i. 3
  Pencoil, account of, ii. 89
  ―――― John de, ii. 89
  Pencoll, i. 387
  Pencoose, account of, i. 391
  Penda, King of the Mercians, ii. 284――iii. 284――iv. 125
  Pendanlase, iii. 431
  Pendarves, account of, i. 160, 163
  ―――― i. 135, 213, 302. Thomas 273, 276. Rev. Mr. 224.――Alexander,
    ii. 93. Peter 143. Samuel 93. Miss 300. Mr. 114. Arms 93.――Edward W.
    W., iii. 367. Henry 284. Rev. Henry and Margaret 84. Sir William
    382. Family 148 _bis_, 286, 343, 382.――Mr. iv. 2
  ―――― of Pendarves, i. 160, 163, 400, 401. E. W. W. 163, 164, 401,
    403. Rev. Thomas 161. William 160. Sir William 160, 163. Arms
    161.――Family and Miss, ii. 93
  ―――― of Roscrow, Mary, i. 137.――Alexander, his character, Rev. John,
    Mary, ii. 98. Miss 235, 239. Arms 98.――Samuel, iii. 303. Family 133.
    Mrs. Bassett their heir 303.――Family, iv. 107
  Pendeen, Dr. Borlase born at, iii. 51
  ―――― cove, ii. 290
  Pendene, account of, by Hals, ii. 282. By the Editor 284
  Pendenis castle, iv. 116; or Pendennis, iii. 136, 183, 217, 274. Sir
    N. Slanning, governor of 75
  Pendennis, the former name of St. Ives parish, etymology, island,
    old fortification, and chapel upon, ii. 258
  ―――― castle, i. 104, 105, 268――ii. 1 _bis_, 5, 6, 17, 280. Falmouth
    built for its supply 9. Situation, rent to the crown, etymology,
    description, extent, repaired by Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth,
    has contained above 100 cannon, and some thousands of foot arms,
    Sir Nicholas Parker appointed governor 12. Succeeded by Sir
    Nicholas Hals, who was succeeded by Sir Nicholas Slanning, and he
    by John Arundell, siege under him by the rebels, dreadful
    extremities, and surrender of the garrison, the last castle in the
    kingdom to yield, except Ragland in Wales 13. Soldiers killed by
    eating too freely, Col. Fortescue succeeded to the command, and
    after him Capt. Fox, who was succeeded on the restoration by Lord
    Arundell, and he by the Earl of Bath 14. The Killigrews lords of
    the land 17. Not Ictis 20. Its longitude 23. Rev. W. Jackman,
    chaplain 31. Governor and officers salaried by the crown 278
  Pender of Penzance, i. 148
  Pendew, account of, i. 324
  Pendinant, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pendinas and its pharos, by Leland, iv. 268
  Pendor, i. 148
  Pendower beach, iv. 123
  Pendragon, etymology, i. 326
  Pendre, i. 143. John, and arms 143
  Pendrea, i. 143 _bis_, 147――ii. 125.――In St. Burian,
    attorney-general Noye, born at, iii. 152
  ―――― Mr. iii. 16
  Pendrym manor, iii. 123
  Penferm, Matthew, iv. 3
  Penfon manor, ii. 232 _bis_――iii. 352
  Penfoune, iii. 352
  ―――― of Penfoune family, iii. 352
  Penfusis, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pengaer, iii. 225
  Pengally, i. 61
  Pengarswick, account of, i. 124
  Pengelly, i. 119 _bis_, 127――ii. 89
  Pengover, iii. 173
  Pengreap, ii. 133
  Penhale, i. 380, 387, 388.――In Egloskerry, iii. 137
  Penhall manor, iii. 313
  Penhallam, ii. 233
  Penhallinyk, ii. 140
  Penhallow, iii. 193
  ―――― Miss, iii. 421
  Penhalluwick, William, ii. 160
  Penhargard manor, ii. 153
  Penheale, i. 378. Account of 379
  Penhele in Egloskerry manor, iv. 60
  Penhell tenement, iii. 209
  Penhellick, account of, i. 207, 208
  ―――― Rev. Mr. ii. 118
  Penitentiaries, i. 232
  Penkevil of Penkevil family, iii. 214
  Penkevill, iii. 454. Tenement 209, 210. Account of 214
  Penkivell manor, iii. 182, 208
  ―――― arms, i. 297.――Family, ii. 336
  ―――― of Pensiquillis family, and Benjamin, i. 420
  ―――― of Ressuna, Richard, i. 297
  ―――― of Trematon, i. 297
  ―――― St. Michael, parish, i. 116
  Penknek, by Leland, iv. 277
  Penkridge, deanery of, in Herts, held by Tregony Archbishop of
    Dublin, iv. 144
  Penkwek, iii. 26, 27
  Penlee point, iii. 375
  Penleton bridge, i. 119
  Penlyer, Mr. 296
  Penmear manor, iii. 239
  Penn, Captain, ii. 25――iii. 85
  Pennalerick, Miss, iii. 62
  Pennalyky, William, iii. 324
  Pennance, account of, i. 257
  Pennans, account of, i. 255
  Pennant, i. 178 _bis_, 184. Account of 383
  Penneck family, ii. 217, 218. Origin 217. Anne, Catherine and
    Charles 218. Rev. John 217. Father and son 123, 218. Family
    monuments 219
  Pennington, i. 304
  Penniscen, iii. 283
  Pennock, ii. 170
  Pennore or Penarth, account of, ii. 113
  Pennycumquick, houses at Falmouth so called, story of the name, the
    same by Mr. Wynn, ii. 20
  Penpell, i. 243
  Penpoll, i. 247――iii. 343 _bis_, in St. Germans and Quethiock 359
  Penpons, account of, ii. 336
  ―――― of Penpons, ii. 335
  Penqueen, i. 118
  Penquite, ii. 91
  Penrey, iii. 305
  Penrice, i. 43, 47. Etymology 43
  Penrin, Mr. ii. 97
  Penrine, by Leland, iv. 271
  Penrith, ii. 76
  Penros, account of, iii. 429
  Penrose, i. 132, 346, 386――iv. 97
  ―――― ii. 157. Rev. John, his character 104. Martha 30, 32. Captain
    Thomas, his history 25. Journal 26, 27, 28, presented with a medal
    by the King of Sweden 27. His scuffle with Cornish seamen 29. Trial,
    conviction, pardon, death, and issue 30.――John and Richard, iii.
    324. William 324 _bis_. Mr. 112.――Admiral C. V. iv. 158. Notice of
    158, 159
  ―――― of Lefeock, Martha and Thomas, iii. 186
  ―――― of Nance in St. Martin’s in Kerrier, iii. 188
  ―――― of Penrose, Edward, and Richard, iii. 444. Miss 9 _bis_, 444,
    445. Mr. 442, 443. His house and hospitality 443. Family 443, 445.
    Arms 443
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  ―――― manor, iii. 445. Account of 443. Possessors 445
  Penryn, meaning of, iii. 327
  ―――― borough, account of, ii. 94. Corporation 8, 9. Members for, F.
    Basset 243. Sir William Lemon 229. Richard Penwarne 75
  ―――― hundred, ii. 51, 92
  ―――― manor, i. 231――iii. 2 _bis_, 226.――Bishop of Exeter, Lord of,
    ii. 51
  ―――― parish, i. 138, 242, 379
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ―――― town, ii. 2, 17, 69, 96, 100, 113, 140, 215――iii. 62,
    64.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. United with Falmouth
    99.――Road from Helston to, iii. 63
  Penryn Penwid, iii. 431
  Pensandes, by Leland, iv. 265
  Pensants, by Leland, iv. 286
  Pensiquillis, account of, i. 420
  Penstruan, account of, i. 421
  Pentavale Fenton, iii. 394. Its etymology 395
  Pentavall, ii. 1
  Penter’s cross village, iii. 346
  Pentewan, account of by Hals, i. 41
  ―――― manor, iii. 190
  ―――― quarry, iv. 104.――By Editor, i. 50. Streamworks 51
  ―――― stone, iv. 104
  Pentillie, account of, iii. 163. Fine house built there 166
  ―――― castle, account of, iii. 346. Church aisle belonging to 346
  Pentilly, i. 316. Account of 314
  Pentine, Avice and Richard, ii. 398
  Pentire of Pentire family and heiress, iii. 193
  ―――― of Pentire in Minvor and of Pentewan in Mevagissey, Jane, iii.
    314 _bis_. Philip and family 314
  ―――― of Petuan, i. 384
  ―――― point, i. 381――iii. 240, 281. Its latitude and longitude 281
  Pentnar, i. 419
  Pentowen, by Leland, iv. 275
  Pentuan, i. 49
  ―――― manor, possessors of, iii. 193
  Pentwan, account of, by Tonkin, i. 47
  ―――― Lower, described, i. 47
  Pentybers Rok, iv. 238
  Penuans, i. 234
  Penularick, Miss, iii. 60
  Penvose head, iv. 94
  Penwarne, i. 236
  ―――― in Mawnan, i. 46――iii. 74 _bis_. Account of 75, 76. Sold 77
  ―――― in Mevagissey manor, iii. 192. Its possessors 191, 193
  ―――― i. 255.――Richard, ii. 9. He procured copies of the letters of
    Sir Nicholas Hals 10.――Richard, iii. 324, 325
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mawnan, John _bis_ iii. 77. Peter 76. His death
    77. Richard 75, 325. Robert, _bis_, 75. Robert and Thomas 77. Family
    75, 193. Arms 75, 77
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mevagissey, Vivian, iii. 193. The heir, and
    family 191
  Penwerris, i. 137
  Penwinnick manor, iii. 382
  Penwith hundred, i. 160, 228, 261, 344――ii. 118 _bis_, 141, 145,
    146, 169, 214, 234, 257, 269, 272, 282, 358――iii. 5, 30, 46, 78,
    140, 242, 283, 306, 339, 380, 381, 425 _bis_, 428――iv. 52, 53
    _bis_, 164 _bis_, 377.――Stone circles in, i. 141
  Penwortha manor, iii. 314, 315. Account of 314
  ―――― village, iii. 314 _bis_
  Penwyne, account of, iii. 66
  Penycuick, near Edinburgh, ii. 20
  Penydarran on the Taff, ii. 20
  Penzance, name explained, iv. 316
  ―――― borough, corporation of, iii. 90
  ―――― manor, iii. 91
  ―――― market, iii. 385
  ―――― town, i. 149――ii. 82, 120, 124 _bis_, 174, 214, 215 _bis_, 216,
    266, 287, 352――iii. 34, 55, 78, 275, 286, 287, 290, 342, 375――iv.
    166.――Account of, iii. 81, 83, 91.――London newspapers at and post
    to, i. 59.――Burnt, rebuilt, incorporated, its jurisdiction, a
    coinage town, its market, fairs, it favoured the royalists, and
    was sacked by the parliament army, iii. 81. Custom house, arms,
    and form of writ 82. Dr. Borlase educated at 51.――Exceeds Truro in
    beauty and in trade, iv. 85. Mr. Thompson died at 109
  Peran Arwothan, ii. 92
  ―――― Uthno, ii. 169
  ―――― well, ii. 2, 129
  Peransabulo, i. 289
  Peransand, i. 198――ii. 93, 173, 315, 317
  ―――― church, iii. 176
  Peranwell parish, iv. 1
  Perceval, Mrs. i. 163, 400
  Percivall, John, married Thomasine Bonaventure, lord mayor, and
    knighted, his death, iv. 134
  Perer, Richard, ii. 209
  Pereth, ii. 76
  Perin in Cornwall, news from, ii. 100
  Perkin, Mr. iii. 87 _bis_
  ―――― Warbeck took sanctuary at Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  Pernall, John, iv. 77
  Perr river, i. 44, 45
  Perran cove, iii. 309
  ―――― St. ii. 113――iii. 304, 309.――Visits St. Keverne, ii. 324.――His
    estimation, the supposed discoverer of tin, iii. 330. His history
    331, 332. His miracles 313. His great age, his shrine and banner
    332. His day 311
  ――――’s St. chapel or oratory, account of, iii. 329
  ――――’s St. college in Keverne, iii. 332
  ―――― Arworthall church, iii. 304
  PERRAN ARWORTHALL parish, or ST. PIRAN ARWORTHALL, in Kerrier.
    Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, manor of Arworthall, iii.
    302. Quantities of tin upon it, chalybeate spring, Renaudin family
    303. By the Editor, saint, church, Perran Well village, change of
    road, smelting-house, extensive use of arsenic, its sublimation from
    ores 304. Ironworks of Messrs. Fox, beautiful valley, impropriation,
    advowson, statistics 305. Geology by Dr. Boase 306
  ―――― Arworthall, St. parish, iii. 224. In Kerrier 328
  ―――― Arworthall village, iii. 303
  ―――― Uthno manor, iii. 311
  PERRAN UTHNO parish, or LITTLE PERRAN. Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii.
    306. Manor of Uthno 307. By Editor, church, its situation, memorial
    to Mr. Davies, the oath of deans rural ibid. Oracular well, emptied
    by a mine, good farmhouses, Goldsithney village, its chapel 308.
    Image of St. Perran or St. James, fair, transferred here from
    Sithney, displaying of a glove at fairs, destruction of the Lionesse
    country, and cove where Trevelyan was borne on shore 309. High tide
    in 1099, noticed by Stow, the Godwyn sands, Editor’s opinion of the
    tale, attempt to restore the land by incantation 310. Acton castle,
    Cudden point, view from it, children go there to seek a silver
    table, manor of Uthno, and of Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, feast,
    statistics 311. Population increased in consequence of mining and
    agriculture, Chapel an Crouse, bowling green, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 312
  Perran well, or St. Perran’s well, iii. 303, 304. Curious account of
    308. Its virtues 329
  ―――― well village, situation, iii. 304
  ―――― Zabuloe parish, iii. 304, 386
  PERRAN ZABULOE, PERANSAND, or PERRAN IN THE SANDS. Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation and boundaries, iii. 312.
    Ridiculous legend of St. Perran, his great age, patron of the
    tinners, tales told of him, fair, value of the benefice, patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Penhall and Halwyn, of
    Tywarnhaile, and of Tywarnhaile Tiers 313. Tywarnhaile house,
    Chapel Angarder, Penwortha manor, tin and lead upon it, Lambourne
    Wigan 314. Its history 315. Manor of Lambourn, its history 316.
    Creeg Mear, urns in it, conjectures respecting it 319. Castle
    Kaerkief, Whitaker’s opinion of it 320. Callestock Veor village,
    other entrenchments of no importance 321. Other two, Tresawsen, or
    Bosawson, the three barrows and four barrows, chapel in
    Callestock, Fenton Berram, manor of Fenton Gymps 322.
    Marghessen-foos village, practice of maids coming to market to
    offer themselves for hire, etymology of Marghessen-foos 323. Roman
    roads, Fenton Gymps family 324. Chywarton, Callestock-Ruol 325.
    Trevellance or Pencaranowe manor, its history, Reenwartha 326.
    Reen Wollas, Melingybridge 327. Manor of St. Piran, some tin on
    it, account of Piran round 328. By Editor, etymology ibid.
    Description of Piran round, the Guary Mir, “the Creation of the
    World,” and “Mount Calvary,” published by the Editor, St. Piran’s
    well supposed to cure diseases, encroachments of the sand,
    discovery and description of a chapel supposed to be St. Perran’s
    oratory 329. Defaced for relics, St. Perran esteemed the patron of
    all Cornwall, his day celebrated with great hilarity, a Perraner,
    St. Chiwidden, Dr. Butler’s Lives of the Saints 330. His history
    of St. Perran or St. Kiaran, went to Rome, was of the clan Osraig,
    died in Cornwall 331. Probably an active missionary, his banner
    the standard of Cornwall, his shrine, impropriation of tithes,
    incumbent 332. Chiverton, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 333
  Perranbonse cove, ii. 360
  Perraner, iii. 330
  Perre, Thomas, iii. 387
  Perrin, Provost of Taunton, i. 86
  Perron, St. Arworthal, ii. 17
  Perry, i. 236
  Persia, iii. 187
  Persius, iv. 87
  Perthcolumb, account of, i. 364
  Perthcothen, iii. 177
  Perthsasnac, ii. 165
  Perthtowan, ii. 250
  Perwennack, i. 11
  Pesaro in Italy, ii. 369, 370, 371, 373. Theodore Paleolagus of 365
  Pesseme, Patrick, ii. 160
  Peter, Rev. John, ii. 117
  ―――― of Harlyn, Francis, iii. 176, 177. Gregory 175, 176 _bis_. John
    76, 166, 176 _bis_. William 176 _bis_, 178 _bis_, 333. Mr. 178. Mr.
    erected a pier 179. Family 177
  ―――― of Porthcuthan, or Perthcothen. Mr. iii. 177. Family 162
  ―――― of Treater, John, ii. 336.――In Padstow, Thomas, iii. 176 _bis_
  ―――― of Trenaran in Padstow, John, iii. 176 _ter._ Arms 176
  ―――― St. i. 197, 198 _bis_――ii. 127.――Younger brother of St. Andrew,
    iv. 100
  Peter’s spring, iii. 72
  ―――― St. church, Rome, iv. 165
  Peterborough, Thomas White, bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Peters, i. 382. Hugh 420. Mr. 296.――Rev. Mr. ii. 218.――Rev. Charles
    of St. Maben, his learning and character, iii. 67, 68. His
    biography, his ancestor a royalist 67. Dined his poor parishioners,
    his controversy with Warburton, extracts from his meditations 68.
    Elizabeth 72. Rev. Hugh 67, 71, 72. His biography 72. Rev. Jonathan,
    of St. Clement’s, Dr. Joseph, of Truro 68. Rev. Thomas and William
    71. Biographical notice of 72
  Petersfield parish, iii. 206
  PETHERICK, LITTLE, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, ancient
    name, iii. 334. By the Editor, present patron, church, and church
    town, Tregonnen village, St. Ida’s chapel ibid. Account of St. Ida,
    her husband a favourite of Charlemagne, another chapel on Trevelian
    farm, former name of the parish, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 335
  Petherick, Little, parish, iii. 277
  Petherwin, North, i. 377
  PETHERWIN, OR PEDERWIN, SOUTH, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, iii. 335. St. Peternus, three
    days dedicated to him, value of benefice, impropriation 336. By the
    Editor, church, its monuments and situation ib. Annual fairs,
    Trecroogo, Tregallen and Trethevy villages, Trebersey, Mr. Gedy an
    ancestor of the Editor, Tresmarrow, Tremeal 337. Death of Mrs.
    Archer, an epitaph, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 338
  Petnell, St. or Petronel, iv. 153 _bis_
  Petre, Sir John, obtained church lands, was ancestor of Lord Petre,
    founded eight fellowships at Oxford, iii. 155. Sir John 293. Sir
    William 155. Lord Petre of Exeter, now of Essex 176
  ―――― of Torbryan, Devon, John, iii. 155
  Petroc, St. iii. 277, 278 _bis_. His life 227. His history, i. 95.
    His body stolen 98
  ―――― St. church, iii. 408. Bodmin 277. The Cornish see 415. This
    is disputed by Mr. Whitaker 408. proved by extracts from a register
    kept there in a book containing the four Gospels 408
  ――――’s, St. monastery, iii. 309. At Padstow, destroyed by the Danes 281
  ―――― St. priory, Bodmin, i. 116
  Petrocstow, iii. 277
  Pettigrew manor, ii. 57
  Petunia nyctaginiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― Phœnicia, iv. 182
  Petvin, John, iii. 313
  Pevensey marsh, iii. 10
  Pever, the heiress of, ii. 109
  Peverell, Sir Hugh, and Sir Thomas, i. 92
  ―――― of Hatfield, Jane, wife of Randolph, and concubine of William
    the Conqueror, i. 367 _ter._ William her son 367
  ―――― of park, i. 367. Richard Thomas, and arms 368
  Peverell’s crosses, i. 368
  Pewterers’ company send a deputy to try the Cornish tin, ii. 30
  Peyron, father, i. 192
  Philack, i. 344
  Philip and Mary, iii. 213, 294, 325
  ―――― King of France invaded Normandy in Richard’s absence, ii. 177
  Philipps, i. 78
  Philips, Jasper, iii. 339. Sir Jonathan 458. His servant 461
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel and Sarah, ii. 352
  ―――― of Poughill, ii. 300
  Phillack, i. 355.――Parish, ii. 141, 145, 146 _bis_, 147
  PHILLACK, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 339. By
    the Editor, church, situation of village, danger from the sand,
    inundations of sand, hillocks of it ibid. Houses buried under it,
    Towan, extension of trade, improvement of the harbour, mining and
    smelting, Mr. Edwards 340. Rivalship with Mr. Harvey, both improved
    the harbour, bars in the mouths of all rivers, a causeway upon
    arches across the entrance of the main estuary 341. Castle Cayle,
    and Riviere at Theodore’s castle, Mr. Whitaker’s invention, new
    house at Riviere, Trevassack 342. Modern house on Bodrigy, Penpoll,
    Treglisson farm, copper works at Hoyle, smelting house at Angarrack,
    fine garden there, advowson 343. Incumbent, present rector and
    patron, parish feast and statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Sand
    hills, sand restrained by plants 344. Sometimes consolidated into
    sandstone. By Editor, copper lodes and elvan courses, Whele Alfred 345
  Philleigh parish, ii. 265
  Philley parish, ii. 2, 275 _bis_, 279――iii. 402, 403
  Phillips, Matthew, i. 360, 362.――Rev. Jasper, ii. 146. Mary 269.
    Rev. William 386, 406. His monument at Lanteglos 406. Mr. 150, 386, 389
  ―――― of Carnequidden in Gulval, Henry and Jane, ii. 241
  ―――― of Landue, Thomas, ii. 400
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel, ii. 269, 352. Sarah 352
  ―――― of Tredrea, Elizabeth, iii. 159
  ―――― of Botreaux castle, T. J. iii. 236 _bis_
  ―――― of Camelford, Charles, John, and Jonathan, i. 380. Sir Jonathan
    134.――Rev. William 380.――Charles, ii. 399 _bis_. Jonathan, Rev.
    William, name 399.――Sir Jonathan and T. W. iii. 235
  Phillipps, Rev. William and family, i. 3.――J. T., iii. 42
  ―――― of Camelford and Newport family, iii. 42
  ―――― of Landue in Lezant, Mr. iii. 235
  ―――― of Trencares, Charles and Sir Jonathan, iv. 45. Rev. William
    45, _bis_. Story of 46. Miss, Mr. and family property 45
  Philological inquiries, ii. 103
  Philopatris, age of, ii. 76
  Philosophical Transactions, i. 149――iii. 250, 251, 378――iv.
    146.――Account of a storm in, ii. 325
  Phœnician castles, ii. 423
  Phœnicians, ii. 3――iii. 395――iv. 168.――Acquainted with Falmouth
    harbour, ii. 19
  Phœnix in her Flames, a tragedy, iv. 97
  “Phraseologia, Latin and English,” iv. 87
  Physalis edulis, iv. 183
  Picardy, pronunciation in, ii. 127
  Pider hundred, i. 9, 209, 231, 232, 289, 386, 388, 407――ii. 253,
    378, 384――iii. 139, 267, 277, 312, 318, 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
    _bis_, 162
  Pidre, iv. 376.――Etymology, i. 9
  Pig’s street, Penryn, iii. 62
  Pilate, iii. 422
  Pilchards, nature of, ii. 263. Methods of fishing for 261. Of
    preserving, oil from 263. Caught by seine nets at St. Keverne 324
  Pillaton, or Pillton manor, iii. 345, 346
  ―――― parish, i. 103, 104, 316――ii. 361, 364――iii. 161, 371
  PILLATON parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a rectory, value, patron, manor, iii. 345. By the Editor, Lysons on
    Pillaton and Hardenfast manors, Pentillie castle, church and its
    monuments, one to the Rev. Mr. Eliot, church, town small, Penter’s
    cross village, patron 346. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 347
  Pinard, Arthur, ii. 423
  Pinaster fir, account of, iii. 11
  Pincerna, etymology of, ii. 148
  ―――― Richard, ii. 148. Simon 145, _bis_, 146 _bis_.――Simon, iii.
    139. Heir 140 _ter._ Family 140
  Pindar, iii. 34
  ―――― Peter, iii. 220
  Pineck parish, i. 414――ii. 142.――St. iv. 128
  Pinneck, John, ii. 170
  Pinnock, St. parish, iii. 13, 260
  PINNOCK, St. parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 347. By the
    Editor, village, and manor of Trevillis, proprietors of land,
    advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 348
  Pinock, ii. 157
  Pipe Rolls, ii. 423
  Piper, Hugh, and Sir Hugh Constables of Launceston castle, anecdote
    of Sir Hugh, ii. 421. His monument in Launceston church 422.――Miss,
    iii. 136. Heiress and family 337
  Piran bay, iii. 313
  ―――― parish, iii. 324
  ―――― round, iii. 328. Account of 329――iv. 78
  ―――― Arworthall church, iv. 3
  ―――― St. church lands, iii. 328
  ―――― St. family, iii. 328
  ―――― St. manor, account of, iii. 328
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 2 _ter._ Mr. Reed’s smelting house in 4
  ―――― St. in the Sands parish, iii. 267
  ―――― St. in the Sands town, iii. 332
  Piran’s, St. well, iii. 322
  Piranes, St. in the Sands, by Leland, iv. 268
  ―――― St. or Keverine, by Leland, iv. 270
  Pirran in Treth parish, iii. 323
  Piskies or fairies, i. 18
  Pitleman, Ralph, ii. 427
  Pits’ writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Pits, iv. 145 _bis_, 148, de Illustribus Angliæ Scriptoribus 148
  Pitt, Robert, i. 69. Thomas 69 _bis_. Thomas 1st Lord Camelford 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas 66, 67. His descent, enterprise in India,
    return with diamond, its sale to the Regent Orleans, its weight, his
    purchase of Boconnoc and the burgess tenures of Old Sarum, election
    for Old Sarum 68. Thomas 2nd Lord Camelford, his birth and
    christening, education, history, character 70. Death 71. William,
    Earl of Chatham 69.――Family, ii. 339, 376, 412. Thomas 353, 354,
    409, 410. William 339. Governor 353. Mr. 410. Pleased with Dr.
    Glynn’s invitations 154.――Thomas, iii. 450. Mr. 207. Governor
    450.――Mr. iv. 44
  ―――― of Boconnock, Thomas, ii. 405
  Pitz, Rev. Mr. ii. 258――iv. 53
  Pius 2nd, pope, iv. 146
  Place of death, i. 9
  Place or Plase, i. 28
  Placentia, iii. 400
  ―――― University, i. 311
  Plague at St. Cuthbert, i. 292.――At St. Ives, ii. 271
  Plain-an-Guary, iii. 384
  Plantagenet, Princess Elizabeth, i. 63. Princess Katherine
    64.――Humphrey 4th son of King Henry 4th, ii. 260. Margaret,
    Countess of Salisbury 91. Richard Earl or Cornwall 155.――Richard,
    iii. 27
  ―――― or Beaufort, Edmund, Edmund Marquis of Dorset, and Henry, ii.
    260.――Margaret, iii. 65
  ―――― civil wars, iii. 289
  ―――― house of, ii. 110, 249
  Plantagenets, iii. 84, 246. Their times 8, 348――iv. 114
  Plants of Cornwall, App. 3, iv. 180
  Plase, ii. 40. Account of 43
  Plassey, battle of, i. 390――iv. 11
  Pleas of the crown, i. 119, 177
  Plegmund, Archbishop, i. 95
  Plengway village, Amphitheatre at, iii. 384
  Plint, i. 316
  Pliny, i. 192――ii. 408――iii. 328
  Plot’s, Dr. Natural History of Oxford, iii. 323
  Plowden, William, iii. 38. Mr. 37. Family 38
  Pluwent or Plynt, iii. 291
  Plym river, ii. 2
  Plymouth breakwater, ii. 245
  ―――― castle, i. 105――ii. 10
  ―――― church, dedicated to St. Charles, ii. 20
  ―――― dockyard, high water at, iii. 375
  ―――― harbour, iii. 101, 105, 108, 164, 375, 461.――Superior to
    Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― limestone, iv. 123 _bis_.――Burnt for manure, ii. 361
  ―――― reef or breakwater described, iii. 108. Compared with the great
    Egyptian pyramid 109
  ―――― road, ii. 396
  ―――― sound, i. 189――ii. 45, 108 _bis_, 164, 375, 379, 380. French
    and Spanish fleets in, ii. 245
  ―――― town, i. 113 _bis_――ii. 10, 224――iii. 21, 45, 98, 109, 110,
    121, 183, 189, 196, 253, 254, 283, 378, 399, 426――iv. 32, 115, 116,
    123, 187, 188 _ter._――Ruthven, governor of, i. 113.――Relief of,
    incompetent to sustain an attack, ii. 245. Cornish miners marched to
    defend, open to attack but escaped it, Major Trelawny, governor of
    67. Engagement with Dutch fleet before 25.――Dr. Borlase educated at,
    iii. 51. Besieged by Charles’s troops, Earl of Stamford, governor
    184.――General Trelawny, governor of, iv. 94. Siege of 185 _ter._
  Plympton, i. 170――iv. 185
  ―――― priory, i. 27――ii. 339――iii. 139 _bis_. Prior of 139
    _bis_.――Godfrey, prior of, ii. 426
  Plynt parish, ii. 409
  Pochehelle, iii. 349
  Poictiers, Archdeacon of, ii. 415
  ―――― Bishop of, St. Hilary, ii. 168, 169. Died at 169
  ―――― Earl of, Richard, ii. 422
  Point, the, iii. 107, 108
  Pol, St. de Leon, town, in Brittany, iii. 285
  Polamonter, Nicholas, i. 234
  Poland, i. 336
  Polbenro, account of, iv. 36
  Poldice mine, ii. 134
  Pole, Sir Courtenay and Penelope, ii. 379.――Rev. Reginald, iii.
    440.――De la, Edmund, Earl of Suffolk, i. 86
  ―――― Carew, Mrs. R., iii. 229
  Polglase, account of, i. 399
  Polgoda, ii. 173
  Polgooth mine, iii. 198. Account of 195, 197
  Polgorran, account of, ii. 113
  Polgover, iii. 252――iv. 3
  Poljew cove, ii. 129
  Polkerris harbour, iv. 109
  Polkinghorne, Roger, iii. 83
  Polkinhorn, iii. 387
  Polkinhorne, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― Degary, i. 257.――Mr. ii. 157. Rev. Mr. 258, 260
  ―――― of Polkinhorne, family, heir, and arms, iii. 142
  Polland, Lewis, ii. 195
  Pollard, Peter, i. 216.――Christopher, iii. 358
  ―――― of Treleigh, Hugh, John, John a tribute to, Margaret and
    family, iii. 383
  Polleowe, iii. 326
  Pollephant, i. 308
  Pollrewen tower, iv. 229
  Pollyfont or Pollifont manor, iii. 38, 39. In Lewannick 233 _bis_
  Polman, ii. 41
  Polmanter downs, ii. 271
  Polmear cove, iv. 166
  Polpear, iii. 7
  Polpera or Polperro, iv. 23, 36, 38
  Polperro harbour, ii. 400
  ―――― town, ii. 400 _bis_. Scenery beautiful 400, 401
  Polruan, ii. 411――iv. 36.――Account of, ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279,
    290.――Formerly a corporate borough, ii. 412
  Polruddon ruins, by Norden and Lysons, i. 46
  Polskatho or Porthskatho, ii. 51
  Polston, bridge at, ii. 432.――Bridge, Charles 1st entered Cornwall
    by, iv. 185
  Poltare, account of, iii. 88
  Poltesca, iii. 424
  Polton manor, ii. 253
  Polvellan, iii. 229. Etymology 230
  Polventon, iv. 29
  Polvessan, account of, iv. 133. The grounds in a fine state 35
  Polvethan manor, ii. 400
  Polwhele, account of, i. 205
  ―――― castle, iv. 229
  ―――― i. 56 _bis_, 58, 205, 255. Degory 19, 293. Arms 205. Motto
    206.――Family, ii. 337.――Rev. Richard of Manaccan and Newlyn, iii.
    113, 271. Character of 112.――Rev. Richard came from Truro, iv. 86.
    Rev. Richard communicated to the Editor some missing portions of
    Hals’s MS. 184
  ―――― of Newland, i. 105
  ―――― of Penhellick, John and Robert, i. 207
  ―――― of Polwhele, i. 207. Degory ibid. Drew 207 _bis_. John 206,
    207. Richard 207. Rev. Rich., 208
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 396. John ibid.
  ――――’s History of Cornwall, i. 288
  Polybius, on Signals, the friend of Scipio Africanus, his general
    history, iii. 106
  Polychronicon, author of, iv. 93
  Polyenetes, or the Martyr, a tragedy, iv. 97
  Polyfunt in Trewenn, iv. 68
  Polygala speciosa, iv. 183
  ―――― myrtifolia, iv. 183
  Pomeray, i. 348
  ―――― Henry de la, ii. 180, 183. Took St. Michael’s mount 177.
    Murdered a sergeant-at-arms, his stratagem for surprising Mount St.
    Michael 178. Held it out, submitted, his death 180; or Pomeroye,
    Henry de la, iii. 22, 78, 90
  Pomeroy, Henry de, i. 295, 296. Henry 296 _bis_. Sir Henry 296. Sir
    Hugh 214. Joel 296 _bis_. Josceline, Ralph de, and Sir Roger 296.
    Thomas 214. Arms 297.――Rev. John, ii. 279, 339. Mr. 43.――Family,
    iii. 90. John 260
  Pomeroy of Bury Pomeroy, Devon, Sir Richard, iii. 148. Lords of Bury
    Pomeroy 90
  ―――― of Tregony Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_. Henry 297
  Pomery, Rev. Mr. i. 403.――Rev. Joseph, iii. 348 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 160
  Pomier, Lord, ii. 39
  Pondicherry, siege of, chief seat of French power in India, iv. 11
  Ponsanmouth, iv. 3
  Ponsmur, i. 256
  Pontis Riale river, source of, iv. 237
  Pontus, i. 388 _bis_
  Pool mine, ii. 239
  Poole, account of by Hals, iii. 168. By Tonkin 170
  Pooley, Rev. Mr. ii. 34.――Rev. Henry of Newlin, iii. 271, 275
  Poor Knights of Windsor, Hugh Trevanion one of, ii. 52, 54. Governor
    of 55
  ―――― rates at Helston, ii. 159
  Pope of Rome, i. 139, 146――ii. 371. Urged Richard to the crusades
    177. Lodged Thomas Paleolagus, and allowed him a pension 368. His
    protection of him 371.――Alexander the 4th, i. 176.――Boniface, ii.
    288. Gregory 290. Gregory the Great 287. St. Gregory 288.――Gregory
    9th, i. 312. Innocent 3rd 110, 112. Innocent the 4th 176. Innocent
    the 5th 110. Leo the 9th 110 _ter._ Nicholas the 2nd 110. Pelagius
    the 2nd 393. Victor the 2nd 110 _bis_
  ―――― Alexander, the poet, i. 58――iii. 53 _ter._ His letter to Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. his large fortune, and house called the Vatican 88
  ――――’s annates, ii. 59, 126
  ―――― inquisition into the value of benefices, iv. 185. _See
    Inquisition_
  Popham, Sir Home and Captain, iii. 446
  Population of Cornwall, App. II. iv. 178. Of all the parishes in
    Cornwall from the last parliamentary statements 177. For several
    years from 1700 to 1831, 178
  ―――― return for Helston, ii. 161
  Porkellis, neighbourhood produced the best tin in Cornwall, ii. 140
  Porrown Berry, iii. 202
  Port, Hugo de, iii. 115
  Port Eliot, ii. 68, 70 _bis_――iii. 107
  ―――― Isaac, i. 384, 385――iv. 47
  ―――― Looe, iii. 249
  ―――― Looe barton, iv. 25, 26, 37 _bis_
  ―――― Prior, name changed, iii. 107
  Portbend, high water at, iii. 98
  Portbyhan, otherwise West Looe, iv. 28
  Portello, lands of, iii. 294
  Porter, i. 320.――Mr. and arms, iii. 66.――Charles, iv. 62. Rev.
    Charles of Warbstow 125
  Porth, i. 29
  Porth Alla, ii. 250, 324, 330 _bis_, 331. The stream which
    discharges at 330
  ―――― chapel, i. 12
  ―――― Enys, iii. 288. Name changed 286
  ―――― Horne, i. 324――ii. 174, 200
  ―――― Kernow, iii. 32.――Shells at, i. 148
  ―――― Prior, now Port Eliot, ii. 66
  ―――― Talland, iv. 24
  ―――― Treth, ii. 239
  Portheran, ii. 41
  Porthguin, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthiley, iii. 129
  Porthissek, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthleaven, iii. 444
  Porthmear, i. 47
  Porthmellin cove, iii. 192
  Porthoustock, ii. 324――iii. 259.――Extraordinary shoal of pilchards
    at, ii. 324
  ―――― rock, ii. 331
  Porthpean, i. 49
  Porthskatho cove, ii. 58
  Porthwrinkle, iii. 439
  Portionists, iv. 45
  Portnadle bay, iv. 28
  Porto Bello, iii. 218
  Portreath, ii. 241, 250.――Harbour, iii. 390.――A safe harbour, used
    to exchange copper for coal, ii. 241
  Portsmouth, ii. 246. Loss of the Mary Rose off 342
  ―――― castle, ii. 10
  ―――― harbour superior to Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― town, ii. 10
  Portuan borough, iv. 20, 21
  ―――― manor, iv. 21
  Portugal, ii. 227――iii. 187, 423
  Post, in Queen Elizabeth’s time, i. 59
  Potatoes being introduced into Cornwall, iv. 50
  Potstone, iv. 70
  Pott, John, iii. 16
  Poughill parish, ii. 340, 430――iv. 12, 15
  POUGHILL parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, ancient name, impropriation,
    Pochehelle manor, iii. 349. By the Editor, small, its advantages,
    manor ibid. The charters, murder of Nicholas Radford 350. Flexbury
    and Bushill, impropriator of tithes, Stamford-hill and Sir B.
    Granville’s victory there, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 351
  Poul pier, by Leland, iv. 290
  Poulpirrhe, by Leland, iv. 279
  Poulton manor, iii. 2
  Poundstock parish, ii. 232――iii. 114――iv. 15, 136
  POUNDSTOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, impropriation, patron, incumbent,
    Trebarfoot, Penfoune, manor of Poundstock, iii. 352. By the Editor,
    situation of church, Tregoll, manors of Launcels, West Widemouth and
    Woolston, great tithes, advowson, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 353
  Powder hundred, i. 41, 52, 202, 388, 393――iii. 24, 55, 180, 190
    _bis_, 195, 198, 207, 210, 354, 391, 395, 402 _ter._, 403, 448,
    450――iv. 70, 71, 75, 97, 102, 115, 116, 117.――Powdre, i. 242, 251,
    294, 413――ii. 24, 36, 50, 88, 105, 275 _bis_, 298, 315, 352, 356,
    390――iv. 376
  Powderham hundred, etymology, i. 15
  Powell, David, i. 305
  Powley, Hugh, iii. 6
  Powvallet Coyt manor, ii. 38
  Poyctou, iv. 144
  Poyntz, of Berkshire, William and William Stephen, ii. 385
  ―――― of Cowdray castle, Sussex, William Stephen, iii. 231.――Family,
    ii. 354
  Pradannack manor, iii. 258, 259
  Praed, i. 346, 349. James 349, 350.――Family, ii. 241. Humphrey
    Mackworth, M.P. 264. His act for improving the fisheries at St.
    Ives 264.――Arabella and Catherine, iii. 10. Rev. Herbert 9. James
    and his marriage 11. Julia and Mary 10. William 9, 10. Character,
    marriage, &c. 10. Death 11. Colonel 8. Mr. 7, 8. His liberality 7.
    Mr. singular story of, and his death 9. Family, account of 8.
    Remark on 11. Name 9
  Praed, of Trevethew, Florence and James, i. 357.――H. M., iii. 9
    _ter._, 54, 93, 239. His character 9. Improved Trevethow and the
    plantations of Cornwall 11. Improved a valley 59. Rev. Herbert of
    Ludgvan, his son 54. James 444. Mary 239 _bis_. Miss 444. Mr. 85
    _bis_.――Mr. iv. 58. Family 54
  Prake, Mr. 110 years old, iv. 24
  Pratt, Mr. i. 283
  Preaching monks, i. 310
  Precays, i. 417
  Presbyterians, iv. 73.――Their rupture with Mr. Stephens, ii. 270
  Prest, Agnes, her history, i. 108. Place of her martyrdom 111
  Prestwood family, ii. 91. Thomas 196
  Pretender’s army defeated at Preston, ii. 112
  Prewbody, ii. 337
  Priam, iii. 418 _ter._, 420
  Price, Piercy, i. 275.――Winifred, ii. 93.――John, iii. 86 _bis_, 86,
    87, 289 _bis_. Found a ring, and erected a monument in memory of it
    289, 290. Rose 289. Sir Rose 85, 86. Story of 87. Lady 86. Mr. was
    of the expedition to Jamaica 85
  ―――― of Trewardreva, Thomas, ii. 93
  Prideaux, in Luxilian, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― castle, iii. 56
  ―――― i. 74, 76, 117, 266, 289 _bis_, 294, 299, 349, 385. Adiston
    160. Edmund 399. Matthew 349. William 160.――Dean, ii. 78. His
    “Connections” and remarks upon 76.――Notice of him, iii. 278. His
    house 281. Edmund 278. Family 238. Possess part of the tithes of
    Padstow 280
  ―――― of Boswithgye, Peter, i. 43
  ―――― of Devon, Sir Edmund, i. 259
  ―――― of Fewborough, i. 17――ii. 335
  ―――― of Gunlyn, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Netherton, Devon, Sir Edmund, and arms, ii. 242.――Sir John,
    iii. 278. Family 237――iv. 137
  Prideaux of Orchardton, Sir John, i. 346, 347
  ―――― of Padstow, i. 172.――Had a staircase from Stowe, ii. 351.――Rev.
    Charles, iii. 279. Edmund 3. Nicholas, his character, built his
    house at Padstow 279. Mr. 56. Family, and arms 279. Monuments 280
  ―――― of Plase house, Edward, i. 17
  ―――― of Prideaux, Roger, Thomas, _bis_, family, and arms, iii. 56
  ―――― manor, iii. 57 _bis_. Account of 56
  Prince’s “Worthies of Devon,” i. 144, 346, 348――ii. 61――iii. 184,
    222――iv. 15
  Prince of Wales, iii. 222
  Prior park, i. 57, 58.――A house at Truro built of stone from, ii. 33
  Prior’s cross, i. 368
  Priory of Bodmin, i. 73. Its dissolution, and value of its revenues 74
  Prisk, i. 237
  Probus church, iii. 180――iv. 135
  ―――― and Grace Fair, iii. 364
  ―――― parish, iii. 180, 182, 188, 243, 269, 448, 450, 451――iv. 156;
    or St. Probus, ii. 2, 305, 353 _bis_
  PROBUS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, impropriation, patron, impropriator, incumbent,
    manor of Moresk, Trehane, iii. 354. Carvean, Trewother, manor of
    Trelowthes, Trewithgy, Trevorva 355. Proverb upon it, Trewithan,
    manor of Wolveden or Golden 356. Ruin of the Tregians, Camden’s
    mention of it 357. Tonkin descended from them, list of their
    forfeited estates 358. The place where Cuthbert Mayne was found is
    still shewn, Tregian twenty years in prison, his son suffered a
    second loss of property 360. In consequence of the gunpowder plot,
    retired to Spain, the Marquis of St. Angelo, Talbot, Tredenham
    361. Curvoza 362. By the Editor, church and monuments, Mr. Thomas
    Hawkins introduced inoculation into Cornwall, church tower ibid.
    Compared with others, church was collegiate, a fair, Prince
    Charles visited most gentlemen in the west of Cornwall, Mr.
    Williams went up to congratulate the King on his Restoration 363.
    Name of the fair, the saints Probus and Grace, skeletons found in
    the chancel wall, Whitaker’s memoranda, parish feast, etymology of
    Carvean 364. Of Trewithgy, Trenowith, and Treworgy, manor of
    Probus, fortification in Golden 365. Supposed by Whitaker to be a
    Roman camp, Caer Voza, a British. Trehane, the two Dr. Stackhouses
    366. Trewithan, its beauty, Mr. Williams fond of ringing bells,
    peal at Kenwyn church for the amusement of the inhabitants of
    Truro 367. Hawkins family, persecution of Mr. Tregion, more
    victims to religious opinions suffered under Elizabeth than Mary
    368. Tregion’s connections, and especially his wealth incitements
    to his ruin, his own imprudence the ultimate means 369. Editor’s
    remarks on the transaction, and on the tyranny of the Tudor
    monarchs, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 370.
    Interesting varieties of rock formerly to be seen on the road to
    Grampound, the road now turned 371
  Probus town, i. 242 _bis_, 251, 294, 393, 420. Tower at 48
  ―――― St. and his skeleton, iii. 364
  ―――― St. vicarage, iii. 182. The vicar 181 _quat._, 189
  ―――― Groguth, iii. 354
  Proclamation for the apprehension of Rogers and Street, i. 279
  Prophets, ii. 65
  Prospect, Cornish word for, ii. 200
  Protestants persecuted in Germany, iii. 67
  Prothasius, St. i. 99
  Prouse, ii. 54.――Digory, iii. 358
  Prout, arms, iii. 66
  Prowse, Mrs. Elizabeth, i. 8
  Pryce, Dr. William, iii. 323 _bis_.――His Archæologia Cornu
    Britannica, ii. 255――iii. 390. His Mineralogia Cornubiensis ibid.
    His Vocabulary 362
  Prye, William, i. 215
  Prynne’s records, i. 251
  Psalms, book of, iii. 262
  Psoralia aculeata, iv. 182
  ―――― pinnata, iv. 182
  ―――― spicata, iv. 182
  Ptolemy, i. 256――ii. 172, 199.――The Geographer, iii. 24 _bis_, 25
    _bis_, 395――iv. 39. His geography 8
  Puddicombe, Rev. S. ii. 397.――Rev. Stephen of Morval, iii. 253
  Puntner, harbour at, i. 48
  Purification, feast of, iii. 324
  Putta, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Pyder hundred, i. 115, 212, 404――ii. 89
  Pyderick, Little, parish, i. 212
  Pye, i. 62.――Family, line upon, and arms, iii. 449
  Pylos, ii. 368
  Pyn, Herbert de, iii. 117
  Pyne family, iii. 117
  Pynnock, St. parish, i. 112――ii. 291
  Pyrenees, iv. 159
  Pyrrhus’s saying after a hard earned victory, ii. 342

  Quaker’s meeting, ii. 35
  Quakers, iv. 73
  Quaram, Rev. Mr. rector of Falmouth, iv. 72
  Quarm, Rev. Mr. ii. 4
  Quarme, Robert and Walter, i. 422. Arms ibid.
  ―――― of Creed, Robert, i. 236
  ―――― of Nancar, Rev. Walter, i. 256. Arms ibid.
  Quarrier in Leskeard, iii. 21
  Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139, 239
  Question, Mr. iv. 118
  Quethiock parish, i. 409――ii. 361
  QUETHIOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 371. Impropriation, value of benefice, patron, and incumbent
    372. By the Editor, ancient name, Trehunsey manor, Trehunest
    village, antiquity of the church, monuments, appropriation of
    tithes, once a college, its foundation deed printed ibid. The
    rector, now its sole representative, a former chapel, statistics,
    vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 373
  Quick, Anthony, James, John, iv. 55
  Quincy, Rev. S., i. 366
  Quiril, Peter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 300――ii. 412

  Radcliffe observatory, S. P. Rigand, director of, ii. 376
  Raddon, Richard de, ii. 427
  Raddona, Richard de, iv. 77, 82
  Radford, Nicholas, iii. 350
  Radnor, Earl of, i. 383――iii. 170.――Robarts, Earl of, ii. 377, 380.
    John 379, 380. Arms 380.――Last earl, iii. 193. Henry 381
  Raile, John, iii. 387
  Railway, i. 48.――Railways in Redruth, iii. 390
  Rainton rectory, i. 130
  Raith and Raithow, etymology of, ii. 394
  Ralegh, Piers de, Walter de, iii. 269
  Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 390――ii. 7, 21, 56, 342
  Ralph, i. 344. John 352 _bis_. Rev. John 351, 352, 366. Loveday 352
    _bis_. Mary 352.――John, iii. 2
  Ram or Rame head, i. 343――ii. 106――iv. 32.――Description of, iii. 375
  Rame, Joanna de, iii. 374 _bis_, 438 _bis_. Arms 374
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 374, 375
  ―――― parish, iii. 101, 108, 110
  RAME parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a
    rectory, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Rame, iii. 374. By the
    Editor, church peculiarly situated, monuments, manor and barton of
    Rame, Rame head, its appearance, and that of the Lizard, St.
    Michael’s chapel, description of the head, boundary of Plymouth
    harbour, its latitude and longitude, and establishment of the port,
    Edystone lighthouse 375. Its latitude and longitude, former danger
    of the rocks, description of the first lighthouse, remarkable storm,
    lighthouse disappeared, improved construction of the second 376.
    Generosity of Louis XIV. fire, terrible accident 377. Erection of
    the third lighthouse, Bond’s description 378. Inscription, Cawsand
    village, and bay, statistics, rector, and patron 379. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 380
  Rame place, iii. 375
  Randall, Thomas, steward of Helston, ii. 160
  Randill, Jonathan, iii. 260
  Randolph of Withiel, iv. 161
  Randyl family, and arms, ii. 353
  ―――― of Tregenno, Richard, i. 421. His arms 421
  Raphel manor, ii. 400
  Rascow island, iv. 230
  Rashleigh, i. 43, 74, 106, 255. Charles, constructs Seaforth harbour
    47. Establishes fishery 48. Origin and history of the family, and
    arms 43.――Family, ii. 91, 294. Philip 295. Philip endowed a hospital
    at Fowey 43. Made a fortune by privateering 44. Purchased the manor
    of Fowey, his ancestors represented it in parliament 46. Philip, a
    zealous naturalist, has published two volumes 47. William 46, 91,
    92. Mr. 397.――Miss, iii. 443. Family 57.――Jonathan, iv. 101. Philip
    140. Mr. 114. Family 99 _bis_, 131, 137 _bis_
  Rashleigh of Disporth, Charles, i. 260, 423
  ―――― of Menabelly, Rachel, i. 257, 259――William, ii. 294, 295. Mr.
    400.――William, iii. 290. Miss 367. Mr. 88. Family 57.――Jonathan and
    Jonathan, ii. 107. Jonathan and his son ibid. Jonathan 109. Rev.
    Jonathan 108. John and John 107. Philip 109. Philip, collector of
    Cornish minerals, has published specimens, constructed a curious
    grotto, his marriage and death 108. William 108, 109 _ter._ Family
    107, 109. One of them sitting in almost every parliament of George
    II. and III. 107
  ―――― of Penquite, Coleman and John, iii. 57
  ―――― house in Ranelagh parish, Devon, iv. 101
  Rat island, iv. 230, 266
  Ratcliffe of Franklyn, Devon, Joshua and his daughter, iii. 76
  Ravenna in Italy, ii. 75 _bis_
  Ravenscroft of Cheshire, arms, i. 374
  Rawe, R. J., iii. 387
  ―――― of Pennant, John, i. 383
  Rawle, i. 263――ii. 274. Mr. 273
  Rawlegh’s “Relicta Nomen Viri,” iv. 155
  Rawlinge, Mr. iii. 82
  Rawlings, Thomas, built a house, and William, notice of, iii.
    280.――Thomas, iv. 143
  ―――― of Padstow, Thomas, i. 235, 310.――Thomas, ii. 256.――Rev.
    William, iii. 282. Mr. 178
  Rawlins, Rev. William, jun., ii. 273
  Rawlinson, Mary, and T. H. of Lancaster, iii. 137
  Rawlyn, John, iii. 358
  Ray, the botanist, iii. 173
  Raynwood, John, iii. 211
  Reading, iii. 10
  Rebellion, story of the great, i. 44. History of Flammock’s 86
  Red Cross street, London, iv. 86
  Red sea, place of banishment for exorcised spirits, iii. 48
  Redevers, Earl Baldwin de, ii. 427
  Redgate, i. 179 _bis_. 180 _bis_
  Redinge, i. 206
  Rediver mills, iv. 47
  Redman, Richard, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 189――iii. 147
  Redruth manor, possessors of, iii. 381
  ―――― parish, i. 160, 208, 238, 239――ii. 129, 239 _bis_, 272,
    284――iii. 5, 7――iv. 5
  REDRUTH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, a rectory, value, patron, iii. 380. Manor, town, Carew
    brief in Penwith hundred, town now considerable, large corn market,
    had two weekly markets in the reign of Edward III., proceeding of
    Mr. Buller, town chiefly one street 381. Old chapel, landed
    proprietors, manors of Treruff and Tollgus 382. Treleigh manor,
    Tonkin’s tribute to Mr. Pollard, Park Erisey, the barton of Treleigh
    produces tin and copper, the owner imposed upon 383. Plain an Guary,
    church beyond the town, glebe, value of benefice 384. By the Editor,
    situation and description of church, St. Uny, advowson, new chapel,
    Tavistock abbey ibid. Life of St. Rumon, by Leland and Butler,
    etymological conjecture, copper works and slate, handsome shops, and
    good market, quantity of shoes, &c. brought from Penzance 385.
    Market much crowded, new market place, Lord Dunstanville’s clock and
    bell tower, village of Plengwary, Amphitheatre adjacent to,
    etymology, the village called Little Redruth, parish muster book
    386. Great scarcity in 1697, the Flammock insurrection, manor and
    honor of Tehidy, Cornish, Saxon and Norman acre, difference
    between the common and statute acre 388. Extent of Tehidy, notice of
    Lord Dunstanville’s death, meetings to commemorate his virtues,
    monument to be erected on Cambre 389. Landed proprietors, Dr. Pryce,
    railways from Portreath harbour, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining district 390
  Redruth town, iii. 381. Road to Marazion from 308.――From Truro, ii. 304
  ―――― Little, village, iii. 386
  Reed, Thomas, iv. 3, 4 _bis_. His ancestors 4
  Reenwartha, iii. 328. Account of 326
  Reenwollas, iii. 327 _bis_
  Refishoc manor, iii. 195, 196
  Reform Act, i. 391――iii. 29.――Change produced by, i. 390.――Remarks
    on, iii. 272
  Reformation, iii. 264, 279, 363
  Refry, Henry, iii. 387
  Regent street, iii. 205
  Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, ii. 427 _ter._, 428
  Regulus an abbot, iv. 105
  Reid, i. 259
  Rekellythye, iii. 324
  Relics of antiquity dug up near Camelford, ii. 402, 403
  Religious ceremonies of the Britons, i. 193
  Relistion mine, ii. 144
  Remfry, Henry, iii. 383. Richard 382
  Renaudin, David, John, family, and arms, iii. 303
  ―――― of Arworthal, David, iii. 225 _bis_
  Rendall of Lostwithiel, Elizabeth and Walter, iii. 328
  ―――― of Pelynt, family, iii. 328
  Renfry, Sondry and Thomas, iii. 387
  Rennie, John, the engineer, iii. 378
  Renphry, his son, sold Trewithan, iv. 140
  Reperend Brygge, iv. 255
  Reschell, iii. 111
  Rescorla, i. 49
  Reskimer, by Leland, iv. 270
  ―――― iii. 169.――Heir of, iv. 156
  Reskymer, account of, iii. 133
  ―――― family, ii. 358――iii. 126, 135, 423.――Arms, iv. 96
  ―――― of Reskymer, John, iii. 133. Sir John 133, 147. John and four
    daughters, Richard, Roger and arms 133. Mr. 147 _bis_
  Resogan, Bennet, and John, sen. iii. 325. John, jun., 325, 326
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 325
  Resparva, i. 386
  Respiration, Dr. Mayne upon, iii. 250
  Restoration, iii. 73
  Restormal, iii. 28
  Restormalle castle, iv. 229
  Restormel, i. 338――iv. 81. By Leland 277
  ―――― castle, ii. 38.――Account of 392
  ―――― hill, ii. 393
  ―――― house, ii. 393
  Restowrick, i. 310
  Restrongar creek, ii. 24
  ―――― passage, ii. 17
  Restonget creek, iii. 224
  ―――― manor, iii. 230, 231. Account of 226
  ―――― passage, iii. 226
  ―――― village, iii. 226
  Resurra in St. Minver, ii. 336
  Resurrans, i. 214. 215 _bis_
  Retallock, iii. 143
  ―――― barrow, account of, i. 220
  Retollock of Trewerre, i. 391
  Revell, Richard, ii. 180
  Revenge, man of war, destroyed in a glorious victory, ii. 342, 344
  Rewley abbey, ii. 138, 139.――Near Oxford, iv. 4 _bis_. Edmund Earl
    of Cornwall’s charter to 4
  Reynolds, i. 61 _ter._, 85. Admiral Carthew, his death 205.――Sir
    Joshua, ii. 306. Admiral, lost at sea 389. Mr. 241. Family 142.――Mr.
    iii. 354
  Rhé, isle of, iii. 183
  Rheese, ii. 173
  Rhodes, Rev. George, i. 354.――Miss, ii. 227. Family 100
  ―――― isle of, i. 411
  Rhys ap Tudor, iv. 8
  Rialobran, iii. 80
  Rialton, Godolphin Lord, i. 123, 126, 234
  Rice, i. 237
  Rich, Lady Lucy, and Robert Earl of Warwick, ii. 379
  Richan, iii. 402
  Richard, Duke of Gloucester, made sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 185
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 54――ii. 118, 177 _bis_, 178, 180 _quat._, 341,
    409――iii. 27 _bis_, 78, 132, 202, 393――iv. 71, 100 _bis_, 102 _bis_,
    112.――Cœur de Lion, i. 254――ii. 249――iii. 7.――Taken prisoner, ii.
    178. Ransomed, returned home, raised an army, and defeated John 179
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 59, 62, 93, 176, 181, 294, 341, 394, 422, 431――iii. 27
    _bis_, 60, 65, 111, 129 _bis_, 148, 269, 303, 436――iv. 22, 36, 99, 101
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 43, 108 _bis_, 115, 185, 231――iii. 101, 102 _ter._,
    142, 184, 203, 393. Slain at the battle of Bosworth 108 _bis_, 185
  ―――― King of the Romans, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 448――iv. 4 _ter._――Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8, 156――iii. 15,
    19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448. Notice of 28. Arms 169
  ―――― St. King of the West Saxons, and his death, iv. 126
  ―――― of Shrewsbury, ii. 186, 187 _bis_
  Richardia, Æthiopica, iv. 182
  Richards, William, iii. 153
  Richardson, i. 383
  Richmond, Earl of, ii. 108 _bis_――iii. 101, 102. Edmund of Hadham 65
  Ridgeway, Earl of Londonderry, i. 69.――John, ii. 70
  Rigaud, S. P., ii. 376
  Rillaton manor, iv. 7
  Rimo, ii. 50
  Rinden, i. 117
  Ringwood of Bradock, Miss, iv. 139
  Risdon’s History of Devon, i. 133.――Manuscript, ii. 341
  Risdon of Babeleigh Giles, iv. 157
  ―――― of Badleigh, Giles, i. 223
  Rist church, i. 148
  Rivers in Cornwall, list of, iv. 223. Their sources 237
  Rivers, Thomas, i. 177
  ―――― Richard Woodvill, Earl of, i. 194
  Riviere, iii. 342 _ter._
  Roach, in France, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Roach parish, i. 41, 212, 218, 310――ii. 1, 93――iii. 195, 442,
    448――iv. 137, 160
  ROACH or Roche, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, antiquity of the parish and town, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient chapel, iii. 391. Description
    of its remains, a pool supposed to ebb and flow 392. The story
    from whence its name of St. Gundred’s well is derived, Treroach or
    Tregarreck, Tremoderet en Hell, ruins of Holywell 393. Hains
    Burrow, Avoh Bicken, every parish in Cornwall formerly had a
    beacon, Colefreth, ruins of a chapel at, well near Pentavale
    Fenton 394. Etymology 395. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    saint, his history ibid. Parish named before he was born, a
    rectory, its value, patron, incumbent, society for purchasing
    advowsons, Tregarick manor, etymology 396. By Whitaker on the
    name, hermitage in the rock 397. By the Editor, the rock and tower
    conspicuous, Lysons says the cell was dedicated to St. Michael,
    Mr. Whitaker draws on his fancy 398. Lysons’s view and description
    of the hermitage, incumbents 399. Observations on the society for
    purchasing advowsons, parish could not be dedicated to St. Roche,
    history of St. Roche, his miraculous cure from the plague 400.
    Pimples called after him, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, the rock compared with St. Mewan beacon 401
  ―――― rock, i. 189――ii. 283――iii. 265
  ―――― St. church tower, ii. 386
  ―――― St. curacy, ii. 389
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 384
  Road, Truro, i. 227
  Roadstead near St. Ives, ii. 260
  Robartes, i. 384. Lady Essex 378, 379. Seized with small pox a month
    after her marriage 379. Francis 297. Henry Earl of Radnor 293. John
    Earl of Radnor 19, 297, 378, 279. Lord 113, 116. Sir Richard
    293――ii. 9.――Family, iii. 258.――John, ancestor of Charles Bodville,
    Earl of Radnor, John mayor of Truro, iv. 73. John Lord, Baron of
    Truro 74. Lord 161, 185, 187. Family acquired great wealth at Truro,
    engaged in mercantile pursuits there for three generations, rose to
    eminence and acquired the earldom of Radnor temp. James 1st 88
  Robarts, i. 74.――Frances, ii. 379. Francis, Henry and John, origin
    of the family 381.――Family, iii. 57.――Robert, Viscount Bodmin, ii.
    379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles 2nd 380. John Lord Robarts Earl of
    Falmouth, afterwards Earl of Radnor 379, 380, 382. Earl of Radnor
    377. Charles Bodville 2nd Earl 380. Henry 3rd Earl 380, 381. John
    1st Earl 379, 380, 381, 382. John 4th Earl 381. Richard Lord Truro
    380, 383. His arms 380
  ―――― of Lanhidiock family, iii. 193, 197
  ―――― of Truro, Richard, iii. 234. Family 348
  Roben, John, iii. 387
  Robert, son of Ankitil, ii. 427
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― son of William the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  Roberts, Sir Richard, i. 19 _bis_.――Richard, ii. 375. Family 170,
    397.――Francis, iii. 170. Family 178
  ―――― of Coran, Hon. John, i. 419
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93
  Robins, i. 53――ii. 151.――John, iii. 260.――Benjamin, his Mathematical
    Works, iv. 10. Stephen and Miss 156. Family 162
  ―――― of Penryn, James and Thomasine, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tregenno, i. 421. Stephen 421
  ―――― Verian family, John, iv. 116. Arms 117
  Robinson, i. 302. George 303.――Family, ii. 217, 358. George 358.
    William 160 _bis_.――George and his heirs, iii. 419. P. V. 419, 424.
    Rev. William of Ruan Major 419. Miss 75. Mr. 419, 421, 424. Family 423
  ―――― of Cadgwith, George Thomas, his melancholy death, iii. 421.
    Arms 422
  ―――― of Nanceloe, or Nansloe, ii. 139. Rev. William ibid.――iii. 419
  ―――― of Treveneage, Mr. killed by a bull, ii. 221
  Robyns, Mr. iii. 88
  Roche, St. iii. 395, 397, 398――iv. 139.――His history by Hals, iii.
    395, 400. By Editor 400. His death, ib. Supposed to preside over
    certain complaints 401
  Roche parish, iii. 55, 450
  Rochelle, iii. 183
  Rochester, St. Just, Bishop of, ii. 282, 287.――St. Justus and St.
    Paulinus, Bishops of, iii. 284
  Rock, story of one turning round, i. 187
  ―――― ferry in St. Minver, iii. 275, 282, 283
  ―――― island, ii. 1
  Rocks near Land’s End dangerous, iii. 430
  Rodd family, ii. 228, 229. Miss 227. Mr. 134.――Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Herefordshire, Capt. Francis, ii. 228
  ―――― of Trebartha, Rev. Edward, ii. 228. Edward, D.D. 281. Col.
    Francis 228. F. H. ib. _bis_, 229. Jane, Adm. Sir J. T. and Harriet
    228. Mr. 99
  ―――― of Trebather, Francis, i. 359. Francis Hearle 360
  Rodda, Miss, ii. 82
  Roderick, King of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Rodolph 2nd Emperor of Germany, ii. 371
  Rogate parish, Sussex, iii. 205, 206
  Rogers, Anne, i. 270 _ter._, 271, 274. Rev. Edward 242. John
    273.――Brian, iii. 76. Rev. John 137. Rev. John, Rector of Mawnan 77,
    445. His taste, &c., 445. Nicholas 387. Peter 76. Family 75. Arms 76
  ―――― of Antron, Captain John, iii. 445. Improved that place 446
  ―――― of Cannington family, iii. 76
  ―――― of Helston and Penrose, Hugh, John, and John, M.P. the latter
    added to his estates, iii. 445――Of Penrose, near Helston, i.
    228.――John, ii. 128, 243. Mr. 117.――John and Mrs. iii. 88
  ―――― of Skewis, i. 267. Henry 267, 284, 285, 286, 287 _bis_. His
    character 267. Turns his sister-in-law out from Skewis house,
    resists the Sheriff, several men killed 268. Escapes to Salisbury,
    taken, convicted, and executed 269. His trial for the murder of
    Carpenter 270. Defence 272. Trial for the murder of Woolston 274. Of
    Willis 276. Seen in prison 281. Print of him, with his history 282.
    Newspaper reports of the trial 283. His wife 271, 272, 273. His son
    280. Editor’s conversation with 280
  Rogers of Treasson, afterwards of Penrose, John, iii. 47. Rev. J.,
    54. Family 47
  Rogroci, and Lestriake in Germow and Brake, iii. 360
  Rollandus, i. 98
  Rolle, i. 151. Sir Henry 2.――Family, Robert, ii. 313. Samuel 313
    _ter._ Lord 87.――Dennis, iv. 136. Family 41
  ―――― of Stephenton, Henry, iv. 40.――Of Stevenston, John, ii.
    343.――Mr. iii. 117. Family 254
  Rolles family, iii. 117 _bis_
  Rollo, Duke of Normandy, ii. 344, 347
  Rolls family, ii. 416
  Roman army, i. 335
  ―――― calends, iii. 258
  ―――― camp, iii. 319――iv. 78
  ―――― Catholics, persecution of, iii. 368
  ―――― coins, iv. 30.――Found at Camelford, ii. 403
  ―――― Emperor; i. 195
  ―――― fort in Probus, iii. 365
  ―――― idols, iv. 101
  ―――― invasion, iii. 162
  ―――― legions, i. 335
  ―――― martyrology, iv. 96
  ―――― road, iii. 324――iv. 12; or way 15.――From Lincolnshire to Bath,
    and through Somersetshire to the west, iii. 324
  ―――― saturnalia, ii. 164
  ―――― territories in Gaul, i. 335 _bis_
  ―――― work at Berry park, iv. 31. On West Looe Down 29, 30, 31
  Romans, i. 256, 295, 334 _ter._, 335 _bis_――iii. 395.――Encamped in
    various parts of Cornwall, ii. 19. Their castles 423.――Directed
    their roads to the nearest and best fords, iv. 30
  ―――― Richard, King of the, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 285, 448――iv. 4 _ter._ and Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8,
    156――iii. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_
  Rome, i. 197 _quat._, 198 _bis_, 206, 334, 335, 393――ii. 369――iii.
    284, 331, 400, 431, 434 _bis_――iv. 126 _bis_, 146, 148. St. Gorian
    beheaded at 112. Indulgences from, for building Bideford bridge 341.
    Thomas Paleologus arrives at 368. Foreigners prohibited from living
    at 371. Greek college founded there 370, 371. Scotch college 371.
    Jubilee of 1601 at 371
  ―――― artists of, iv. 169
  ―――― church of, iii. 357, 368――iv. 165
  ―――― Emperor of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. John Lateran, church at, iv. 165
  ―――― Lateran, gate of, iv. 165
  ―――― papal, tower of, i. 312
  ―――― see of, iii. 150
  Romney, Kent, ii. 202, 210. A Cinque port 38
  ―――― marsh, iii. 10
  Romulus, i. 333
  Roofs, security for, iii. 243
  Roper, Edward, iii. 37. Elizabeth 140
  ―――― of St. Winow, iv. 156
  Roscarnon, ii. 24
  Roscarrack, account of, i. 384
  ―――― family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Roscarrack, i. 384. Charles, John, _bis_, and Richard 384
  ―――― burial place, i. 385
  Roscarrock, Mr. i. 214.――Thomas and Mr. iii. 314. Family 193, 240
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371
  Roscorla, account of, i. 44
  ―――― George de, i. 44 _bis_
  ―――― of Roscorla in St. Austell, William, iii. 188
  Roscrow in Mabe, iii. 125.――Account of, ii. 93, 98
  ―――― family, ii. 93
  ―――― of Penryn, Julian, i. 144, 145
  ―――― of Roscrow, i. 145.――Family and arms, ii. 337
  Roscruge family, and etymology of the name, i. 39
  Rose, no wild ones in the southern hemisphere, iii. 173
  Roseath manor, iv. 3
  Rosecadwell, possessors of, iii. 88
  Rosecorla, i. 420
  Rosecossa, account of, ii. 279
  ―――― Sir John, ii. 279
  Rosecradock, i. 196, 381.――In St. Clear, iii. 172
  Rosehill, iii. 88
  Rosemadons, i. 145
  Rosemodens, manor of, in Buryan, St. Hilary, Paul, and Guinear, iii. 360
  Rosemodris, i. 150
  Rosemorron, account of, ii. 124
  Rosemullion head, iii. 177
  Rosesilian, ii. 398
  Roseteague, ii. 56, 57
  Roseundle, account of, i. 44
  Rosevithney, account of, iii. 47
  Roseworth, account of, ii. 317
  Rosillian, i. 53, 54
  Roskuroh, account of, i. 383
  Roskymer family, ii. 128
  Rosland, ii. 50 _bis_
  Rosmeran, i. 136
  Rosminver, iii. 237
  Rosmodrevy, i. 141 _bis_
  Rosogan, James and John, ii. 192――John, iii. 333
  ―――― of St. Stephens, Elizabeth, i. 400. John 399 _ter._ Arms 400
  Ross, Dr. John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 224――iii. 300.――Solomon de,
    ii. 336
  Rosswick manor, ii. 358
  Rosteage, account of by Hals, ii. 54. By Tonkin 56
  Roswarne, i. 162, 164
  ―――― De, i. 162 _bis_
  Rother, Jane, i. 357
  Rouen, Archbishop of, appointed Regent by Richard 1st, ii. 178
  Rough Tor, i. 131, 132, 201, 307, 310
  Round table, ii. 308
  Rous, Sir Anthony, Recorder of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 145
  ―――― of Halton, Anthony, i. 313 _bis_. Francis 315. Arms 313
  Rouse, Henry, i. 215.――Captain, Governor of St. Mawe’s castle for
    Cromwell, ii. 277. Lines upon him 278. Robert of Wootton converted
    part of a barn at St. Mawe’s castle into a Presbyterian
    meeting-house, his marriage 278
  Rovier, iii. 342
  Rowe, Rev. John, ii. 432. Rev. William 252. Mr. 139, 157.――Family,
    iii. 215 _bis_, 239
  Rowle, Roger, iii. 185. William 386
  Royal society, iii. 52, 53, 378
  Royalists concealed in a vault, i. 143
  Ruan castle, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― St. iii. 419
  ―――― Lanihorne manor belonged to the Archdekne family, iv. 121
  ―――― or Lanyhorne parish, i. 294――ii. 2, 356――iii. 40, 385――iv. 115,
    117 _bis_, 121
  RUAN LANIHORNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, iii. 402. Patron, incumbent, land
    tax, Tregago, its etymology 403. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, value of benefice, Lanyhorne castle ibid. Situation and
    description of it, pulled down, turned into a little town, trade by
    shipping 404. A rectory, value, patron, two incumbents 405. By the
    Editor, situation of the church, the creek stopped up, the castle,
    Arcedekne family ibid. Manors of Lanihorne and Elerchy, Treviles,
    Mr. Whitaker’s account of this parish, memoir of him, his death 406.
    Memorial, Editor’s character of him, and of his writings, his
    defence of Mary Queen of Scots 407. His error respecting the ancient
    cathedral of Cornwall, has printed two volumes on the subject,
    containing invective against Dr. Borlase and others, extracts made
    by Mr. Forschall from a MS. in the British Museum, description of
    the volume 408. The extracts in Saxon 409. List of the Bishops of
    Cornwall and of Devonshire 415. See tranferred to Exeter, reason of
    Edward the elder for endowing the Bishoprick of Crediton,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  Ruan Major, or St. Ruan Major parish, ii. 116, 358――iii. 128, 257,
    385, 421, 423 _bis_. Rectory 258
  RUAN MAJOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, barton of Erisey,
    iii. 16. Family, story of Mrs. Erisey leaving her husband and taking
    her daughter with her, his distress compared with Hector’s on
    parting with Andromache 417. Translation of Hector’s address to
    Andromache, Hals’s deduction from it of Homer’s and Hector’s opinion
    upon marriage, dexterity of another, Mr. Erisey admired by James
    1st, who objected to his name 418. Parish existing before Wolsey’s
    Inquisition, value, patron, land tax 419. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent. By the
    Editor, family, and barton of Erisey, advowson ibid. Hals’s specimen
    of Homer, the same passage from Pope, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 420
  Ruan Minor parish, ii. 116, 319, 358――iii. 128, 385, 416, 419
  RUAN MINOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, patron,
    incumbent, Cadgwith, Mr. Robinson’s encounter with a bull, iii. 421.
    He died in three or four days, opinions of his neighbours, our
    Saviour’s judgment, Meneage comprehended in Lizard, etymology of
    Lizard and the dangerous nature of the coast 422. By Tonkin,
    boundaries, patron, incumbent, value 423. By the Editor, Cadgwith
    cove, succession of property in the parish ibid. Singular claim
    belonging to the rector, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, Geology of the Lizard district in the “Transactions of
    the Cornish Geological Society” 424
  Rudall, Rev. Edward, i. 111
  Rudyard, John, built the 2nd lighthouse at Eddystone, iii. 376, 377, 378
  Ruffo, Roger, iv. 27
  Rugeham, iii. 350
  Rume parish, ii. 252
  Rumor, St. iii. 384 _bis_, 459. His life 385
  Runawartha, iii. 326
  Rundle, i. 136
  Rupe de, or Roach, Ralph, iii. 393. Family 391, 392, 393
  Rupert, Prince, arrived in Cornwall, and accompanied the King, iv. 186
  Rupibus, Peter de, i. 130
  Rushes, planted as a fence against the sand, ii. 150
  Russell, John, Lord, i. 301.――Lost an eye at the siege of Montrueil,
    sent to oppose the Cornish rebels, iii. 196. Meets them 197. Rev.
    John 275. Mr. 11
  ―――― of Exeter, Mr. made a fortune by the Lisbon trade, ii. 19
  Ruthes chapel, i. 218
  Ruthven, governor of Plymouth, i. 113
  Rutland, ii. 89
  ―――― Henry, Earl of, i. 9
  Ruydacus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Ryalton manor, i. 209, 234, 246, 250――iv. 138, 139. Account of 231
  Ryalton mansion house, i. 74, 233
  Rycaut’s history, ii. 368
  Rye, Naval armaments defeated by Fowey, ii. 45
  Rysbank, i. 169
  Ryvier castle, by Leland, iv. 265

  Sabina Popeia, i. 329
  Saccombe of Trewinnow, i. 257
  Sadler, Captain, i. 270
  Saigar, iii. 331
  St. Alban’s, battle of, iii. 294
  St. Asaph, William Lloyd, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Saint Aubyn. _See Seynt Aubyn_
  St. Barbe, Francis, iii. 224
  St. Clare, Sophia, a novel, iii. 34
  St. George, Clarence and Sir Richard, iii. 61
  St. John family, iii. 270
  St. Martin, Aldred de, iv. 77, 83
  St. Maur, William, ii. 189
  St. Pierre, Eustace, ii. 158
  Saints, Sieur D. T.’s Book of, i. 214
  Salamanca university, i. 311
  Salamis, iii. 216
  Salem in America, iii. 72 _ter._
  Salian Way, i. 393
  Salisbury, rebels march through, i. 87. Henry Rogers escapes to, and
    is there apprehended 269, 282
  ―――― Bishop of, John Coldwell, ii. 7. Lionel Woodvill 194
  ―――― Earl of, i. 168.――Cecil, ii. 66. Robert Cecil 213. Montacute
    91. Nevill, Richard 182. Plantagenet, Margaret, Countess 91
  ―――― plain, a nucleus of three chalky ridges, iii. 10
  Salmatius, i. 192
  Salmenica, castle of, ii. 368
  Salmon of the Alan and Val, i. 74
  Salmon, John, ii. 192
  ――――’s Survey of England, iv. 8
  Saltash, the Tamara of the Britons, iv. 40
  ―――― borough, John Lemon, M.P. for, iii. 229
  ―――― passage, iv. 185, 188
  ―――― river, i. 32
  ―――― town, i. 77, 103, 113, 203――ii. 59, 76, 79, 254――iii. 110, 380
  Salter, George, iii. 350. William of Devonshire 211, 215
  Salterne of Penheale, i. 379
  Saltren, John. iii. 276 _bis_
  Salvia cardinalis, iv. 182
  ―――― grahami, iv. 182
  ―――― involucrata, iv. 182
  Sammes’s Britannia, i. 120
  Sampford Courtenay, i. 170
  Sampson, the Jewish Hercules, iii. 280
  ―――― the younger, Archbishop of Dole, iii. 336
  ―――― Benjamin, his gunpowder manufactory and elegant residence, iii.
    305. Martin 16
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. ii. 231. Hals’s uninteresting history of, Giant church
    dedicated to 90.――His history, iii. 281
  ―――― St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 280
  SAMPSON’S, St. or Glant parish, ii. 89 _bis_, 90 _bis_, _see Glant_
  ―――― St. de South-hill church, ii. 231
  San or Saint explained, iv. 312
  Sancred, or Sancreed parish, iii. 242,  283
  ―――― St. iii. 425
  SANCREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, land tax, rich lodes of tin, iii. 425. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name ibid. A vicarage, value, patron 426. By
    the Editor, church and monuments, one to Mrs. Bird, memoir of her,
    impropriation and patronage, consecrated well, St. Euny’s chapel,
    Hals’s dissertation on Creeds ibid. Pronounced Sancrist, Drift,
    Tregonnebris, late vicar, statistics, present vicar, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 427
  Sancrit, iii. 78
  Sancroft, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, committed to the tower,
    iii. 296, 299
  Sanctuary manor, iv. 17
  Sand, inundated great part of Cornwall, ii. 149. Difficulty of
    burning the calcareous to lime 150.――Encroachments of, iii. 340.
    Confined by roots of plants 344.――Important for manure, iv. 17
  ―――― place, iii. 252
  Sandal, John, i. 251
  Sander’s land, i. 187
  Sanders, Mr. iv. 74
  Sandford, i. 317
  Sandhill, account of, i. 158
  Sands, John, i. 24.――Lord, and Hester his daughter, iii. 145
  Sandwich, i. 169.――A Cinque port, ii. 38
  ―――― Edward Montagu, Earl of, iii. 104
  Sandys, Sir Edwin, Edwin Archbishop of York, arms, iii. 158.――Rev.
    William, tutor to Lord de Dunstanville, ii. 244.――Rev. William, iii.
    10, 238, 239 _bis_, 240. Called the Cardinal, monument to 239.
    William 241
  ―――― of Hedbury, Worcestershire, Margaret and Sir William, iii. 158.
    William 158, 159. Sir William 158. Family 156. The Editor, their
    heir 159. Arms 158.――Edwyn, Lord, iv. 57
  ―――― of Helston, Mary, Mr. ii. 218.――Of St. Minver, Mr. iv. 104
  ―――― of Lanarth, Rev. Sampson, William, ii. 327
  ―――― of Ombersley, ii. 327
  ―――― of the Vine, Basingstoke, Hants, Edwin, iii. 159. Elizabeth
    158. Henry 157 _quat._, 158 _ter._, 158, 159. Hester 157 _ter._, 158
    _ter._, 159 _bis_. Margaret, William Lord 158.――Edwyn, Lord, raised
    a regiment of foot, and another of horse for Charles 1st, his death,
    iv. 58. William Lord 57 _bis_
  ―――― of the Vine peerage, petition for, iv. 58
  Saneret parish, ii. 282
  Sanns, John and Sampson, ii. 320
  Sans, word explained, iv. 317
  Santy, Edmund, iii. 324
  Saplyn, William, i. 215 _bis_
  Saracens, i. 414――ii. 37
  Sarah, i. 414
  Sargeaux of Court, family, ii. 394, 395. Alice 395 _bis_. Richard
    394 _ter._ Richard, jun. and Richard Sheriff of Cornwall 394. Sir
    Richard, ib. _ter._ Arms 395
  Sarum, borough, ii. 162.――Old, burgage tenures purchased by governor
    Pitt, and his election for, i. 68
  “Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius,” notes on, iv. 87
  Saunder’s hill, iii. 280
  Saviour’s, St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 281
  Sawah, iii. 33
  Sawle, Joseph, i. 43――iii. 200――Family, iv. 101
  ―――― of Penrice, Joseph and Mary, i. 222.――Mr. iii. 279
  Saxifraga sarmentosa, iv. 182
  Saxon camp, iv. 78
  ―――― Chronicle, ii. 403――iii. 310
  ―――― fort, iii. 322
  ―――― kings, tradition of seven dining together, ii. 284
  ―――― saint, iv. 125
  ―――― times, iii. 264
  ―――― victory at Camelford, iii. 322
  Saxons, i. 195, 305, 334 _quat._, 326, 337 _bis_, 338, 342 _bis_,
    404――ii. 127――iii. 284, 365 _bis_.――Landed at Perthsasnac, ii. 165.
    Their castles 423. Battle with the Britons 403.――Defeated by St.
    David, iii. 293.――Their settlement in Cornwall, iv. 125
  Say, William, Lord, ii. 379
  Sayer family, iii. 212, 215
  Scandinavians, i. 341――ii. 248
  Scawen, i. 392.――Family, ii. 67. Arms 68.――Thomas, iii. 318, 319.
    Sir William 268, 271, 317. Mr. 271, 355. William, his observations
    on the Cornish MS. Passio Christi, App. V. iv. 190. His dissertation
    on the Cornish tongue 193 to 221
  ―――― of Millinike, William, ii. 67
  Scawn, i. 20
  Schobells, ii. 281
  Sciffo, Phavorino and Hortulana, i. 175
  Scilly Islands or Isles, i. 139, 198, 199――ii. 213, 237, 283
    _ter._――iii. 429, 430 _bis_, 431, 433.――Governor and gunners
    pensioned, ii. 278. Sir John Grenville, governor 345. Lighthouse on
    St. Agnes 358.――Etymology, iii. 430 _bis_. Reduced by Athelstan 322.
    Garrison at 289.――List of, iv. 230
  SCILLY ISLANDS, by the Editor, unnoticed by Hals and Tonkin,
    frequented by the ancients for tin, called the ancient
    Cassiterides by mistake, fable of the Lioness country, exaggerated
    opinion of the ancients, Scilly isles mistaken by them for
    England, iv. 168. Monastery, grant to Tavistock abbey and its
    confirmation 169. A second 170. Letter from Edward 3rd, his camp
    in Enmoor, only two monks resident, agreement for their exchange
    for secular priests, tithes impropriated, St. Nicholas convent on
    Trescow island, remains visible, St. Nicholas the patron of
    mariners 171; and of infants, miracle working by his relics, the
    islands important in the Civil Wars, patriotism of the cavaliers,
    system of annual leasing injurious to the islands 172. Now let on
    lives with condition of improving the harbour, expectations formed
    from Mr. Smith, Lighthouse on St. Agnes, suggestion for one on the
    Wolf 173. Wrecks formerly much more frequent than now, loss of the
    Victory, Geology, rocks insignificant, no legendary history or
    peculiarity of manners, their names, speculations upon them 174.
    Vigilance in the customs, produce, resort of ships, Dr. Borlase on
    their druidical antiquities, population, improvement of police and
    justice 175. Appointment of magistrates, situation of St. Agnes
    lighthouse, high water 176
  Scipio Africanus, iii. 106.――His remark on the fall of Carthage, ii. 426
  Scobell, i. 45 _bis_, 46, 255. Barbara 259 _bis_. Francis 44, 417,
    418. Francis, M.P., 416. Mary 259. Richard 44, 259 _bis_. Arms
    44.――Francis, iii. 381. Mr. and family 88
  ―――― of Menagwins, Mary and Richard, i. 257.――In St. Austell, ii.
    217 _bis_
  ―――― of Rosillian, Henry, i. 53
  ―――― of St. Austell, i. 53
  Scobhall of Devon, arms, i. 44
  Scornier, account of, ii. 134
  Scotland, i. 336――iv. 75.――Union with, i. 126.――St. German travelled
    through and preached there, ii. 65. The Eliots originated from 66.
    The Duke of Braciano came to 371
  ―――― church of, iii. 300
  Scots, King, ii. 371
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Scott, Sir Walter, a quotation from, ii. 214. He has given
    popularity to the word foray 165
  Scottish tongue, iii. 114
  Scripture, Jewish, contains no reference to a future existence, book
    of Job excepted, iii. 69
  Scrope, Elizabeth and Sir Richard, ii. 185.――Richard and William,
    Lords of Bolton castle, iii. 129. Arms ibid. 130. Their contest with
    Carmynow for them 129
  Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, iii. 138
  Scylley Isles, by Leland, iv. 266, 285
  Sea trout, iii. 442
  Seaborn, Anne and Mr. of Bristol, ii. 270
  Seaford, relics at, iii. 33
  Seaforth, i. 47
  Searell, Allen, i. 2
  Searle family and arms, i. 37.――Mr. iv. 98
  Seaton river, iii. 118, 119
  Seawen, i. 397
  Sebaste, i. 52
  Sebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Seccombe of Pelsew, William, and arms, i. 417
  Sechell, Rev. Mr. of St. Just and Sancreed, iii. 427
  Segar, William, ii. 192
  Selborne, and its vicar, Mr. White, iii. 206
  Selby abbey, ii. 75
  Selybria in Greece, ii. 366
  Senan, St. an Irishman, his life by Dr. Butler, friend of St. David,
    founded a monastery, was a bishop, died the same day as St. David,
    notice of him, iii. 431. His day 431, and 434
  Senate of Rome, i. 334
  Seneca, iv. 87
  Seneschale family, ii. 139
  ―――― of Holland, Bernard, John de, and Luke, ii. 93
  Sennan, St. a Persian, exposed to wild beasts, and at last killed by
    gladiators, iii. 434
  ―――― St. parish, i. 198――ii. 282
  Sennen, Sennon or Sennor parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 30, 78
  SENNEN parish, or ST. SENNEN, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value, land tax, painted images hid in the wall,
    inscription on font, iii. 428. Penros, Trevear, parish yields
    little wheat, but plenty of barley, Chapel Carne Braye 429.
    Dangerous rocks, spire thrown down, erected by the Romans, or by
    King Athelstan, and Marogeth Arvowed 430. Penryn-Penwid, Land’s
    End 431. By Tonkin, St. Sennan, daughter church to Burian. By the
    Editor, most western parish in England ibid. No granite on the
    cliff except near Land’s End, magnificent scene, Longships,
    light-house upon, communication interrupted sometimes for three
    months, latitude and longitude of Land’s End, church conspicuous,
    built of granite, monuments, inn 432. Its appropriate
    inscriptions, Mean village, tradition and prophecy attached to a
    flat rock here, Whitsand bay, things said to have landed here,
    parish fertile, variety of measures, difference of the mile in
    England and Ireland 433. English and Irish acre, history of St.
    Sennen, another St. Senan, his Life by Dr. Butler 434. Parish
    feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, sand in Whitsand bay,
    drifted as far as Sennen green 435
  Senns, i. 214
  Sepulchre of our Saviour, ii. 414
  Sereod, Sir Thomas, M.P. for Cornwall, iii. 165
  Sergeaulx, Sir Richard and his heirs, iii. 65.――Richard, iv. 21 and
    22. Sir Richard and three Misses 22. Family 21
  Sergiopolis, iv. 100
  Sergius, St. iv. 111. His history, the place of his martyrdom named
    Sergiopolis 100
  ―――― and Bacchus, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iii. 232 _bis_――iv. 100, 105
  Sergreaulx, i. 264. Alice 262 _quat._ Richard 264. Sir Richard
    262.――Sir Richard, ii. 181. Family ibid. 182
  Serischall, Bartholomew, Margery and arms, iii. 225
  Seriseaux, Richard de, ii. 398
  ―――― arms, iii. 225
  Serjeant, Rev. John, i. 381
  Serjeaux family, iii. 258
  Serman, St. iv. 14
  Serpeknol, iv. 153
  Serpents, petrified, invariably wanted a head, ii. 298
  Sescombe of St. Kevorne, i. 313
  Seven Oaks, Kent, iv. 87 _bis_
  Seven years’ war, ii. 32, 245
  Severn channel, iv. 15
  ―――― river, iii. 298
  ―――― sea, iii. 331
  Seville, i. 161
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 82
  Seviock, iii. 374
  Seymour, Lord Hugh, cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18
  ―――― Charles Duke of Somerset, and Lady Elizabeth 460. Colonel H.
    iii. 231.――Edward, Duke of Somerset and protector, iv. 107
  ―――― of Bury Pomeroye, Sir Edward, i. 416
  Seyne fishing for pilchards, ii. 262
  Seyntaubyn, or Seynt Aubyn, i. 136, 261, 317, 318, 319, 414. Mr.
    265. Sir John, Bart. 121, 261 _bis_, 266 _ter._, 268, 271, 277, 350,
    417, 418. His address to the parish of Crowan on the outrage at
    Skewis 284. Charity schools endowed by 288. Thomas 261. Family
    monuments in Crowan church 288――ii. 160 _bis_. Ann 5. Catherine 199.
    Geoffrey, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir Guy 181, 183, 395. John 213,
    _quin._, 354. Sir John 5, 176, 199 _bis_, 213, 214, 243. Margaret
    243. Margery 354.――St. Aubin, or St. Aubyn, Francis, iii. 80. John
    83. Rev. R. T. of Ruan Minor 424. Miss 133. Mr. a pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53.――Sir John, iv. 73, 139. Mr. 22. Family 107
  ―――― of Clanawar, Colonel John, i. 113
  ―――― of Clowance, i. 261, 262, 263. Geoffrey 265. Sir Guy 261, 262,
    263, 265. John 262 _bis_. Sir John 262 _ter._, 263, 265. Thomas 262
    _bis_. Arms 262.――Geoffrey, ii. 385. John 122.――John, iii. 81, 317.
    Sir John 317, 318, 319. Thomas 211. Mr. 65.――Of Clowans, Colonel
    John, iv. 188
  ―――― of Crowan, i. 360
  ―――― of Trekininge, Sir John, i. 216
  Shaftesbury, ii. 26
  ―――― Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of, ii. 379
  Shakespeare, iv. 119
  Shakspeare of Pendarves, John, iii. 311
  Shannon river, iii. 434
  Shapcott, of Elton, Thomas, i. 170
  Shapter, Rev. Mr. ii. 106
  Sharp Tor, or Sharpy Torry, i. 189, _ter._――iii. 45.――Description
    of, i. 187
  Sheen Priory, Richmond, ii. 190
  Sheepshanks, Rev. Mr. ii. 105. His character 104
  Shell work, extraordinary, i. 147
  Shepard, Elizabeth, i. 222
  Shepherds, iii. 273. Origin of the name 272
  Sherborne manor, ii. 7
  Sheriff of Cornwall violently resisted in the execution of his duty
    by Henry Rogers at Skewis, i. 268
  ―――― Thady, iv. 116
  Sheviock barton, iii. 436
  ―――― manor, ii. 362――iii. 437
  ―――― parish, i. 32――ii. 250. Or Shevyock 59
  SHEVIOCK parish, by Hals, situation and boundaries, value of
    benefice, land tax, endowment of the church, Dawnay family, iii.
    436. By Tonkin, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, Sheviock manor
    437. By the Editor, church old, splendid monuments 438. Tale of the
    building of the church and a barn, advowson, Crofthole village, its
    situation, Porth Wrinkle 439. Trethel, statistics, rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 440
  Shillingham, iii. 464. Account of 463
  ―――― of Shillingham family, iii. 463
  Shipmoney, iii. 144 _bis_, 152
  Shipwreck, extraordinary, ii. 320
  Shoreham, i. 258
  Short, Charles, of Devon, ii. 218
  Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, iv. 174
  Shrewsbury, ii. 76. St. Chad, patron of 391
  ―――― Richard of, i. 88
  Shropshire, the Cornwalls twenty-two times sheriffs of, iii. 449
  Shuckburgh, Richard, i. 355.――Sir George. His Tables, iv. 145
  ―――― of Shuckburgh, i. 355
  Sibthorpe, i. 358
  Sibthorpia Europæa, iv. 180
  Siddenham, South, ii. 430
  Sidenham, Cuthbert and Humphrey, iv. 77
  Sidney, Sir Philip, Sir Beville Grenville was his rival, ii. 348
  Sigdon, ii. 71
  Sigebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Signals, from Maker church, iii. 106. Remarks on ibid.
  Silly, William, i. 223.――Mrs. ii. 136.――Elizabeth and Joseph, iii. 66
  ―――― of Minver and St. Wenn, John, iii. 237. Family 66. Arms 237
  ―――― of Trevella, Hender, iii. 237. William 237, 238
  Sillye, heir of, iv. 111
  Siloam, tower of, iii. 422
  Silvester, Pope, i. 237
  Simmons, George, iii. 215
  Simon’s, St. and St. Jude’s day, ii. 140
  Simon Ward or St. Breward parish, i. 62, 131――iv. 97
  Simpson, John, iii. 206
  Sion Abbey, ii. 176. Middlesex 209, 212 _bis_
  Sirius, its parallax ascertained by Dr. Maskelyne, ii. 222
  Sisters, the nine, iv. 2
  Sithian, St. Bertin, Abbot of, iv. 157
  Sithney parish, ii. 136, 141, 155, 156, 160. St. John’s hospital at
    157――iii. 419, 421.――Its governor, iv. 1.――Near Helston, singular
    tale of a fair removed from, iii. 309
  SITHNEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, St. John’s
    hospital, a deficiency in the MS. iii. 441. Trout, royalty of the
    river, Trevelle’s tenure 442. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    ibid. A vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Penrose
    manor, its situation, Loo Pool, its trout, sandbank, used as a
    bridge, its danger, Mr. Penrose’s house, name of the river 443. The
    bar, the fish of the pool 444. By the Editor, distance of the church
    from Breage church, divided by a valley, attempt to make a harbour
    of Porthleaven ibid. Has failed, Penrose, improvements expected,
    Antron 445. Trevarnoe, St. John’s hospital, stone pointing out its
    site, impropriation of the tithes, present and a former incumbent
    446. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, form of the
    parish, Whele Vor 447
  Sixtus 5th, Pope, ii. 371 _bis_
  Skelton, ii. 186
  Skewish, Great, iv. 141
  ―――― Miss, iii. 147.――Collan and family, iv. 2
  Skewys, i. 267 _bis_, 272, 303
  ―――― of Skewys, John, i. 303
  Skidmore, Thomas, ii. 196
  Skinden, account of, ii. 338
  Skippon, Major General, i. 114 _bis_――iv. 188. His men distressed on
    their march, and charged by the King’s troops ibid. Commissioner for
    the parliament army 189
  Skyburiow, Miss, iii. 134
  Slade of Lanewa, George, i. 418
  ―――― of Trevennen, Simon, iii. 202 _bis_, and William 202
  Slancombe Dawney, i. 64
  Slannen, i. 347, 370
  Slanning, Sir Nicholas of Marstow, Devon, governor of Pendennis
    castle. Killed at the battle of Bristol against the rebels, and the
    marriage of his widow, ii. 13.――Sir Nicholas, Bart. iii. 76. Sir
    Nicholas of Marystow, Devon 75, 76. Arms 76
  Slapton, college of, Devon, iii. 352
  Slate from Drillavale quarry, the best in England, iv. 45
  Sloane’s, Sir Hans, MSS. iii. 154
  Slugg, John, ii. 189
  Small, i. 317
  Smeaton, Mr. ii. 264. Built the present Eddystone lighthouse 378
    _quat._, 432
  Smith, i. 78, 117.――Walter, ii. 70.――William, Bishop of Litchfield,
    afterwards of Lincoln, iii. 141――i. 218.――Mr. has taken a lease of
    the Scilly isles, iv. 173. Name 128
  ―――― of Crantock, Sir James, i. 250. Sir William 249. Arms 250
  ―――― of Devon, George and Grace, ii. 347
  ―――― of Exon, i. 250. Sir James 348
  ―――― of Kent, John, ii. 379
  ―――― of Mitchell Morton family, ii. 416
  ―――― of Trelizicke, i. 348
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ――――’s, ii. 154
  Smithfield, execution in, ii. 192
  Smithick or Smithike, British name of Falmouth, ii. 20. Changed 8.
    Town and custom-house built 9
  Smithson, Sir Hugh, Duke of Northumberland, iii. 460
  Smyrna, iii. 187.――Rev. E. Nankivell, chaplain to the factory at,
    iv. 5
  Smyth, Rev. T. S. i. 49.――Rev. John, curate of St. Just, notice of,
    ii. 286. Monument, inscription, and cenotaph 287
  Snell, Rev. Mr. of Menheniot, iii. 168
  ―――― of Whilley, Elizabeth, iii. 160
  Soaprock, account of, ii. 360
  Sobieski, John, the preserver of Christendom, ii. 351
  Society, Antiquarian, ii. 224
  ―――― for propagating the Gospel, iii. 73
  ―――― Royal, ii. 224
  Solenny, Hostulus De, iv. 25, 26 _quat._ John 26 _ter._
  Solinus, i. 199
  Solomon, Duke of Cornwall, i. 294
  Somaster of Painsford, Devon, John and Marianne, ii. 304
  Somers, Lord, iii. 15
  Somerset, Duke of, i. 169 _quat._――ii. 182.――Charles Seymour, iii.
    460. John 65.――Edward Seymour, Protector, iv. 107
  Somersetshire, i. 113――ii. 110, 190, 293. Romantic scenery of
    88.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――King Charles in, marched out of, iv.
    185. The Trevelyans sheriffs of 114
  Sondry, Thomas, iii. 387
  Sophocles, ii. 103, 165
  Sound, the English fleet sailed for, ii. 27
  South Downs, iii. 10
  ―――― Saxons, Cissa, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Sea islands, iv. 45
  Southallington manor, i. 64
  Southampton, ii. 76
  Southernay, i. 108
  Southey’s lines upon St. Keyne’s well, ii. 295
  Southill parish, i. 151 _bis_――ii. 309 _bis_――iii. 43――iv. 6, 7
  SOUTHILL parish. See _Hill, South_
  South Teign, i. 170
  Sowle, i. 47
  Spain, i. 161 _ter._――ii. 107――iii. 187, 361――iv. 86.――Coast of,
    iii. 218.――Tobacco sold cheap in, ii. 43. War with 245. Her fleet
    ibid. Appeared in Plymouth Sound 246. Officers lost returning from
    325.――Elizabeth’s wars with, iii. 105.――Trade of Looe with, iv. 35
  Spaniards, ii. 6.――Invasion of Britain by, their name hated at
    Mousehole, iii. 287.――And French, sea-fight with, iv. 21
  Spanish galleons, Sir Richard Grenville sent in the Revenge to
    intercept, ii. 344
  ―――― galleys, five, burnt Penzance, iii. 81, 91
  ―――― merchants murdered, ii. 6
  ―――― pieces, ii. 6
  ―――― vessel wrecked, iii. 311
  ―――― wars, story of, ii. 6
  Spark of Plymouth, i. 370
  Sparks family, ii. 357
  Speaker of the House of Commons, ii. 68.――Speakers, Hakewell’s
    Catalogue of, iv. 44
  Speccott, i. 221. Sir John 381 _bis_. Arms 379.――Family, ii. 398,
    400.――Mr. iii. 449. His death 450
  ―――― of Penheale, John, i. 378 _bis_. Hon. John 378, 379. Seized
    with small pox the day after his marriage 379. His death and will
    ibid.――John and Colonel, ii. 399.――Of Penheel, John, iii. 38
  Speed, i. 217――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101; and Dugdale’s Monast. Anglic.
    i. 247――ii. 62, 96――iv. 101
  Spelman’s Glossary, iii. 389
  Spencer of Lancaster, i. 263
  Spernon, i. 127
  Sperrack of Trigantan, i. 258
  Spettigue, Rev. Edward of Michaelstow, iii. 223.――John, iv. 62
  Spigurnel, Henry, iii. 2
  Spinster’s town, iv. 140
  Spour family, ii. 227, 229. Henry, Miss, and arms 227
  Spoure of Trebartha, Edmund, and Mary, ii. 396.――Family, i. 302, 303
  Spry, Edward, iii. 378. Sir. J. T. and Admiral 446. Miss 66. Family
    194, 449. Line upon 449
  ―――― or Sprye of Tregony, Peter and his daughter, iii. 77. Miss 75
  Sprye, A. G. i. 28. Rev. William 106. Arms and etymology of name
    28.――Samuel Thomas, M.P. for Bodmin, ii. 35. Admiral 34.――Family, i.
    29, 61 _ter._――ii. 54, 300
  ―――― of Blissland, i. 28
  Spur, Mr. ii. 120
  Spye, derivation of name, i. 28
  Squire, Arthur, ii. 377
  Stabback, Rev. Thomas, i. 293.――Rev. Samuel of Sancreed, iii. 427
  Stackenoe, iv. 1
  Stackhouse, Mrs. i. 400. Edward William 401. Rev. Thomas, author of
    the History of the Bible 400. John 163 _ter._, 400 _bis_. William
    400. Dr. William 163, 400 _bis_.――John, iii. 367 _bis_. Thomas of
    Beenham, Berks 366. His works ibid. Rev. Dr. William, rector of St.
    Erme ibid. _bis_. William 367 _bis_
  Stadyon, ii. 139
  Stafford, Baron of, ii. 230. Baronial family 231
  ―――― county, ii. 89
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 64.――Edmund, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 446. Family 117
  Stainton, Henry De, iii. 2
  Stamford, Earl of, governor of Plymouth, iii. 183. Defeated 351
  ―――― hill, iii. 351
  ―――― creek, iii. 256
  Stanbury, iii. 255
  ―――― family, iii. 350
  ―――― of Stanbury, Richard or John, Bishop of Hereford, family and
    their property, iii. 255
  Stancomb Dawney, iii. 436
  Stanhope, i. 61. Hon. and Rev. H., 149
  Stannaries, laws relating to, i. 365.――Records of, iii. 57.――Earl of
    Radnor, Lord Warden of, ii. 380.――John Thomas, Vice Warden of, iv. 91
  Starford, William, i. 108
  Stawel, Edward Lord, H. B. Legge, Lord, H. S. B. Legge, Lord, and
    Mary, iii. 206
  Stawell, John, ii. 196
  Steam boats, discovery anticipated, iv. 91
  ―――― engine, the first used in Cornwall, i. 127
  Stebens, Rev. R. S. of South Petherwin, iii. 338
  Stephen, King, ii. 87――iii. 433, 456 _bis_, 463――iv. 81, 82, 140
  ―――― prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  ―――― St. the protomartyr, iii. 450, 456
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 292
  ―――― St. cum Tresmore, ii. 430
  ―――― ’s, St. abbey, dissolution of, iv. 68
  ―――― St. altar in Dublin cathedral, iv. 146
  ―――― St. chapel in Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. college, by Launceston, i. 112――iv. 185.――Prior of, i. 378
    _bis_
  ―――― St. collegiate church, suppressed, ii. 419. Ralph, Dean of 426.
    Prior of 422
  ―――― St. parish, i. 103, 128, 140, 251, 310――iii. 195, 207, 335, 354
    _bis_, 395――iv. 152
  Stephen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  ―――― St. in Brannel church, iii. 198. The advowson 202
  ――――’s St. in Brannel or Branwell parish, i. 310――ii. 109, 110,
    353――iv. 54
  STEPHEN’S, ST. in BRANNEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, consolidation with St. Denis, and Carhayes,
    endowment, patron, incumbent, land tax, court, iii. 448. Bodenike,
    the love adventures of Mr. Tanner and Mrs. Windham 449. By Tonkin,
    situation and boundaries, dedication, daughter to Carhayes, value,
    patron, incumbent 450. Manor of Brannel 451. Whitaker, singular
    constitution of the parish, manor of Carhayes supposed a royal one
    451. Name and appearance of the house confirm the supposition 452.
    St. Denis parochiated, Carhayes not mentioned in Pope Nicholas’s
    valor 453. By Editor, church stands high, lofty tower, potatoe
    cultivation, monument in church to Dr. Hugh Wolrige with epitaph,
    statistics, fluctuation in mining, china clay, Geology by Dr. Boase
    454. China stone and clay, quantities exported from Cornwall 455
  ―――― St. by Launceston parish, ii. 361, 417, 419, 420――iii. 466
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near LAUNCESTON parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, collegiate church, converted into a priory, iii. 456.
    Impropriated all the benefices annexed to it, land tax, fairs, a
    friary 457. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice 457.
    By Editor, early history indistinct, college changed into a
    monastery, St. Thomas’s church, etymology of Launceston, the church
    seated high with a lofty tower, inscription to Viscount Newhaven,
    Sir Jonathan Phillips 458. Barton of Carnedon, modern history of the
    parish, borough of Newport, its constitution, Werrington 459. Its
    deer park 460. Fairs, Sarah Coat, aged 104. Statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr.Boase 461
  ――――’s, St. by Launceston, prior of, iv. 51, 59, 63 _bis_, 68
  ―――― St. in Lesnewith, iv. 63
  ―――― St. in Penwith, iv. 50, 51 _quat._
  ―――― St. by Saltash parish, i. 199, 203――ii. 8, 110.――Sheet of
    Hals’s MS. relating to, communicated to the Editor, iv. 184
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near SALTASH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 461. Ancient name, value of benefice, castle, honour, and
    manor, of Trematon, their history 462. Shillingham, etymology,
    Buller family, treachery of a domestic chaplain 463. Fentongollan
    reluctantly sold to raise the amount of a fine 464. Earth,
    Wyvillecomb 465. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a vicarge, its
    value, &c. ibid. By the Editor 466. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 470
  ―――― St. point, i. 381, 386
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 72
  Stephens family, i. 84 _bis_, 121 _bis_――ii. 43, 77, 80, 269――iv.
    67.――Rev. Edward, ii. 338. Samuel 215. Mr. 134, 259.――Rev. Darell,
    of Little Petherick, iii. 335. Rev. D. of Maker 109. John 48, 387.
    Rev. Mr. 240. Mrs. 8.――Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Culverhouse near Exeter, Richard, iv. 67
  ―――― of St. Ives, John, i. 353, 354, 392, 399 _bis_, 403. Samuel
    403.――Family escaped the plague, ii. 271. Anne, Augustus, Harriet
    270. John 269 _ter._, 270 _bis_, Maria 270. Samuel 270 _quin._
  ―――― of Tregenna, Samuel, i. 392, 403.――Mr. ii. 354.――In St. Ives,
    Rev. J. iii. 54. Samuel 440
  ―――― of Tregorne, Mr. iii. 311
  Stepney, iii. 188
  Stepper point, iii. 281, 282
  Sternhold, Thomas, i. 96――iii. 238
  Stevens family, iii. 192
  Steward, Lord, ii. 68
  Stidio, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60, 61――iii. 415
  Stithian parish, i. 221, 236.――Stithians, ii. 129, 140.――Stithyans
    or St. Stithians, iii. 59, 305, 380
  ―――― St. iv. 2
  ――――’s St. church, iv. 4
  STITHIAN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, mother church to Peranwell, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, impropriation, saint, iv. 1. Penaluricke
    barton and manor, Tretheage, the nine maids, tin 2. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage ibid. Patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Tretheage 3. By Editor, church
    and tower, manors of Kennal and Roseeth, barton of Tretheage ibid.
    Penalurick, Treweek, Tresavren, Trevales, the church, charter of
    Edmund Earl of Cornwall 4. Value of the benefice, late vicar,
    statistics, present vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 5
  Stithiany, ii. 136
  Stock, D. J. E. his Life of Dr. Beddoes, iii. 251
  Stoke, i. 266.――Meaning of, iv. 7
  ―――― Climsland, i. 151, 153 _bis_――ii. 229, 230, 309――iii. 40, 43
  ―――― Climsland, or Stow Climsland manor, iv. 6, 7, 11
  STOKE CLIMSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor, writ,
    Hengiston downs, tin works, part of Cari Bollock, iv. 6. Manor of
    Rileaton, writ, benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax. By Tonkin and
    Whitaker, situation and boundaries, value, patron, incumbent, manor
    of Climsland 7. Cary Bullock park, etymology 8. By the Editor, manor
    of Stoke Climsland, and Climsland prior, Carybullock, Whiteford, Mr.
    Call, memoir of 9. Afterwards Sir John, Sir W. P. Call, manor of
    Climsland prior, advowson 11. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 12
  ―――― Damerel, i. 266
  ―――― Damerell parish, iv. 39
  ―――― Gabriel church, i. 367
  ―――― Gabriel vicarage, i. 130
  Stone, advowson, iii. 115
  ―――― of Bundbury, Wilts, James, i. 259
  Stonehouse, west, now Mount Edgecombe, iii. 107
  Stones, circles of, i. 141
  Storm which destroyed Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376.――At Gwenap,
    ii. 132
  Stourton, Lord, iii. 357. His daughter 369
  Stow’s History of England, iii. 310
  Stowe, in Bucks, carvings from Stowe in Cornwall, transferred to,
    ii. 346, 351
  ―――― in Kilkhampton, ii. 340. Etymology 232. The Grenvilles resided
    there for many generations 344. Mansion built by John, Earl of Bath
    346, 351. The noblest house in the west of England 346. Demolished,
    materials sold, wainscot of the chapel sold to Lord Cobham, and
    transferred to Stowe, Bucks 346, 351. Magnificence and situation
    346. The carving of the chapel by Mr. Chuke, ib. Built at the
    national expence, almost all the gentlemen’s seats in Cornwall
    embellished from 351.――Staircase from, iii. 279. Spoils of 351
  Stowell, Sir John, ii. 233.――William, iii. 358
  Stradling, Ann, iii. 316. Edmund 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Dunlevy, Edmund, iii. 211
  Strange, Nicholas, i. 246
  Strathan, or Stratton hundred, iii. 22, 114, 254, 349
  Straton, i. 60
  Stratone, iv. 1
  Stratton hundred, i. 133――ii. 232 340, 402, 413――iv. 12, 15, 39, 40,
    131, 152 _bis_.――Bailiffry of, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 427――iv. 15, 16 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 273, 340, 413, 416, 429, 430――iii. 114, 274, 349,
    352. Roman road through 324.――Battle at, ii. 349.――Victory, i. 113
  STRATTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    iv. 12. Patron, land tax, market, Thurlebere, battle in the
    rebellion, Sir B. Grenville unhorsed 13. Chudleigh taken prisoner,
    royal party victorious, with a loss of 200, took 17 guns, subsequent
    fertility of the field, Sir Ralph Hopton and his ancestry 14. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Roman way, value of benefice, a
    vicarage, patron, manor 15. Its value 16. By Editor, former road
    through Stratton and Binomy manors, manor of Efford, church and
    tower ibid. Great age of Elizabeth Cornish, the tithes, manor of
    Sanctuary changed for the honour of Wallingford, Bude, jetty, canal
    efficacy of shell-sand as manure, boats used with wheels, Fulton’s
    improvement of canal navigation 17. A watering place, Launcells
    house, G. B. Kingdon, Esq. instance of longevity, bells, height of
    Hennacleve cliff 18. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 19
  Straughan, Colonel, challenged the King’s army, his troop led by
    himself, iv. 186. Challenge accepted, his orders, and charge, took
    some of the King’s horses 187
  Street, John, accomplice with Rogers, convicted and executed, i.
    269. His trial for the murder of Carpenter 272. For that of Woolston 276
  ―――― Nowan, iii. 288
  Stretch of Devon, Lord of Pinhoe, iv. 43
  Strettoun, by Leland, iv. 258
  Stribble hill, i. 223
  Strode, Richard, ii. 231
  Stroote, i. 348
  Stukeley, i 141
  Styria, iii. 186
  Subterranean vault at Trove, i. 143
  “Sudeley Castle, History of,” iii. 160
  Suffolk, ii. 66
  ―――― Duke of, iv. 107.――Henry Grey, ii. 294 _bis_
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 154.――Edmund de la Pole, i. 86
  Sulpicius, St. iii. 122
  Sumaster, ii. 71
  Summercourt, i. 388 _bis_
  Sunderland, Earl of, i. 84 _bis_, 126. Charles Spencer 127
  ―――― man of war, ii. 32――iii. 186
  Surat, ii. 227――iii. 188
  Surrey, iii. 10
  ―――― Thomas Holland, Duke of, iii. 27
  Surrius’s book, i. 214
  Surtecote, Angero de, iv. 27
  Survey of Cornwall, iii. 437――iv. 68, 100, 139, 156. Of the Duchy of
    Cornwall 6
  Sussex county, iii. 206 _bis_. Weald of 10
  Sutherland, i. 349, 350, 359
  Sutton, Rev. Henry, ii. 409.――Rev. William of St. Michael Carhayes,
    and St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 450
  Swallock, i. 131
  Swannacot manor, iv. 136
  Swanpool, i. 137, 138
  Swansea, i. 364――ii. 241
  ―――― coal sent to Cornwall, iii. 340
  Sweden, King of, ii. 27. Bestows medals on English officers ibid.
  Sweet, i. 417.――Rev. Charles, iii. 38
  ―――― of Kentisbury, Rev. Charles 381
  Swift, Jonathan, Dean of St. Patrick’s, i. 58.――Restored Archbishop
    Tregury’s tomb, iv. 141, 144, 147
  Swimmer, Robert, ii. 70
  Swiss cantons, had a custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  Swithin, St. ii. 403
  Switzerland, iii. 231
  Sydemon, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Sydenham, Devon, iii. 126
  Sydney Sussex college, Cambridge, iv. 136 _bis_
  Sylea island, iv. 230
  Symmonds, Rev. John, ii. 116
  Symonds, Rev. Mr. i. 353, 354
  Symons, William, i. 105, 107.――Rev. Mr. ii. 116.――Rev. J. T. of
    Trevalga, iv. 67. Family 62
  ―――― of Halt, i. 162
  Symonward, iv. 49
  Symphorian, two saints of the name, iv. 117, 120
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 258
  Symphrogia, St. iv. 117
  Syriac, St. iv. 111, 112
  Syrian castles, ii. 423
  Sythany, i. 261
  Sythney, hospital of the Knights of St. John at, iii. 78
  Syth’s, St. ii. 405

  “Tables of the Greek Language,” iv. 87
  Tacabere, i. 133, 134 _bis_
  Tacitus, i. 256――iii. 162
  Tagus, i. 372
  Talbot, William, iv. 28. Family 145
  Talcare, i. 20――iv. 24
  Talgrogan, i. 17
  Talland, ii. 430 _bis_. Tallant 398. Talland, Tallant, or Tallend
    parish, iii. 65, 249, 291, 294
  TALLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    land tax, etymology, iv. 19. West Looe, borough and town 20.
    Killygarth barton and manor 21. Hendarsike 22. Trenake 23. By
    Tonkin and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, a vicarage, value,
    impropriation, patron, incumbent, Polpera ibid. Porth Tallant,
    manor, etymology, the church, story of Mr. Murth and his French
    miller 24. By the Editor, additions from Bond relating to West
    Looe, in the hamlet of Lemain, barton of Port Looe, Lammana,
    description of the chapel 25. Grants relating to the monastery 26,
    27. Midmain rock, Horestone rock, Portnadle bay, corporation of
    West Looe 28. West Looe down, Giant’s hedge, St. Winnow down 29.
    Romans directed their roads to Fords, Causey from Leskeard to Looe
    30. Two circular encampments, described, Berry park 31. Prospects,
    five barrows, grave discovered, a celt found 32. Some in the
    British Museum, gold chain and brass instruments found, Polvellan
    33. Inclosure of the down desirable 34. Property in it, lettings
    35. Trade of Looe, church, Beville monument, Polbenro, beauty of
    the road from Fowey to Looe, Killigarth manor, Kilmenawth, or
    Kelmenorth, hamlet of Lemaine, extract from an old record 36.
    Portlooe, Looe island, Polvellan, Greek inscription, Admiral Wager
    37. Killygarth, Polperro, advowson, statistics, incumbent,
    impropriation, Geology by Dr. Boase 38
  Talland town, iv. 36
  Tallard, Marshall, ii. 307 _bis_
  Tallat, Captain, iii. 187
  Talmeneth, by Leland, iv. 264
  Tamalanc, i. 2
  Tamar river, i. 107, 113, 133 _bis_, 266, 310――ii. 362, 364, 413,
    418 _bis_, 432――iii. 1, 40, 45, 104, 114, 121, 166, 254 _bis_, 298,
    301, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 15, 39 _bis_, 40 _ter._, 70, 152,
    185.――Romantic, iii. 42. Its banks 460.――The country adjacent to,
    may be proud of Mr. Call, iv. 9
  Tamara, the Roman, iv. 40
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 291
  Tamarix Gallica, iv. 180
  Tamarton, i. 107
  ―――― chapel, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― hundred, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― parish, iv. 131, 152 _bis_
  TAMARTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Tamar river,
    mentioned by Ptolemy, ancient name of the parish, church recent,
    land tax, manor, iv. 39. Line of a Saxon poet on Athelstan’s victory
    40. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice, a
    rectory, incumbent, patron ibid. Manor 41. By Editor, Lysons on the
    descents of property, manor of Hornacott, Ogbere, Vacye, villages of
    Alvacot, Headon, and Venton, statistics, ib. Incumbent, and Geology
    by Dr. Boase 42
  Tamarton parish, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― north, manor, iv. 41
  Tamerton, i. 241――ii. 430
  Tamerworth harbour, iii. 104, 105
  Tamesworth haven, i. 32
  Tanis, parish of, ii. 208
  Tanner, i. 146, 153 _ter._, 159.――Bishop 200――ii. 201, 246――iii.
    233, 448, 449――iv. 104, 112.――His Notitia Monastica, i. 134, 146,
    250, 251, 300――ii. 209――iv. 102, 104. App. 10. 319 to 336.――John,
    iii. 202, 372, 450. Love story of 449. Rev. Mr. 199. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Stephen’s in Branel 448. Family 198
  ―――― of Carvinike, Anthony, i. 386
  ―――― of Court and Boderick, i. 387
  ―――― of Cullumpton, George, ii. 110
  Taperell, John, iii. 16
  Tapestry at Trewinard, i. 358
  Tarr, Rev. Mr. ii. 251
  Tarsus, iii. 284
  Tassagard, iv. 146
  Tathius, St. notice of, ii. 44
  Taunton, ii. 27, 76, 190, 191.――Insurgents march to, i. 86
  ―――― Richard of Truro, lent Hals’s MS. to the Editor, the son of W.
    E. iii. 18. Richard 407. Family 18
  Tavistock, i. 158, 159
  ―――― Abbey, in Devon, ii. 274――iii. 372, 384, 385, 459, 460――iv. 6,
    64, 169, 171.――Abbot of, ii. 365――iii. 459 _bis_.――Livignus, ii. 60.
    Osbert 426
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― river, source of, iv. 237
  Tawlaght, iv. 146
  Taxatio Benefic. of Pope Nicholas, iii. 5, 24, 40, 112, 277, 291,
    306 _bis_, 334, 336, 339, 345, 352, 372, 374, 384, 396, 437, 442,
    443, 457 _bis_――iv. 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 76, 95, 112, 118, 129,
    140, 153, 162
  ―――― Eccles. ii. 394 _bis_――iv. 159
  Taxation of Pope Nicholas, iv. 46.――To the Pope’s Annats, ii. 116
  Taylder of St. Mabe, Joan, and Thomas her father, iii. 76
  Taylor, i. 32
  Teague, Mr. i. 254
  Teath, St. parish, i. 375, 382――ii. 401, or Tethe, iv. 95 _bis_,
    99, 137
  TEATH, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, his
    history, iv. 42. Ancient name, value of benefice, land tax,
    Bodanan, the Cheyney family, their monuments and arms in the
    church 43. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage,
    value, patron, impropriator 44. By the Editor, Lysons gives the
    descent of property, Tregordock manor, Drillavale Quarry,
    Treveares, Captain Bligh of the Bounty 45. Church, age, situation,
    roads, anecdotes of Mr. Phillips, value of benefice 46.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, Treburget mine 47
  Tedda, i. 2
  Tees river, i. 290
  Tegleston, i. 1
  Tehidy, ii. 241.――Manor, iii. 380 _bis_, and Honor 384, 388, 389
    _bis_, 390
  Temple bar, iii. 142
  ―――― Rev. Mr. character of, ii. 104
  ―――― manor, iv. 48
  ―――― moors, ii. 36――iv. 46, 48
  ―――― parish, i. 21, 60, 167――iv. 128, 129
  TEMPLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Knights
    Templars, ancient name, value of benefice, iv. 48. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of benefice 49. By Editor, church
    founded by the Templars ibid. Potatoes cultivated, parish attached
    to the manor of Treleigh, patronage, incumbent, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 50
  Temporibus, John de, iii. 313
  Tencreek, account of, i. 254.――A singular tree there, iii. 169
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 254, 347 _bis_, 396. Arms 255
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 206
  Terceira islands, a battle with the Spaniards off, ii. 344
  Terence, notes on, iv. 87
  Tereza, St. iii. 150
  Terrill, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Testa, Abbess of Wimborne, iv. 126
  Teth, St. i. 322――iv. 66
  Teucrium latifolia, iv. 183
  ―――― frutescens, iv. 183
  Teuthey, by Leland, iv. 279
  Teutonic ears, name of Winifred not soft enough for, iv. 127
  Tew, St. i. 174
  Tewan, i. 11
  Tewardevi, iv. 93
  Tewington manor, by Hals, i. 41. Antiquity, court leet, etymology
    45. By Tonkin, etymology 46. Possessors, and quarry at 47
  Tewkesbury abbey, i. 288.――Gloucestershire, iv. 140
  ―――― battle of, ii. 260. Sir John Grenville left for dead on the
    field 345
  Teynham, Lord, iii. 140
  Thamar river, iv. 233
  Thames river, iii. 10, 63, 310. High water in 98
  Thanks, i. 37
  Thaumaturgus, Gregory, i. 388
  Theliaus, St. history of, i. 321
  ―――― St. church, i. 321
  Theocritus, by Warton, ii. 266
  Theodore, iv. 8
  Thesdon, a Prince of Cornwall, iii. 342
  Thesdon’s castle, iii. 342
  Thessalonica, principality of, sale of the city to the Venetians,
    ii. 366
  Thetford, ii. 76
  Thica Vosa, an intrenchment, ii. 113
  Thick, Reginald de, i. 383
  Thomas the Rhymer, ii. 308
  Thomas, Henry, i. 277. J. 10. John 19.――Mr. ii. 414.――John and
    Richard took the name of Pendarves, two brothers took that of
    Carnsew, another of Roscrow, and another of Caweth, the arms of all,
    ii. 337.――Andrew, John, his father, and John, iii. 326. John, built
    a house at Chiverton 333. William changed his name to Carnsew 61.
    Miss 333. Family 125. Arms 326.――John, iv. 109 _bis_. John acquired
    a fortune at Truro 90. Rev. Samuel of Truro 76. Miss 117
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, in Wales, Howell and family, iii. 326
  ―――― of Tregamena in Verian, iii. 202
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136
  ―――― St. Apostle and martyr, iv. 50. His day 2
  ―――― St. Aquinas, i. 312
  ―――― St. à Becket, i. 158, or of Canterbury, ii. 73, 96 _bis_,
    156――iv. 1, 50
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. parish, St. i. 377――ii. 417, 420――iii. 335, 456, 457, 458
    _bis_
  THOMAS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, iv. 50. By Tonkin, boundaries, shape, river
    Kensey 51. By Editor, church small, stands on the site of Launceston
    priory, its remains, well, statistics ibid.――Incumbent, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 52
  Thomas’s, St. street, iv. 51
  Thompson, James, i. 58.――John, ii. 192.――Henry and Rev. J. T., iv. 109
  Thoms, i. 94 _bis_.――Mr. family name changed, and arms, iii. 125
  Thomy, Robert, iii. 125
  Thomye, Robert, iii. 143
  Thorlibear manor, ii. 416
  Thornbury in Devon, iii. 450
  Three Barrows, ii. 317
  Thriades, book of the, i. 338
  Throckmorton, Clement, i. 16
  Throwley, Sir Nicholas, ii. 395
  Thunbergia, Coccinea, iv. 183
  Thunderbolt at St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 199
  Thundering Legion, miracle of, ii. 76
  Thunderstorm, ii. 157
  Thuraken, a Turkish General, ii. 367 _bis_
  Thurigny and Grenville, Robert Fitz Hamon, Lord of, ii. 344, 347
  Thurlebear family, iii. 270
  Thurlebere, account of, iv. 13
  ―――― de, John, family and heiress, iv. 13
  Thynne, Henry Frederick, Lord Carteret heir of the Grenville
    property, and Lord George present possessor of the title and
    estates, ii. 346
  Tiber river, iv. 148
  Tiberius, Emperor, i. 197
  Tide, high, hours of at various ports, iii. 98. Nine hours and half
    flowing from Land’s End to London 99. Extraordinary in 1099, 310
  Tidiford village, ii. 362. Trade at, limestone burnt at 362
  Tidlaton, ii. 427
  Ties, Henry de, ii. 130
  Tilbury, army at, i. 161
  Tillie, Stephen, i. 270, 271 _bis_, 274.――Sir James, iii. 163, 346.
    His extraordinary will 163, 166. Other particulars of him, his arms
    destroyed 166. J. W., 346. Count 166
  Tillie, manor, iv. 55
  Tilly, James, i. 315. Sir James assumed the arms of Count Tilly,
    deprived of them 314. Directions for his funeral 315
  ―――― of Pentilly, James, iii. 44
  Timothy, Epistle to, i. 198, 206
  Tin, fetched by the Greeks from Falmouth harbour, ii. 3. Mode of
    selling in Cornwall 318
  ―――― smelting-house at Treloweth, i. 365. Lamb tin preferred abroad 365
  ―――― stream, of Luxilian, iii. 58
  ―――― works in Stoke Climsland parish, iv. 6
  Tincombe, Mr. iv. 4
  Tindall’s Bible, i. 314
  Tinmouth, John of, iii. 331
  Tinners, St. Perran the patron of, iii. 313
  Tinney Hall, manor, iii. 38
  Tintagel, by Leland, iv. 284
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 259
  Tintagell castle, i. 381――ii. 308, 402.――Seat of the Dukes of
    Cornwall, and birth-place of King Arthur, i. 339. _See Dundagell_
  ―――― parish, ii. 401――iii. 22――iv. 44, 66.――King Arthur’s castle in,
    curious rock, iii. 180. _See Dundagell_
  TINTAGELL parish. _See Dundagell_
  Tinten manor, iv. 97
  Tippet or Tebbot of Callestock Veor, John and family, iii. 321
  ―――― of St. Wen, family, iii. 321
  Tippett, John, iii. 341
  Titanium, a metal discovered in Manaccan parish, iii. 113
  Titus, Emperor, i. 198
  Tiverton, i. 170
  ―――― school, iii. 258
  Toby, i. 282
  Todi in Tuscany, ii. 125
  Todscad, i. 212
  Tol Peder-Penwith, iii. 35, 36. Scenery, accident at 35
  Tolcarne, ii. 48――iii. 232.――Account of, ii. 278
  ―――― or minster, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Tolgoath, i. 415
  Tollays in Redruth and St. Just, iii. 359
  Toller, Mr. ii. 43
  Tollgus manor, iii. 382, 383. Etymology 382. House 383
  Tolskiddy, i. 213
  Tolverne manor, ii. 275, 276, _bis_, 278 _bis_. Henry 8th said to
    have passed two nights at 280
  Tom, Great, of Oxford, inscription upon, iii. 241
  Tombstone at Gunwall, ii. 128
  Tomm, i. 78
  Toms, Miss, iii. 176
  Tonacomb, iii. 255
  Tonkin, Mr. i. 296. James 10. Thomas 8, 9, 10. Rev. Uriah 147.
    Particulars of the family, and monumental inscriptions 12. Arms 9.
    Arms and motto 13.――Hugh, iii. 325. John, his character and adoption
    of Sir Humphrey Davy 94.――Thomas the historian of Cornwall, ii. 75,
    76, 104, 199, 238, 239, 251, 256, 295, 297, 354 _bis_, 381, 383,
    399, 405, 411.――iii. 17, 20, 32, 38, 57, 62, 63, 66, 90, 120, 135,
    177 _bis_, 192 _bis_, 205, 214, 223, 228, 231 _bis_, 238 _bis_, 243,
    245, 261, 274, 302, 313, 314, 318 _bis_, 320, 322, 323, 325, 328,
    366 _bis_, 386, 405, 406, 434, 451.――iv. 24, 25, 62, 65, 76 _bis_,
    78, 120 _ter._, 165.――His Parochial history, iii. 96.――His notion of
    a Danish camp controverted, iv. 78, 80, 81. Does not notice the
    Scilly Isles 168. His etymology of Elerky 119, 120. Whitaker’s
    remarks on it 119.――Rev. Uriah, iii. 7, 94. Vicar of Lelant 88.
    Character of 94. Family 94
  ―――― of Newlyn, iii. 429
  ―――― of Penwenick, Michael, iii. 315 _bis_. His arms 315
  ―――― of Trelevan, Mr. iii. 193
  ―――― of Trenance, near Porthoustock, Mr. ii. 326
  ―――― of Trevannance, Thomas, iii. 358
  Tonkyn, Miss, ii. 255
  ―――― of St. Agnes, i. 234
  ―――― of Hendre, John, i. 234
  ―――― of Trevownas, i. 396
  ―――― of Trewawnance Julian, i. 399. Thomas 399, 400
  Tonsen, i. 254
  Tooke, John, ii. 195
  Tor Point, iii. 121. Road to Leskeard from 439
  Torbay, King William’s landing at, ii. 112. English fleet anchored
    in 247
  Torleh, John, iii. 387
  Torr, Mr. iii. 321
  Tory administration, ii. 245
  Tothill, William, ii. 195
  Totness in Devon, iii. 102, 103
  Tottysdone, ii. 429
  Touche family, ii. 415
  Touchet, James, Lord Audley, i. 86
  Toup, Jonathan, ii. 284. An eminent scholar, his father lecturer of
    St. Ives, his education, &c. and principal works 265. Death and
    monument 266.――Rev. Jonathan, iii. 123 _bis_. Monument to 123
  Towan, i. 234――iii. 340, 345
  Towednack parish, ii. 260, 271, 358――iii. 5 _bis_, 7, 13, 46――iv. 164
  TOWEDNACK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, iv. 52.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax,
    Castle-an-Dunes, Trecragan 53. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, daughter to Lelant, ib. By Editor, saint, soil ibid. Produces
    much tin, also some whetstone, Editor’s manor, court rolls complete,
    foundation of the walls of Amellibrea, Cornish tenures 54. Copyholds
    extinct, record of a manor court, the homage, oath, charge 55.
    Matters to be presented 56. A petition from the widow of Colonel
    Humphrey Noye to Charles 2nd, for the title of Sandys of the Vine
    57. Unsuccessful, impropriation, feast, statistics 58. Geology by Dr
    Boase 59
  Tower, i. 29
  ―――― of London, i. 134――iii. 154, 298, 350――iv. 83.――Sir John Eliot
    committed to, ii. 66. Perkin Warbeck ditto 190, 191.――Sir Richard
    Vyvyan conveyed to, iii. 136, 217. His daughter born there 136. The
    Bishops committed to 296. Mr. Buller sent to 464
  Towington, iii. 195
  Townsend, Francis, Windsor Herald, ii. 375
  “Tractatus de Corde,” &c. iv. 98
  Tracy family, iii. 286
  Tracye, Thomas de, ii. 119
  Tradescantia crassula, iv. 183
  Tragedies of Seneca, notes on, iv. 87
  Trajan, Emperor, i. 206
  Transubstantiation, Cornish doctrine against, i. 109. Berengarius
    against, Romish doctrine triumphant 110
  Travelling a century ago, anecdote of, iv. 91
  Travers, Mr. i. 324
  Tre Yeo, ii. 416
  Treago, account of, i. 248
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Arms 249
  Trearick, Prebend of, i. 383
  Trearike, Lord of, i. 382
  Trease of Blissland, etymology, i. 61
  Treassow, account of, iii. 47. A perturbed spirit banished from 48
  Treasurer of England, Lord High, William Scrope, Earl of Wiltshire,
    iii. 129
  Trebant water, iv. 29
  Trebarfoot, iii. 352
  ―――― of Trebarfoot, family, iii. 352
  Trebartha, account of by Editor, ii. 228. Monuments to its
    possessors 229
  Trebatha, account of, ii. 226
  Trebeigh manor in St. Ives, iv. 50
  Trebell village, ii. 385
  Trebennen borough, i. 323 _ter._
  Treberrick in St. Michael Carhays, account of, iii. 202
  Trebersey family, iii. 337
  Trebigh, i. 410. Account of 411
  Trebilliock, two brothers, ii. 255
  Trebizond, empire of, ii. 368
  Treblithike, iii. 65
  Treburget, iv. 47
  Trebursus, ii. 428
  Treby of Trebigh, Hon. George, Lord Chief Justice, and arms, i. 412
  Trecan, iii. 448.――Account of, ii. 397
  Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― family and arms, iii. 40, 41
  ―――― of Trecarrell, Sir H. iii. 44. Built Launceston church 42; and
    re-built Linkinhorne church 45
  ―――― manor, iii. 40, 41. Account of, and monuments to its possessors 43
  Trecragen castle, iv. 53
  ―――― hall, iv. 53
  Trecroben, iii. 7
  ―――― hill, iii. 7. Account of 11
  Trecroogo village, iii. 337
  Tredawl, i. 25
  Tredeathy, account of, iii. 66
  Tredenham, Sir Joseph, i. 44.――Family, i. 305, 414――iii. 381
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207
  ―――― of Tredenham, i. 417.――In Probus, family and Sir Joseph, ii.
    217.――Sir Joseph, family, iii. 361; and their property 362. Arms 361
    _bis_
  ―――― of Tregonan, i. 418. John 416, 418. Sir John and Mary 418. Sir
    Joseph, _ter._ and Sir William 416
  ―――― manor, iii. 361
  Tredevy, by Leland, iv. 258
  Tredidon barton, iii. 459
  ―――― of Tredidon, family, iii. 459
  Tredine castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Tredinham family, ii. 276 _bis_, 281. Sir Joseph 170. Governor of
    St. Mawe’s castle 277. Patron of St. Just 278
  Tredinick, i. 116, 117. Etymology 117
  ―――― Christopher and his arms, i. 116
  ―――― of St. Breock, arms, iv. 95
  Tredrea, the Editor’s place in Cornwall, iii. 307――iv. 143.――Account
    of, i. 360
  ―――― of Tredrea, i. 360, 365
  Tredreath town, iii. 6, 8
  Tree, singular one at Tencreek, iii. 169
  Treegoodwill, ii. 405
  Treen manor, iv. 166
  Trees, subterranean, ii. 207
  Trefelens of Trefelens, William, iii. 326
  Trefey family, iii. 44
  Treffrey in Lanhidrock, account of, ii. 380
  ―――― in Linkinhorne, ii. 380
  ―――― of Fowey, family, ii. 380
  Treffreye, i. 383.――John, defended Fowey against the French, ii. 40.
    His seat at Plase and history 43. John, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir
    John, William and arms, these cut in Fowey church ibid.
  Treffry family, ii. 36. Thomas fortified his house 46. Mr. Sheriff
    of Cornwall 186. Mr. 279.――Elizabeth, iii. 71. John 72.
    Miss 67.――Miss, iv. 24
  Trefilis, iii. 402
  Trefreke, account of, i. 383
  Trefrew village, ii. 405
  Trefrize manor, iii. 44
  Trefronick, i. 20
  Trefry, John, iii. 347
  Trefusis, i. 125, 225, 226. James 240. Otho de 348――ii. 32. John,
    his lines on Captain Rouse 278. Rev. John 231. R. G. W. Lord Clinton
    313 _bis_, 314 _bis_.――Catherine, iii. 41. Francis 228. Mary 41.
    Nicholas 40 _bis_, 41. Otho 318. Robert 224. Miss 60. Mr. 230. Lord
    Clinton ibid. Family 40, 107, 117, 230, 254, 390. Arms 318.――Family,
    iv. 62
  ―――― of Landew, family, ii. 399
  ―――― of Trefusis, i. 65, 240. George William 151.――Richard, ii.
    304.――Bridget, Francis, iii. 62. Robert 327, 282. Samuel 227. Mr.
    382. Family and arms 227
  ―――― manor, iii. 382. Account of 226. House 227. Situation 231
  Trefyns, account of, ii. 130, 131
  Tregaga or Tresaga family, iii. 209
  ―――― house in Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 209
  Tregagle, Mr. ii. 332 _bis_, 335
  ―――― of Trevorder in St. Breock, tale of one, family, and arms, iii. 265
  Tregago or Trejago, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― castle, &c. house, iii. 403
  ―――― or Trejago, i. 117.――Jane, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211.
    Family 208 _bis_, 214
  ―――― of Tregago, family, built the castle, iii. 403
  Tregallen village, iii. 337
  Tregalravean, account of, ii. 56
  Tregameer, i. 140
  Tregamynyon, account of, iii. 242
  Treganetha, iv. 140
  Tregantle, iii. 438
  Treganyan of Treganyan, family, iii. 215
  ―――― tenement, iii. 209, 215. Etymology 212
  Tregaraan, ii. 51
  Tregaradue, ii. 50
  Tregarden, ii. 109
  Tregare, ii. 50, 275
  Tregarick of Tregarick, Matilda, Mr. and family, iii. 397
  ―――― manor, account of by Hals, iii. 396. By Whitaker 397
  Tregarne manor, ii. 320
  Tregarrick, iv. 29
  Tregarthen family, ii. 114
  Tregarthin of Court, in Brand, family, iii. 198
  Tregarthyn family, ancient and powerful, Catherine, ii. 109. Jane,
    Joan, and her epitaph 110. John 109 _bis_, 110. Margaret 109, 110.
    Mary ibid. Thomas 109 _bis_, 110. Arms 110
  Tregaseal, i. 141
  Tregavethan manor in Kenwin, iii. 192
  Tregavethick village, ii. 399
  Tregavethnan manor, account of by Hals and by Tonkin, ii. 316
  Tregavithick manor, account of, ii. 400
  Tregaza, account of, i. 394
  Tregea, of St. Agnes, John, iii. 315. William 326. Capt. William 315
  ―――― of Lambrigan, William, ii. 353
  Tregeagle, i. 18, 19. John 19.――John, ii. 338
  ―――― of Trevorden, John, iii. 76
  Tregean, Francis, ii. 354
  Tregear manor, iii. 2 _bis_
  Tregeare, account of, i. 263, 264
  ―――― of Tregeare, i. 263, 264. Richard 263. Arms 263, 264. Etymology 264
  ―――― manor, ii. 56, 336. Account of 51, 377. Geran’s parish, part of
    it 54. Purchased by Kempe 57
  Tregedick family, ii. 316
  Tregelly manor, iii. 170
  Tregembo, ii. 217, 218
  Tregena, Mr. ii. 255
  Tregenhawke, account of, ii. 252
  Tregenna, near St. Ives, ii. 215.――Mr. Stephens’s house at, i. 403
    _bis_――ii. 270. Beautiful prospect from a hill near 272.――Rev. John
    of Roach and Mawgan in Pider, iii. 139, 396 _bis_, 399. Miss, Mr.
    and family 406.――Rev. Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Tregenno, account of, i. 421
  Tregenyn, i. 408
  Tregethes, i. 364
  Tregew, account of its possessors, ii. 30
  Tregheney Brygge, iv. 255
  Tregheny castle, iv. 228
  Tregian, account of, i. 420
  ―――― family, i. 234, 248.――Francis, ii. 353――iii. 243, 269, 355. His
    history 357 to 360. List of his lost estates 358. Francis the son
    383. His history 360. Persecution 368. Adventure 369. Jane 358. Mr.
    357 _ter._ The unfortunate 549 Mr. 405. Their posterity existing
    in Spain 361. Arms 357.――Francis, iv. 118. Margaret 72
  Tregian of Golden, i. 420
  ―――― of Walvedon, Miss, iii. 102, 103
  Tregillas, John, i. 10
  Tregion, Francis, ii. 305
  ―――― or Tregyn in St. Ewe, iii. 358
  Treglaston, iii. 350
  Tregleah, account of, i. 372
  Treglisson family, iii. 343
  Treglith, iv. 62
  Tregof, ii. 427
  Tregoll village, iii. 353
  Tregonan, i. 418. Account of 416
  Tregone tenement, iii. 223
  Tregonell, account of, i. 247
  ―――― of Middleton, John, i. 247, 248. Sir John 248
  ―――― of Tregonell, i. 247. Arms ibid.
  Tregoney or Tregony parish, iv. 115, 166
  Tregonissy, i. 49
  Tregonnan, in St. Ewe, iii. 361
  Tregonnebris, occupiers of, iii. 427
  Tregonnen village, iii. 334
  Tregonning hill, i. 128 _bis_
  Tregony borough, account of, i. 295. Arms 296.――Members for, Charles
    Trevanion, iii. 200. William Trevanion 205
  ―――― branch of Fale river, iii. 405
  ―――― bridge, i. 245, 299――iii. 207
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 299――ii. 2
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― manor, i. 296
  ―――― parish, i. 242
  ―――― priory, i. 299, 300
  ―――― town, ii. 17, 180――iii. 404, 451. German school at 67
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 272, 289
  ―――― Medan, i. 294 _bis_, 297
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_
  Tregoos chapel, i. 218
  Tregordock manor, iv. 44
  Tregorick, i. 49
  Tregors, Andrew de, iii. 372
  Tregose, ii. 320.――Miss, iii. 421――iv. 24
  Tregoss moor, i. 230.――Moors, iv. 26
  Tregothick, i. 125
  Tregothnan, i. 140――ii. 33, 308 _bis_――iv. 167
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Johanna. John, and family, iii. 212
  Tregothnan manor, iii. 208, 209, 464. And tenement 209, 215. Gates
    and houses of 209. New house at 212. Account of ibid. Description
    221. Carried to the Boscawens 213
  Tregou village, ii. 399
  Tregoweth of Crantock, Margaret, iii. 177
  Tregoze, i. 39――ii. 130――Arms, i. 39
  Tregtheney-Pomerey castle, iv. 228
  Tregullan village, ii. 385
  Tregumbo, account of, ii. 170
  Tregurtha, ii. 218. Abounds in mines 219
  Tregury, now Tregotha, iv. 143 _bis_
  ―――― Michael de, Archbishop of Dublin, iv. 138, 141, 143, 145.
    Governor of Caen University 138, 144, 145 _bis_. His life 144.
    Ware’s mention of him 145. Buried at St. Patrick’s, Dublin 138. Tomb
    141. Epitaph 138. Death 146. Will 147. Works 148. Family, last heir
    male and three coheirs 143
  Tregwerys, or Trewerys in Probus, iii. 360
  Tregyon family, iii. 404
  Trehane barton, iii. 354, 355, 366, 367, _bis_.――Account of, i. 397
  ―――― of Trehane family, iii. 354. Arms 355
  Trehanick in St. Teath, iii. 212
  Trehavarike, account of, ii. 335
  ―――― of Trehavarike family, ii. 335
  Trehawke family, ii. 399.――Mr. a miser, iii. 19. Family and
    monuments to 20
  ―――― of Leskeard, Mrs. iv. 97
  ―――― of Trehawke, arms, iii. 169
  ―――― iii. 168, or Trehavock, account of 169
  Trehunest village, iii. 372
  Trehunsey manor, iii. 372
  Treiagu, John de, iv. 96
  Treice, Mr. ii. 87
  Treise, Sir Christopher, i. 321.――Family and heir, iv. 60
  Treiwall, ii. 208
  Trejago castle, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, ii. 2
  ―――― Jene, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211. Family 214
  Trekininge, account of, i. 219, 223
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 225
  Trekynin, Jenkyn, iii. 318
  Trelagoe village and manor, i. 3
  Treland Vean, account of, ii. 320
  ―――― Vear, account of, ii. 320
  Trelask manor, iii. 37, 38 _bis_
  Trelauder of Hengar, family and heir, iv. 94
  Trelaun by Leland, iv. 280
  Trelawder of Hengar, or St. Mabyn family, gentlemen of blood and
    arms, their marriages and heir, arms the same as Tredinick’s, iv. 95
  Trelawn, iii. 293. History of by Bond, and house built at 295.
    Masses performed at 301
  ―――― mill, iv. 29
  ―――― wood, iv. 29
  Trelawney in Pelynt, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― family, i. 23. Jane 221. John 65. Sir John 221. W. S., 158.
    Arms 23.――Family, ii. 255, 309. Anna 235. Charles 77 _bis_. Edward
    ibid. Rev. Heal 394. Sir John, Sir Beville Grenville’s letter to
    349. Sir Jonathan 55, 235
  ―――― of Coldrynike, Jonathan and Major John, ii. 67
  ―――― of Lamellin, Sir John, ii. 411
  ―――― of Poble, Kent, ii. 7
  ―――― of Poole, ii. 67. John 411, 412. Sir Jonathan 16――iii. 133. Sir
    Jonathan 168. Family now of Trelawen 170. Arms 169
  ―――― of Trelawne, ii. 67
  Trelawny barton in Altarnun, account of, i. 22.――The cradle of the
    family, iii. 294
  ―――― ii. 151, 397. Rev. E., 229. Edward, Dean of Exeter 238 _bis_.
    Hele and Mr. 230.――Edward, governor of Jamaica, iii. 295 _bis_, 300.
    Rebuilt his house 295. Notice of 299. Monument to and epitaph upon
    292. Sir Harry the Roman Catholic Bishop, memoir of 300. Henry 297.
    Sir John, memoir of, couplet upon, rebuilt his house 295. Sir
    Jonathan, Bishop of Bristol, Exeter, and Winchester 248, 295 _bis_,
    296. Memoir of, one of the seven Bishops sent to the tower 296.
    Letitia 297. Rebecca 248, 249, 297. Sir William 219. Governor of
    Jamaica 300. Sir W. L. S., 301. Family 293. Name 294. Arms 295.
    Monument 292. Saying relating to the family 295.――Major-General
    Charles, governor of Plymouth, iv. 94. Sir Jonathan 34, 139. Sir
    William 37. Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy 93. Arms 96
  Trelawny of Coldrinick, John, iv. 94
  ―――― of the Lawn, Jane, and Sir John, i. 225
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Trelawny, i. 65
  Treleage manor, etymology of, ii. 319
  Trelean, account of, i. 420
  Treleare, the Editor’s farm, ii. 308
  Trelegar, ii. 54, 57. Account, of 55
  Treleigh in Redruth, iii. 359. Manor 383, 384. Account of 383
  Trelevan, iii. 125, 191. Manor 192 _bis_, 194. Occupiers of 192
  Trelevant, of St. Agnes, Hector, iii. 243
  Trelewick, account of, i. 420
  Treligan, i. 27.――Account of, ii. 54
  Trelil, ii. 139
  Trelisick, i. 418. Account of 350, 359, 417. House 359.――Account of
    and house built at, ii. 32.――Or Trelizike in St. Earth, iii. 318, 423
  Trelisike, account of, i. 348.――Or Trelizik, iii. 125
  Trelogas, account of, ii. 300
  Trelowarren, account of, iii. 133, 137
  Treloweth, i. 365. Smelting house at ibid.
  Trelowith manor, iii. 355
  Trelowthes manor, iii. 355
  Treloye chapel, i. 231
  Treluddera, Treluddero, or Treludra, iii. 267, 268, 272――iv.
    141――Rights of, ii. 271
  Treluddro in Newlyn, iii. 319
  Treludra Pippen, iii. 268――iv. 141
  Trelugan manor, ii. 363
  Treluick, account of, i. 417
  Trelven, i. 174
  Trelynike, account of, i. 379
  Tremabe, description of, i. 177
  Tremada, account of, i. 319
  Tremagenna, ii. 405
  Tremain, by Leland, iv. 270
  Tremaine church, iv. 60
  ―――― Rev. H. H. ii. 99.――William, his garden, iii. 343
  ―――― parish, iv. 61, 64, 124, 125, 127
  TREMAINE, or Tremean parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    endowment, impropriation, land tax, chapel of ease to Egloskerry,
    iv. 59. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries 59. Name, daughter to
    Egloskerry 60. By Editor, manor of Tremaine, church, its name,
    patron, impropriation, saint, his feast, statistics 60. Geology by
    Dr. Boase 61
  Tremanheer of Penzance, i. 162
  Tremarastall, ii. 169, 170
  Trematon, i. 199, 203――ii. 70.――iv. 81. By Leland 291
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 297――ii. 42
  ―――― manor, i. 296, 297――iii. 462 _bis_. History of 462
  Tremayne in Mabe, account of, iii. 60
  ―――― in St. Colomb, Major, iii. 61
  ―――― in St. Martyn’s, iii. 61, 63. Account of 124, 126
  ―――― Rev. Charles, i. 398. Rev. H. H., 423, 424. His character 423.
    John 422. John, H., 423, 424. His character 423. Lewis 420, 423. Mr.
    417. Serjeant 424.――Mr. ii. 134.――Arthur, Degory, Edmund, Edmund,
    iii. 61. John, John, John 60. J. H., 230. Rev. Nicholas, Peres de,
    Peros, Richard 60. Richard Roger 61. Thomas, Thomas, Thomas 60. Rev.
    Dr. of Menheniet 171. Miss 102. Mr. 192, 194. Family 60, 197.
    Estates increased 60
  ―――― of Collacomb, i. 416
  ―――― of Croan, H. H. and J. H. i., 377
  ―――― of St. Ewe, Sampson, senior, i. 419.――Or of Heligan or
    Halligan, in St. Ewe, J. H., iii. 240. Lewis 191, 196. Mr. 193
    _bis_. Family 61, 63, 126, 240.――Of Halliggon, Sir John, Col. Lewis,
    Rev. W. and Mr. i. 416. Of Heligan, Rev. H. H., 260, 359. John 260,
    419 _bis_. Sir John and Col. Lewis 419
  ―――― of St. Ive, i. 45
  ―――― of Sydenham, i. 201――iii. 126
  ―――― of Tremayne family, and Miss, iii. 126
  ―――― manor, iv. 60
  ―――― parish in East hundred, iii. 61
  ―――― vicarage, i. 378
  Trembath in Madern, iii. 33, 56
  Trembetha, account of, iii. 7
  Trembleth, account of, i. 405 _bis_
  ―――― chapel, i. 405
  ―――― heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Trembleth, arms, iii. 405. Burying place ibid.
  Tremblethick, i. 405
  Trembraze in Leskeard, iii. 209
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 209
  Tremeal, iii. 337 _bis_. House rebuilt 338
  Tremearne, Rev. John, iii. 287
  Tremeen, iv. 97
  Tremenheere, Captain H. P. character of, iii. 88. John, endowed a
    chapel at Penzance 93. Mr. 82. Family 94. Have adorned the new
    church at Penzance 93
  Tremere, account of, ii. 384
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 384. Alice, John, and arms 385
  Tremertoun, by Leland, iv. 281
  Tremiloret, iii. 59
  Tremle, William, iii. 115
  Tremoderet en Hell, iii. 393
  Tremogh family, iii. 62
  ―――― etymology, iii. 62. Road near 63
  Tremolesworth, i. 370
  Tremolla in Northill Linkinborne and Liskeard, iii. 359
  Tremoore village, ii. 385
  Tremough, account of, iii. 60, 62
  Tremper bridge, i. 235
  Tremporth river, i. 249. Account of its haven and bridge ibid.
  Tremyton castle, iv. 229
  Trenake, iv. 23
  Trenalt, i. 159
  Trenance, i. 41 _bis_, or Trenants, iv. 160. Account of 161 _bis_
  ―――― Lyttleton, ii. 383.――Littleton, iv. 161.――Family, ii.
    383――iv. 161
  ―――― of Black Haye, John and three daughters, and arms, iv. 161
  Trenant, i. 320. Account of 321. Sold 320
  Trenaran, account of, i. 44
  Trenarran, i. 49
  Trenawick, i. 54
  Trenchard of Collacomb, Isabel, iii. 60
  Trenchicot, ii. 427
  Trencreek, i. 207. Account of 256
  ―――― Miss, iii. 75
  ―――― of Trencreek, Robert, i. 293. Arms 256
  Trenear, possessors, iii. 88
  Trenegles, i. 197
  Treneglos church, iv. 62
  ―――― parish, iv. 59, 64 _bis_, 124, 125 _bis_, 127
  TRENEGLOS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Warbstow consolidated with
    it, iv. 61. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, ib.
    Impropriation, value of benefice, incumbent 62. By Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology right, manor of Downeckney by Lysons, impropriation,
    patronage, statistics ibid. Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 63
  Trenere, cellar at, ii. 138
  Trenethick, ii. 139
  Trenewan village, ii. 399
  Trenewith, by Leland, iv. 264
  Trengone, took the name of Nance, ii. 337
  Trengove, account of, iv. 128
  ―――― family, iii. 382――iv. 128, 129. Or nanc, John 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Trengove in Warlegan, family, ii. 238
  Trengreen, i. 54
  Trengwainton, iii. 289. Possessors 85
  Trenhayle, account of, i. 347
  ―――― George and Loveday, i. 357
  ―――― of Trenhayle, i. 347
  Trenheale, Rev. Reginald of Newlin, iii. 267
  Trenhorne village, iii. 38
  Trenithick or Trenithicke, account of, ii. 136, 137
  Trenorren, etymology by Tonkin, i. 47
  Trenouth, i. 221
  ―――― family, iii. 208
  ―――― of Fentongollan, Johanna and Ralph, iii. 397
  Trenoweth, i. 213
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Sir Henry, iii. 102
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Major, Miss, iii. 147. Family buried in St.
    Colomb church ibid.
  ―――― of Trenoweth, Catherine, iii. 211. John, John 211, 214.
    Margaret 211 _bis_. Maud 211. Philippa 211, 214. Family 213, 214
  ―――― lands, iii. 147
  Trenowith, i. 117.――Arms, the family changed their name to Bodrigan,
    ii. 107.――Family, iv. 71
  ―――― manor, i. 406. _See Trewithgy_
  Trenowth, arms, iv. 72
  Trenwith, account of, ii. 259, 261
  ―――― of Trenwith, i. 125――ii. 259, 260. Thomas and arms 259
  ―――― manor, iv. 52, 164
  Treonike, i. 18
  Trequanors, ii. 203, 211
  Treranell, account of, i. 405
  Treravall, i. 406
  Trereardrene, i. 12
  Trereen, Dinas, iii. 30, 34.――Described, iv. 165 _bis_.――Walk to
    church from, iii. 32
  Trereife, iii. 85
  Trerice manor, i. 20, 395――iii. 270. Sir John Arundell removed to
    274.――Cause of his removal, ii. 184
  Treridern, i. 321
  Treroach, Trecarrek or Tregarreck, iii. 391. Possessors 393
  Treruff manor, iii. 382
  Trerule fool, ii. 79
  Tresaddarne, i. 219
  Tresahar, i. 161.――Mr. ii. 11
  Tresassen, iv. 29
  Tresaster, i. 221
  Tresavren barton, iv. 4
  Tresawsen or Tresawsan, iii. 322. Account of 182
  Trescaw in Breage, ii. 217
  Trescobays, i. 136.――In Budock, iii. 248
  Trescow island, iv. 171, 172, 174. Extent of 175
  Tresilian, i. 10, 148――iii. 274
  ―――― or Tresillian bridge, i. 387――ii. 2, 17――iii. 207――iv. 76
  ―――― Sir Robert, Chief Justice, ii. 294.――Killed, iv. 16
  ―――― of Bodilly, Thomas, ii. 137
  ―――― of Roughtra, family, ii. 137
  ―――― of Tresilian, Robert, Lord Chief Justice, iii. 269
  ―――― or Tresulian, iii. 270. Manor 269
  ―――― river, iii. 180, 423
  Tresimple, account of, i. 205
  Tresinny, i. 3
  Tresithany chapel, i. 218
  Tresithney, Thomas, iii. 181. Heir of 140
  Treskeaw, i. 119
  Treskewis, Dame, iii. 60
  Tresmarrow, possessors of, iii. 337
  Tresmere parish, iv. 59, 60, 61 _bis_
  TRESMERE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, value
    of benefice, endowment, impropriation, land tax, iv. 63. By
    Tonkin, situation, ib. Boundaries, etymology, value of benefice,
    impropriation, curate’s stipend withheld 64. By Editor, belonged
    to Launceston priory, churches served by monks, allusion to the
    “Last Minstrel” ibid. Councils ordained that each parish should
    have a resident priest, provision for them, distinction between
    vicar and perpetual curate, remark on Tonkin’s statement,
    impropriator, patron, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 65
  Tresmore manor, iv. 129
  Tresmorrow, ii. 418
  Tresona, i. 160
  Tresongar, account of, i. 383
  Tresore, iii. 77
  Tresparret Downs, ii. 88, 275
  Trespearn village, ii. 377
  Tress, ii. 151
  Tressmare, ii. 430
  Tresuggan, account of, i. 225
  Tresuran, i. 213
  Treswithan, i. 162, 163
  Trethac, i. 174
  Trethake, Matthew de, iii. 134
  Trethay, iii. 402
  Tretheage barton, iv. 2, 3. Described 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2. Description and history of 3
  Trethergye, i. 49
  Tretheris, ruins of an ancient chapel at, i. 18
  Tretheves manor, account of, ii. 358
  Trethevye, Cromlech at, i. 193. Description of 194
  Trethewoll, account of, i. 408
  Trethewy village, iii. 337
  Trethil, iii. 440
  Trethinick, Ralph de, i. 246
  Trethurfe manor, account of, ii. 353, 354
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, and John, ii. 353. Reginald 354. Arms 353
  Trethym, i. 2, 25
  Trethyn castle, iv. 228
  Trethyrfe, Jane and Thomas, ii. 100
  ―――― of Trethyrfe, John, i. 65
  Treu-es-coit manor, iii. 64
  Treuren, by Leland, iv. 289
  Treuris, ii. 427 _bis_
  Trevadlack village, iii. 38
  Trevailer, account of, ii. 124
  Trevalaboth, ii. 203, 211
  Trevales, iv. 4
  Trevalga, i. 322――ii. 28, 235
  ―――― or Trevalgar parish, iii. 22, 232
  TREVALGA parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    antiquity, value of benefice, a rectory, patrons, iv. 66. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, and its value ibid. Manor of
    Trevalga 67. By Editor, description of the parish church, near the
    cliff, named from the manor, patrons, rector, statistics ibid.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 68
  Trevallock, i. 140
  Trevance, account of, ii. 255
  Trevanion, possessors of, iii. 199. House described 201, 202
  ―――― i. 43, 113. Joan and Sir William 65.――John, M.P. for Cornwall,
    and rhyme on his election, ii. 351. Richard 110 _ter._ Mr. 118. Sir
    H. Bodrigan’s defence against him, shares Bodrigan’s property 115.
    Newnham manor given to him 318. Mr. 414. Sir Nicholas 56. Of St.
    German’s 162. Mr. 230. Nicholas, Richard, and Richard, iv. 116
  ―――― of Carhayes, i. 298.――John, ii. 304.――Charles, iv. 156. Mr.
    45.――Or Trevenion, John, iii. 141, 226. William ibid. Family 355
  ―――― of Crego, Charles, i. 297. Attempts to make the Val navigable 298
  ―――― of Crogith, i. 299
  ―――― of Tregarthyn, i. 397.――Charles, ii. 414
  ―――― of Trelegon, Anne and Hugh, i. 302.――Or Treligan, Hugh, iii. 191
  ―――― of Trevanion and Carhayes, Amey, Charles, iii. 199. Charles 200
    _bis_, 202. Sir Charles 199, 200, 201. Hugh, Hugh, Hugh 199. Sir
    Hugh, his sword 206. John 141. John 199. John 200. John and John
    improved Trevanion 201. John, a letter from 204. Colonel John 200,
    201. Colonel John, his death 204. J. T. P. B., 205 _bis_. Richard
    201. William 199, 201, 205 _bis_. Sir William, Sir William 199. Mr.
    and Rev. Mr. 200. Family 199, 203. Sided with Henry 7th 204. Arms
    200. Monuments 206
  ―――― of Trevorter, ii. 304. Alice ibid. John 304 _bis_. John and
    Mary ibid.
  ―――― of Trevoster, Alice and John, iii. 213
  Trevannance barton, i. 8. Etymology 8 and 9. Possessors 9. House
    taken down 10
  ―――― harbour, i. 11
  Trevannion family, ii. 395
  ―――― of Caryhaes, i. 43.――Of Caryhays, ii. 54, 55, 110. Charles 111
    _ter._
  ―――― of Trelegar, ii. 54, 57
  ―――― of Treligan, ii. 54. Hugh 51, 54, 55 _ter._ His lawsuit 51
  Trevanthions family, ii. 128
  Trevarnoe, occupiers of, iii. 446
  Trevartea, Onesa, iii. 60
  Trevarthen, account of, ii. 218
  Trevarthian, Miss and Mr. iii. 423
  Trevascus, account of, i. 114
  Trevasens, account of, i. 113
  Trevassack, iii. 342
  Treveale family, iii. 442
  Treveally, John, i. 119
  Trevear, account of, iii. 429
  Treveares, iv. 45
  Trevedarne in Buryan, iii. 134
  Treveeg, account of, ii. 86
  Trevega, iv. 157
  Treveleck, account of, i. 254
  Trevelga parish, iv. 42
  Trevelisick Wartha, i. 417
  ―――― Wollas, i. 417
  Trevella, William de, iii. 442 _bis_
  Trevellance or Trefelens, ii. 326, 327. Account of 326
  Trevellans, alias Nicholas, alias Williams, John and Nicholas, iii. 318
  Trevelles, i. 8――iii. 326. In St. Agnes 327
  Trevellick, account of, i. 257
  Trevellva, account of, iii. 237
  Trevelver, iii. 240
  Trevelyan, iv. 114
  ―――― family, iii. 117, 126, 215, 309 _bis_. Wonderful tale of their
    ancestor 309, 310. Heiress 215.――Lord Chief Justice, iv. 114, and
    family 114 _ter._
  ―――― of Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, Sir John, iii. 307, 311. Family
    307, 238
  Trevemper bridge, iii. 275
  Trevena barton, iv. 20
  Treveneage 170, 217 _bis_. Account of 170. Abounds in mines 219
  Trevener, Rev. John, i. 260
  Treveniel, ii. 229
  Trevenin tenement, iii. 223
  Trevenion barton, ii. 114
  Trevenna, i. 340
  Trevennen, account of, ii. 113
  Trevenner, Mr. ii. 414
  Trevenny parish, iv. 120
  Trevenor family, ii. 357
  Trevenson, ii. 241 _bis_
  Treveor, account of by Tonkin, ii. 113. By the Editor 114
  Treveor of Treveor, Sir Henry, ii. 113
  Treverbyn manor, i. 42. Etymology ibid.
  ―――― of Treverbyn, i. 41, 42. Hugh and Katherine 43. Walter 43, 44.
    Sir Walter 44
  ―――― burying place, i. 42
  Treveres, account of, ii. 279
  Trevernon, iii. 239
  Trevery, ii. 126――iii. 127
  Treveryan, iv. 109
  Trevethen of Porthcothen, iii. 177
  Trevethey stone, i. 194. Etymology 195
  Trevethow, iii. 9. Account of 11
  Trevia, ii. 405
  Treviderow manor, iii. 250
  Trevidror, i. 148
  Trevilan farm, chapel at, iii. 335
  Treviles or Trefilies, iv. 117
  Trevilian bridge, iii. 189
  ―――― Mr. of Devon, ii. 251. Chief Justice 153――iv. 36.――Family, iii. 216
  ―――― manor, iv. 124
  ―――― river, i. 202
  Trevilion, Mr. ii. 261, 269
  Trevill of Plymouth, i. 348
  Treville family, ii. 252, 397. Richard 252. William de 156
  Trevillian, i. 36――iii. 125. Sir John 306. Mr. 116, 124, 128. Mrs. 421
  ―――― of Basill, i. 198, 199, 200. Sir John, anecdote of 200. Peter
    198, 199. Arms 198
  ―――― of Nettlecomb, John, i. 198 _bis_, 200
  ―――― of Somersetshire family, iv. 39
  Trevillis village, iii. 348
  Trevilload, i. 348
  Trevillon, account of, i. 400
  Trevingy, Reginald, iii. 387
  Trevisa, Charles, iii. 163. John translated the Bible and other
    books 163
  ―――― John, his King Arthur, i. 337
  ―――― of Crockaddon, James, i. 313. John, translator of the Bible,
    and arms 314
  ――――’s and Tindall’s translation of the Bible, i. 121
  Trevisick, i. 11, 418
  Trevithick, account of, i. 223, 234, 416
  ―――― Richard improver of steam engine, i. 164
  Trevocar Winoe, iv. 155
  Trevor, Captain Tudor, R.N. ii. 32――iii. 186. Judge 144
  Trevorder, account of, i. 117
  ―――― Bickin, i. 117
  Trevorick, ii. 255
  Trevorike, account of, ii. 255
  Trevorter, account of, ii. 304
  Trevorva, etymology, &c., iii. 355
  ―――― of Trevorva, family and heir, iii. 356
  Trevosa barton, account of, iii. 175
  ―――― head in St. Merryn, iii. 241, 282. Interesting 180. Latitude
    and longitude 281
  ―――― manor, iii. 75, 175. Possessors of 178
  Trevygham, iii. 22
  Trevyrick, iii. 269
  Trewalda, ii. 145
  Trewan, i. 227
  Trewane, account of, ii. 338
  Trewaras head, i. 129
  Trewardevi, i. 236. Account of 237
  Trewardreath, ii. 391
  Trewardreth, by Leland, iv. 289
  Trewardreva, in Constantine, iii. 427
  Trewardruth priory, i. 307
  Trewedeneck, by Leland, iv. 272
  Treweeke barton, iv. 4, 136
  ―――― Rev. George, ii. 250.――Of Illogan and St. Minver, iii. 239,
    241. Rev. Mr. 396. Of Roach 391, 399
  Treween, i. 25
  Treweere, account of, i. 391
  Trewen manor, account of, ii. 397
  TREWEN parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, impropriation, land tax, fair, Polyvant, iv. 68. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, name by Whitaker 69. By Editor,
    belonged to St. German’s priory, an appendix to South Petherwin,
    impropriation, and patronage, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 70
  Trewenethick in St. Agnes, Bartholomew, and Joan de, iii. 315
  Trewenn, i. 21. Account of 320
  ―――― parish, i. 377――iii. 335, 457
  Trewenter, ii. 427
  Trewer manor, account of, ii. 397
  Trewergy, i. 318. Account of 321
  Trewerne, Rev. Mr. of Withiel, iv. 161
  Trewhele, account of, i. 391
  Trewheler, i. 387
  Trewhella, Christopher and John, iv. 55
  Trewhelow, James, iv. 55
  Trewhythenick, account of, i. 207
  ―――― copper mill, i. 364 _bis_
  ―――― arms, i. 207
  Trewin, William, ii. 160
  Trewinard, i. 125, 344, 360. Account of 344, 349, 356. Etymology
    350――iii. 112.――House improved by Mr. C. Hawkins, i. 358.――In St.
    Earth, iii. 367
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 267
  ―――― chapel, i. 345
  ―――― i. 118, 136 _bis_, 301. Joseph 137. Arms 136.――Rev. Mr. ii. 80,
    127.――Rev. James of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 124, 126, 128.
    Rev. Mr. of Mawnan 75
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 344, 350, 351. Deiphobus, killed a man,
    obtained the royal pardon by conveying all his estates to Sir
    Reginald Mohun 345. Was tried and convicted 346. Lived on small
    stipend from Sir Reginald ibid. Tradition of the murder 356. A
    descendant of Trewinard living lately in the Strand ibid. Rev.
    James, and Sir James 350. John M.P. arrested for debt 344, 356.
    Martin 345, 350. William 350. Arms 346
  Trewince, ii. 5, 54. Account of 57, or Trefynns 133
  Trewiney, iii. 194
  Trewinn parish, iv. 50, 51
  Trewinneck, iv. 96
  Trewinnow, i. 257
  Trewinnock, i. 404
  Trewint, i. 25.――In Lesnewith, iii. 132. Account of 170
  Trewish, i. 196
  Trewithan, iii. 356――iv. 139. Account of 367
  Trewithenike, account of, i. 243 _bis_. House improved 245
  Trewithgy, Trenoweth, or Treworgy, in Probus, iii. 355, 358, 365
  Trewithian, ii. 55 _bis_. Account of 54. Its possessors 58
  Trewolla family, built a pier at Mevagissey, iii. 192.――John, ii.
    111 _ter._ Family and arms 110
  ―――― or Trewoolla of Trewoolla, or Trewolla in St. Goran, iii. 191,
    192 _bis_
  Trewollea, ii. 230
  Trewoofe manor, i. 142
  ―――― of Trewoofe, i. 142, and arms 142
  Trewoola account of, ii. 110
  Trewoolla, arms of, i. 206
  Trewoon in Budock, iii. 61
  Trewoone manor, account of, iii. 196, 197
  Treworder, i. 367
  Treworell, ii. 430
  Treworgan, i. 207. Account of 396, 403
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 396
  Treworgy, ii. 87. _See Trewithgy_
  ―――― parish, ii. 391
  Treworgye, i. 316. Described 177
  Trework, George of Penzance, ii. 218
  Treworock, i. 418. Described 177
  Treworrell village, iii. 22
  Trewortha Vean, occupants of, iii. 188
  Treworthen, John, i. 241
  ―――― of Treworthen, Sir John, Sir Otho, and Walter, family and arms,
    iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Treworthgy, ii. 429
  Treworthy, account of, iii. 383
  Treworveneth, iii. 288
  Trewother, iii. 355
  Trewothike, account of, i. 39
  Trewred manor, iv. 70
  Trewren, i. 260. Arms 237.――Rev. Richard of Withiel, iv. 162, 163
    _bis_. His wife and two daughters 163
  ―――― of Drift, Mr. and family, iii. 427
  ―――― of Tredreva in Constantine, iv. 163
  ―――― of Trewardreva, i. 237, 241――iv. 3.――Catherine, i. 376. John
    237. Rev. Richard 376
  Trewret barton, iv. 70
  Trigantan, i. 258
  Trigg, Rev. Mr. of Warliggon, iv. 128
  ―――― hundred, i. 129, 153――ii. 151, 332, 394――iii. 64, 237――iv. 42,
    44, 48, 49, 93, 95
  ―――― Major hundred, or Trigmajorshire, i. 60, 377――ii. 86, 232, 273,
    274, 402――iv. 12 _bis_, 15, 50, 101, 131.――Divided into Strathan and
    Lesnewith, iii. 22
  Trigminorshire, i. 367, 382――ii. 49, 274 _bis_, 402 _ter._――iv. 66,
    93.――Why so called, i. 60
  Trigonometrical survey, i. 149――ii. 359――iii. 98, 281, 432――iv. 31
  Trinity in Lanlivery, ii. 393
  ―――― Chantry in St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  ―――― chapel at Restormel, i. 338
  ―――― college, Cambridge, iii. 95, 188
  ―――― college, Dublin, library of, iv. 147
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 86, 258
  ―――― house, iii. 378.――Corporation, character of, ii. 359
  Trink, iii. 7
  Trion, St. i. 341
  Tripcony, i. 136.――John, ii. 119 _bis_, 120. Mr. 110, 414. Arms 124
  Trist, Miss, i. 401.――Rev. Jeremiah, iv. 122. Rev. S. P. J., 122,
    123 _ter._
  Triste, i. 164
  Tristram, Sir, ii. 308
  Trivalis castle, King Richard confined at, ii. 178
  Troad, Thomas, iii. 256, 350
  Trojan war, i. 342
  Trout, disquisition on the relative merits of, iii. 442
  Trove, i. 142
  Trowall or Truth well, ii. 219
  Trowbridge, of Trowbridge in Devon, Catherine and John, ii. 339
  Trowell farm, ii. 83――iii. 47
  Trowis, German, i. 192
  Trowse, i. 348
  Troy, iii. 418, 420.――Chronicles, and wars of, abridged, iv. 141
  Troyes, Lupus Bishop of, ii. 64
  Truan, account of, i. 221
  Trubody, ii. 36.――Charles, i. 44
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177, 178
  Trungle, iii. 288
  Trewrew castle, iv. 228
  Truro, Baron, ii. 380
  ―――― borough, corporation of, ii. 81. M.P. for, Colonel John Lemon
    ibid.――John Lemon, iii. 229――iv. 33.――Kelland Courtenay, ii.
    385.――Henry Vincent, iii. 191
  ―――― bridge, iii. 207
  ―――― church, Mr. Lemon buried at, ii. 85
  ―――― manor, ii. 31
  ―――― and Tregrewe manor, in Themwyn and Truro, iii. 359
  ―――― parish, ii. 298, 301, 302, 315
  TRURO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, sea flows to the
    walls, two manors at the conquest, iv. 70. Value of benefice,
    incorporation, patron, incumbent, land tax, arms of King John in
    the church windows, also the Prince of Wales’s plume 71. Manor and
    royalty attached to the rectory, erection of the church, no tower
    or steeple, benefice chiefly consists of voluntary subscriptions
    72. Question of its expediency, monument to John Robartes, and to
    three brothers, Dominican chapel, nunnery of Clares called Anhell,
    town a coinage town, charter of Elizabeth 73. Constitution and
    arms of the borough, form of writ, birthplace of Lord Robarts,
    fairs and cheap markets, Custom House, chief inhabitants, wealth,
    and fine buildings, Captain Upcott 74. By Tonkin and Whitaker,
    situation and boundaries, Tonkin’s etymology from Camden, rejected
    by Whitaker, a rectory, value, patron 75. Incumbent, site of the
    town, from Leland, two brooks, the three streets and three
    churches, coinage, the town a borough, the castle, small creek,
    Tonkin’s commentary on this description, and Whitaker’s on his 76.
    View from the castle, no remains of it, incorporation, seal,
    principal burgesses, mayor is also mayor of Falmouth 77. By
    Whitaker, town named from the castle, which belonged to the Earls
    of Cornwall, nothing but the mount or keep remaining, gave origin
    to the town 78. Seated on the westerly current, etymology,
    supposed rise and progress of the town 79. New way to Kenwin
    church, new bridge, anticipated act of parliament for
    improvements, church first dedicated to St. Pancras, now to St.
    Mary 80. Architecture of the church, castle later than the
    conquest, built by one of the Norman Earls, town in possession of
    Richard de Lacy a century after the conquest 81. Privileged as a
    borough, charter lost, but confirmed by Reginald Fitzroy Earl of
    Cornwall 82. The seal, the charter 83. Confirmed by Henry II. the
    mayor still mayor also of Falmouth, town has superiority over
    Falmouth harbour 84. By Editor, Truro allowed to be the first town
    in Cornwall, leads in all county concerns, the school and its
    masters, Dr. Jane, Dean of Gloucester 85. Epigram upon, Truro has
    produced Mr. Polwhele and Sir Hussey Vivian, and in the 16th
    century the learned Farnaby 86. His death, and works, Boyle’s
    character of him 87. Several families have made large fortunes
    there, the Robarteses Earls of Radnor, the Vincents 88. Mr.
    Gregor, Mr. Lemon, Mr. Coster, Mr. Daniel, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Hussey
    89. Mr. Thomas, Samuel Foote, tragedy in his mother’s family of
    which he published a narrative, the two Landers, a monument to one
    90. Mr. Charles Warrick invented and used the paddle wheel for
    boats, modern changes, specimen 91. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 92
  Truro river, i. 202――ii. 33
  ―――― new road, iii. A 89.――Road from Redruth, ii. 304
  ―――― school, ii. 355
  ―――― town, i. 58 _bis_, 77, 84, 177――ii. 2, 17, 34, 84, 304, 318,
    354, 379, 381, 388――iii. 16, 18, 38, 189, 196, 324 _bis_, 367――iv.
    30, 167. A coinage town, ii. 301. Ferry to 212. Passage from
    Falmouth to 226. Road to Falmouth from 304.――Road to Helston from,
    iv. 4.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. The old part is in Kenwyn
    parish 317. Assizes removed to 431. People of 85. Road through to
    Falmouth 104.――A family of, iii. 213
  Truru, by Leland, iv. 272
  Truthan, account of, i. 396, 403
  Truthon, i. 398 _bis_
  Try, ii. 124
  Trywardreth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tubb, Agnes and Charles, ii. 395. Family ibid.――iii. 129 _bis_
  Tubby, i. 276 _bis_, 277 _quat._
  Tuckfield, John, ii. 296
  Tudor, Mary, iii. 369. House of 370.――Race of, ii. 381
  ―――― times, ii. 114――iii. 8
  Tudy, St. i. 129, 131
  ―――― St. manor, iv. 97
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 44
  TUDY, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, antiquity,
    value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Udith,
    reproved for her fine dress, her answer, iv. 93. Hengar, Penvose,
    Dameliock castle 94. The castle defaced, Billing family 95. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbents
    ibid. Tinten manor, Tynten family 96. By Editor, splendid monuments
    in the church, one to Mr. A. Nicoll, St. Editha, died early at
    Wilton, was very self-denying, Canute’s opinion of her ibid. The
    opening of her tomb convinced him, patrons of the benefice, present
    incumbent, soil, face of the land, the manor, and those of Tinten
    and Kellygreen, Tremeer, Sir William Lower’s works 97. Those of Dr.
    Lower his brother, description of Hengar and the scenery around,
    statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 98
  Tue, St. i. 251, 294
  Tunbridge, ii. 295
  ―――― castle, ii. 424
  Tunnel rock, iii. 36
  Turbervill, James, Bishop of Exeter, i. 108, 109
  Turks, i. 130, 411 _bis_――iv. 148.――War with, ii. 371. Subdued
    Constantinople 365. Conspired with Demetrius Paleolagus 366
  Turner, Francis, Bishop of Ely, iii. 299
  Turner’s wear, ii. 1, 17 _bis_
  Turvey, ii. 292
  Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, ii. 89
  Twickenham, Pope’s grotto at, iii. 53
  Twysden, Judge, ii. 5
  Tybesta, i. 253, 256, 258, 297. Described 253
  ―――― chapel, i. 253
  ―――― manor, iii. 195
  Tyburn, ii. 191
  Tye family, iii. 90
  Tyer family, iii. 84
  Tyes, Sir Henry le, Lord T. (or de Tiers), iii. 314
  Tyhiddy, ii. 235 _bis_, 239 _ter._ Account of by Hals 235. By Tonkin
    238, 239. By the Editor 240
  Tyhiddy downs, ii. 235
  Tyncombe, Mr. ii. 43.――Rev. Mr. iv. 110
  Tyndall’s Bible, iii. 163 _bis_
  Tyne river, i. 2.90
  Tyngmouth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tynnyherne, ii. 430
  Tyntagell castle, iv. 228
  Tynten, John de, _ter._ and family, iv. 96
  Typpet of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard, and arms, iv. 139
  Tywardreath, or Tywardreth monastery, iii. 7――ii. 9
  Tywardreth, or Tywardreath parish, i. 52, 167――ii. 36, 44, 88, 89
    _bis_, 92, 390――iii. 55, 56
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 275
  TYWARDRETH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, and land tax, the
    priory alien, iv. 99. History of the saints Sergius and Bacchus,
    founders of the abbey, dedicated to St. Andrew, his history 100.
    Alien priories suppressed, this an exception, its revenues at the
    general dissolution, account of Menabilly 101. Castle Dore 102. By
    Tonkin, situation, late incumbent, value of benefice, manor,
    belonged time of Henry IV. to the Champernowns, given by the
    conqueror to Robert, Earl of Morton, Leland’s description of the
    town, &c., 102. By the Editor, antiquity of the church and its
    tower, interior decorations, alteration of churches, the different
    purposes to which they are now destined, the monastery has
    disappeared 103. Description from the foundations, which could be
    discovered by digging 104. Charter, the convent seal, St. Andrew’s
    relics brought to Abernethy in Scotland, now St. Andrew’s, priory
    suppressed with other alien houses, but re-established,
    correspondence between Thomas Cromwell and the last prior 105.
    Preserved at Wardour, its nature 106. History of the manor,
    Menabilly, Rashleigh family 107. Mr. Rashleigh’s collection of
    minerals, and published account of them, with a geological plate,
    representing a stream-work, destroyed soon after, his grotto and
    death 108. Polkerris, improvements in, Kilmarth, Treveryan,
    statistics, vicar, patron 109. Geology by Dr. Boase, mines of
    Lanescot, and Fowey consols 110
  ―――― priory, ii. 45, 113――iii. 56, 232 _quat._――iv. 62, 64, 127.――The
    manor taken from, ii. 46; or abbey, its founder, dedicated to St.
    Andrew, not suppressed, iv. 101. Communication respecting it in
    the Gentleman’s Magazine, suppressed, but re-established 105.
    Extracts from its calendar 106.――Prior of, i. 41, 42, 52, 414――ii.
    36, 38, 89――iii. 195――iv. 63 _bis_, 64; or abbot 99 _bis_. List of
    the priors 106.――Curious letter to one, ii. 47
  Tywarnhaile manor, i. 12――iii. 316, 327. Account of 313. House 314
  ―――― Tier’s manor, iii. 313 _bis_, 314, 316, 327. Account of 314
  Tywarnhayle, ii. 130
  Tywednick parish, ii. 257 _bis_, 258 _bis_
  Tywidneck, iv. 164
  Tywoodreth river, source of, iv. 237

  Udith, or Udye, St. her history, disputation with Bishop Ethelwold
    about female attire, iv. 93. Her brother Edward the martyr, her
    death, built St. Denis’s church at Wilton, called the younger, her
    aunt was another St. Udith 94
  Udnow Parva, iii. 306
  Udy, i. 61
  ―――― St. iv. 42
  Udye, St. parish, i. 60――iii. 64, 222
  Uffa, Lieutenant of Devonshire, iii. 415
  Ugbere, or Ogbere tenement, iv. 41
  Ulette, St. i. 341
  Ulex nanus, iv. 54
  Ulster, king of arms, iv. 144
  Umphravill, Mr. ii. 146.――Alicia, and John, her husband, iii. 140.
    Family, ib.
  Underhill, Thomas, ii. 192
  Union, Scotch, i. 126
  United Kingdom, various measures in, iii. 433
  ―――― States, iii. 89
  Universal history, ii. 368
  Unwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Uny, St. iii. 5 _bis_, 7 _ter._, 384 _bis_. Buried at Lelant 7.――Or
    Unan, name explained, iv. 313
  Uny, Lelant parish, iii. 5
  Upcott, George and Jonathan, i. 45.――Joseph of Morval, iv. 187.
    William of Truro, ib. Captain William, memoir of 74
  Upton barton overwhelmed in sand, ii. 149
  ―――― Nicholas, iii. 437――iv. 71.――His MS. of heraldry, i. 170,
    338――ii. 107――iv. 71.――Family, iii. 38 _bis_, 148――iv. 156
  ―――― of Upton and Colombton, iv. 156
  ―――― of St. Winow, heir of, iv. 156
  ―――― de re Militari, iv. 141
  Urban, Mr. iii. 143
  Urchuarth, Miss, i. 244
  Urlick, Mr. and Mr. iii. 88
  Urns, found at Dance-Meyns, i. 141. At Trembleth 405
  Urny, St. iii. 461
  Uro, R. iv. 79
  Ursan of Richardock, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 332
  Ursula, St. story and picture of, i. 195
  Ursula’s, St. tomb, i. 195
  Ushant, ii. 246
  Usher’s, Archbishop, iii. 331, 332.――Brit. Eccles. Antiq. &c. i. 83,
    321.――“De Christ. Eccles.” &c. iii. 257.――His account of St. Kebius,
    ii. 338
  Ustick, i. 144, 371, 376 _bis_. Oliver 145.――Family, iii.
    216.――Stephen, iv. 4
  ―――― of Bideford, Michael, i. 375
  ―――― of Botallock, ii. 285 _bis_
  ―――― of Lea, Oliver, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendavy, Richard, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendevey, Mrs. iv. 163
  ―――― of Penzance, Mr. ii. 34
  Usticke, Rev. Mr. iii. 77. Miss 85
  Uter Pendragon, King, i. 326, 339, 342――iv. 94.――His history, i.
    326. Death 332. Arms 326
  Uthno manor, iii. 307 _bis_
  Uxellodunum, iii. 25 _bis_.――Mentioned by Cæsar, ii. 237
  Uzella, iii. 24 _bis_, 25, 26
  ―――― river, iii. 24

  Vabe, La, or St. parish, _see Mabe_
  Vacye tenement, iv. 41
  Val river, i. 74, 294, 297. Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to make it
    navigable 298
  Valancey bridge, ii. 50
  Vale river, i. 242, 253, 256, 258――ii. 1 _ter._, 17, 24, 298――iii.
    402 _bis_
  ―――― Royal abbey, Cheshire, iii. 232
  Valemouth, ii. 1
  Valerian, Emperor, i. 88
  Valerianus, Emperor, iii. 434
  Valgenow, ii. 1
  Valle, abbey de, i. 300 _bis_
  Valletort, Valitort, or Valletorta, i. 36. Joan, ib. Reginald de 42.
    Roger de Lord of Trematon castle 296.――Jane de, ii. 8. Joan de 109.
    Reginald de 119.――Joan de, iii. 448.――Roger de, iv. 41, 77, 82
  Valmune, ii. 1
  Valor Beneficiorum, ii. 30, 34, 86, 89, 232, 273――iv. 185
  ―――― Ecclesiasticus, ii. 412――iii. 253, 278, 453 _ter._――iv. 4, 5, 69
  Valuba, supposed to be Falmouth, ii. 20
  Valubia, i. 28
  Van Tromp defeated by Blake, and his subsequent victory, ii.
    25.――His death 27
  Vandals, i. 334
  Vandower, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Vane, Sir Henry, i. 314
  Vann family, iv. 121
  Vanstort, ii. 153
  Varfull, account of, iii. 44
  Vasnoom, Rev. Mr. ii. 384
  Vatican at Penzance, iii. 89
  Vaughan, Rev. Thomas, i. 300.――John, iii. 185. Mr. 166
  ―――― of Ottery, John, i. 39. Arms 39
  ―――― of Trewothick and Ottery, i. 371
  Vaultershome, iii. 107
  Vaux of Northamptonshire, family, iii. 404, 405
  Vaye, St. manor, iii. 222
  Vaynfleet, Oller, iv. 55
  Veal, Mr. ii. 150.――Family, iv. 54
  Veale family, and George, ii. 124. Rev. Mr. 124 _bis_. Rev. Mr. the
    first protestant vicar of Gulval 124.――George, iii. 88. Mr. 82.
    Family 94, 286.――Sampson, iv. 55. Rev. W. of Zennar 166
  ―――― of Trevarla, George and Mr. iii. 91
  Vean, John, Robert, iii. 387
  Veep, or Veepe, St. parish, i. 319――ii. 394, 409――iv. 155, 159
  VEEP, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, impropriation,
    founder of church, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, impropriation, iv. 110. Land tax, Priory of Carock, St.
    Pile, Walter of Exeter lived there, wrote the Life of Guy Earl of
    Warwick, different opinions of the historian, new house, burying
    place converted into a garden, Botowne 111. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, ib. A vicar, value, patron, impropriation, manor of
    Manely 112. By Editor, situation of the church, monuments, St.
    Syriac priory, for two monks only, and St. Currie church ibid.
    Revenue of the priory, St. Cyric’s Creek, the saint buried on the
    site now called St. Cadix, the history of Earl Guy 113. Trevelyan,
    the family seated in Somersetshire, and have lost half this estate,
    several manors mentioned by Lysons, besides Manely Coleshill,
    patronage of the benefice, present incumbent 114. Part of King
    Charles’s army here at the surrender of Fowey, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 115
  Velhuish, Mr. ii. 97
  Vellawrance, iii. 343
  Vellownoweth, iii. 319
  Venables, iii. 85
  Venetians attacked Patras, ii. 369. Sale of Thessalonica to 366. Sir
    Henry Killigrew, ambassador to 372
  Venice, iii. 187
  Vennefire, ii. 209
  Venning, Richard, iv. 18
  Venton, ii. 1――iv. 41
  Venus, planet, transit of, observed, iii. 19.――By Dr. Maskelyne, ii.
    222.――Observation interrupted by a storm, iv. 11
  Verbena chamoidryoides, iv. 183
  ―――― pulchella, iv. 183
  Vere, John de, i. 262. John, Earl of Oxford 402. John 12th Earl,
    John 14th Earl, Richard 11th Earl, and Sir Robert 262.――Aubrey,
    son of the 12th Earl of Oxford, attainted, and beheaded, ii. 182.
    George, brother of the 13th Earl 185. Earls of Oxford, Richard
    11th, John 12th 181 _bis_. Opposed the precedence of the spiritual
    lords 181. Attainted and beheaded 182. John 13th, adhered to Henry
    6th at the battle of Barnet, fled to Mount’s bay ibid. Entered it
    by stratagem 183. Twice repulsed Edward’s forces 184. Capitulated,
    confined at Hamms, returned with Henry 7th, killed at Bosworth
    185. John 14th, and his arms, ib. Richard, and Aubrey, last Earl
    195.――Richard de 11th Earl, iii. 65, 274. Family of the Earls of
    Oxford 258
  ―――― river in Herts, iv. 79
  Vergilia capensis, iv. 183
  Verian, Veryan, or St. Verian parish, ii. 50――iii. 198, 282, 402,
    403, 404, 451――iv. 116
  Verman, i. 387――ii. 25. Family 357. Monuments to in Lamaran church
    357.――Miss, iv. 116
  Vernoil, ii. 179
  Vernon, Judge, iii. 144
  Veronica, St. i. 315
  Verstegan, i. 302――ii. 236, 320.――His rhyme, iv. 128.――Richard, i. 264
  Verulam, the ancient name of St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Veryan limestone, iv. 123 _bis_
  VERYAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, iv. 115. Ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, name of Elerchy, history
    of the Trevanion family 116. And of Robins, with their arms, manors
    of Treviles and Govile 117. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, name, history of St. Symphorian, a vicarage, value ibid.
    Patron, incumbent, impropriation, ancient name, manor of Elerchy,
    etymology 118. By Whitaker, name derived from the manorial house,
    its situation ibid. The mills, derivation of the name, dissertation
    on the use of imagination in antiquarian researches ibid. Saint,
    corruption of his name, parish feast 120. The church tower a later
    addition 121. By Editor, the manor, impropriators and patrons ibid.
    Three vicars related, the parish mentioned in an old charter,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 122. And by the Editor 123. Mr.
    Trist’s account of the limestone, Pendower beach, analysis of the
    stone by Mr. Gregor, much superior to the Plymouth limestone ibid.
    Good for cement, contains iron, Mr. Greenough’s map 124
  Veryon, ii. 79
  Vespasian, Emperor, i. 198
  Vestia lycioides, iv. 283
  Vetorio Capelli, a Venetian general, ii. 369
  Veye, St. i. 328
  Vibart of Gulval, ii. 83. Isabel 83
  Vibert, Mr. a benefactor to the church at Penzance, iii. 93
  Victor 2nd Pope, i. 110 _bis_
  Victory man of war, wreck of, iv. 174
  Viel, heir of, iii. 279
  Vienna, Christendom preserved by John Sobieski, under the walls of,
    ii. 351
  Vignierius, i. 192
  Vigures, Hugh, ii. 423
  Ville Frank, taken by the English, iv. 177
  Villie, De, i. 296
  Villiers, Harriet, and John Earl Grandison, i. 69.――Barbara, Duchess
    of Cleveland, ii. 11. George Duke of Buckingham 382
  Vincent, i. 18, 292. Henry and S. V., 54.――John and Matthias, ii.
    227. Walter, killed Mr. George Killigrew, was tried and acquitted 5.
    Died suddenly 6. Walter 316. Mr. 227. Mrs. aunt of Mr. Tonkin 98.
    Arms, and story of them 227.――Family, made a fortune at Truro, iv.
    88. Represented it in parliament, lived at Tresimple, have
    disappeared 89
  ―――― of St. Allen, i. 205
  ―――― of Creed, ii. 90
  ―――― of Nantellon, John, i. 257
  ―――― of Stoke Dabernon, Surrey, family and arms, ii. 227
  ―――― of Trelevan family, iii. 192, 193.――Henry, ii. 55
  ―――― of Tresimple, Edward, Henry, Jane, Mary, Peter, Shadrack,
    Walter _bis_, and arms, i. 205.――Henry, ii. 317――iii. 188, 328. Mary
    188. Walter 328
  ―――― of Trigowethan, Walter, iii. 319
  ―――― of Truro, Edward, iii. 238. Nicholas 192. Walter 192, 327 _bis_
  Vinicombe, John, biography of, iii. 87
  Vinsam, Richard, i. 272, 275
  Virgil, notes on, iv. 87
  Virgin Mary, ii. 2, 96 _bis_――iv. 132. Truro church, dedicated to 75
  Virginia, Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to people, ii. 342
  ―――― fleet, the Dutch attempt to capture, its cargo landed at Foy,
    ii. 42
  Vivian, i. 74, 222. Sir Hussey 173. John 2, 215. Matthew 2. Sir
    Richard 222. Thomas, prior of Bodmin 75, 233. Bishop of Megara 75.
    Tomb 75, 95, 101. His official arms 75. Family arms 76, 94.――Edward,
    ii. 303. General Sir Hussey 34. His ancestors lived at Comprigney
    318. Jane 304. Ralph 398. Rev. Mr. 34.――Francis and Mary, iii. 135.
    Richard 387. Thomas, prior of St. Petroc’s, Bodmin, and Bishop of
    Megara in Greece 279――iv. 160.――Mr. iii. 147.――Sir Hussey originated
    from Truro, iv. 86. John 89. Family 139
  ―――― of Pencalerick, iii. 341.――Mr. iv. 89
  ―――― of Trelowarren, iv. 160
  ―――― of Trenowith, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trenowth in St. Colomb, ii. 335 _bis_. Thomas 335
  ―――― of Truan, i. 221, 383, 408. Anne 221, 222. Francis 216, 221,
    222. Jane 221, 222. John 216 _bis_, 221 _ter._, 222 _bis_. Mary 211,
    222 _bis_. Thomas 216, 221 _bis_, 222. Capt. Thomas 211. Arms
    222.――Family, ii. 43――iii. 148 _bis_――iv. 138 _bis_, 160 _bis_.
  Vivyan of Tollskiddy, ii. 255
  Volant, John de, ii. 209
  Voluba, i. 256
  Vorch, St. ii. 391 _bis_
  Vosper, i. 142――ii. 300.――Arthur, i. 142, 143.――John, iii.
    16.――Etymology, i. 143
  Vowell, i. 108
  Voysey, John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 195
  Vyel of Trevorder, Miss, iii. 134
  Vyell, i. 117
  ―――― of Trevorder, i. 250. Julyan and William 378
  Vyvyan, i. 117, 209. Francis 248. Sir Vyell 101. Sir Francis and
    Jane, ii. 320. Sir Richard, M.P. for Cornwall 351.――Sir Francis, iv. 162
  Vyvyan of Cosowarth, in Little Colan, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Merthin, Charles, i. 136. Sir Richard 136, 241
  ―――― of Trelowarren, i. 65, 148, 237. Jane 357. Sir Richard 211,
    357, 391.――Hannibal, Sir Francis, Sir Richard and Sir Vyell, all
    successively governors of St. Mawe’s castle, Sir Richard displaced
    from the government by Cromwell, ii. 277.――Ann, born in the Tower,
    iii. 136. Barbara 342. Carew 136. Sir Carew 337. Charles 135.
    Francis, built the house at Trelowarren 134. Sir Francis 314 _bis_,
    315 _bis_. Hannibal 134. Harriet 337. John 342. Michael 134. Philip
    137, 337 _ter._ Richard 134 _ter._ Richard 136 _bis_. Sir Richard
    135 _ter._ Sir Richard, a cavalier 135. Sent to the Tower, had time
    to destroy his papers, afterwards M.P. for Cornwall 136. Sir Richard
    seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Sir Richard 337. Sir Richard R. his
    election for Bristol 137. Vyel 136, 137, 337. Sir Vyell 134, 135.
    Sir Vyell and his daughter 446. Five Misses 135. Mr. pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. 133, 337. Rev. Mr. 97. Family 44, 134 _bis_, 135
    _bis_, 216, 250, 258. Arms 135.――Sir R. R., Rev. Vyal of Withiel
    _bis_, and family, iv. 163

  Wadder family, iv. 17
  Waddon, i. 167.――Family, iii. 255. Monuments to ibid.
  ―――― of Tonacombe in Morwinstow, memorials of in Kilkhampton church,
    ii. 347
  Wade, general, i. 56
  Wadebridge, i. 115, 351, 375. Account of 372, 376. Erection 373.
    Fund for repair 374
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 259
  ―――― parish, ii. 256――iii. 324――iv. 46
  Wadebrygge, iv. 255
  Wadham college, Oxford, ii. 377, 389――iii. 20, 251
  ―――― Joseph, iii. 20. William 116. Family, founders of Wadham
    college, Oxford 20
  ―――― of Merrifield, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  Wadland, William, iii. 176
  Wager, Admiral Sir Charles, iv. 21, 36. Bond gives his history 37
  ―――― ship, loss of, iii. 205
  Wakefield, battle of, iii. 294
  Walburge, St. daughter of St. Richard, iv. 126. Little recorded of
    127. Church dedicated at Chester to 125. At Bristol 127
  Walcot, Dr. John, memoir of, iii. 219. His verses on Lieutenant
    Boscawen 220
  Waldegrave, Hon. Edward, monument to, ii. 325
  Wales, i. 307, 330, 334, 373――ii. 127――iii. 277, 336 _bis_, 340,
    460.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65 _bis_. Tin and copper ore
    carried into to be separated 303
  ―――― Prince of, ii. 376, 408――iv. 12, 19, 62, 72.――David, i.
    339.――Frederick, i. 69――ii. 84.――Joan, Princess, iii. 27.――-His
    plume, iv. 71, 78
  ―――― North, i. 294
  ―――― North Nesta, Princess of, and Rosse, Prince of, i. 34
  Walesborough, Walesbreu, Walesbury, or Whalesborough, John, iii.
    116. Mark de 307. Thomas, Thomas 116. Family 115. Arms 116.――Family,
    iv. 39
  Walesbury, or Walesborough, or Whalesborough manor, iii. 307.
    Account of 115, 117
  Walfi, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walker, Rev. S. M., i. 392.――Rev. James, ii. 85. Rev. Robert, vicar
    of St. Winnow 34――iv. 158 _bis_.――Rev. Robert, anecdote of, iii. 4
  ―――― of Exeter, i. 369――ii. 170
  ―――― of Lanlivery, Mr. ii. 34
  Waller, Sir William, the parliamentary general, ii. 343
  Wallingford castle, iii. 285――iv. 9, 17
  ―――― honour, iii. 44, 286――iv. 9, 17, 97, 127
  ―――― manor, ii. 89, 113
  Wallington, iii. 26
  Wallis, Rev. John, i. 96. Captain, R.N., 359――ii. 99. The discoverer
    of Otaheite 270. The circumnavigator 405. Betty, his only dau.,
    270.――Christopher, notice of, iii. 446. John, Captain Samuel, R.N.
    family, and their monuments 440
  Walocus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walpole, i. 151. Sir Robert 265, 284. George Earl of Orford, his
    deed of entail, Robert Earl of Orford 313. Sir Robert 84,
    313.――George, Earl of Orford, iii. 230. Horace 117.――Family 254, and
    iv. 62
  Walsh, James, iv. 67
  Walsingham, St. Mary of, ii. 75
  Walter, Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 180 _bis_.――Mary, iii.
    337. Family 254
  Walton court, iii. 155
  Walveden of Walveden, Catherine and John, and Miss, iii. 357. Family
    357, 365
  ―――― manor, iii. 356
  Warbeck, Perkin, ii. 186 _bis_, 187 _bis_, 189, 190 _quint._――iii.
    433.――Saluted King of England, ii. 188. Takes sanctuary at Beauly,
    submits 190. Pardoned, afterwards escaped 191
  Warborough, iv. 125. The Editor thinks it resembles the Roman works
    in Dorsetshire 126
  Warbstow parish, iii. 275――iv. 59, 61 _quat._
  WARBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, iv.
    124. Consolidated with Trenegles, patron, incumbent 125. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Chester Cathedral
    dedicated to her, attached to Treneglos, incumbent, Warborough
    fortification, from which, says Whitaker, the name is derived ibid.
    By Editor, this part abounds in military antiquities ibid.
    Surprising how armies could have been provisioned, has seen this
    entrenchment, much larger than those in Cornwall generally, the
    saint’s history, and of her relation St. Boniface 126. He invented
    the letter W, a church dedicated to St. Walburga at Bristol,
    impropriator, patron, Fentrigan manor, Donneny manor, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 127
  Warburg, St. iv. 125
  Warburton, William, Bishop of Gloucester, ii. 265, 266.――Dr.
    William, iii. 67, 68 _quint._, 69
  Ward, Simon, brewer to King Arthur, i. 131.――Dr. Seth, Bishop of
    Exeter, consecrated Falmouth church, ii. 4
  Wardour castle, Wilts, iv. 106
  Ware’s History of Ireland, iv. 145. MSS. 147
  Warinus, ii. 427
  Warlegan parish, ii. 239. Warleggon 167, 168. Warliggan 89――iv. 48,
    49.――Warligon, iii. 260
  WARLEGGON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Trengove, and
    family, iv. 128. Their arms 129. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, etymology, value, patron, incumbent, manor ibid. By
    Editor, descent of the manor and patronage of the living, manor of
    Carborro, the church and tower injured by lightning, general
    carelessness in neglecting the simple security against lightning
    130. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 131
  Warlewast, Robert, iii. 456.――William, Bishop of Exeter, i. 27,
    95――ii. 87――iii. 456, 457, 458.――Founder of Launceston priory, ii.
    419, 428. His deed of gift to it 426. Buried at Plympton priory,
    suppressed St. Stephen’s collegiate church 419
  Warliggon manor, iv. 128. Account of 129
  Warne, Rev. Mr. i. 246, 250.――Lawsuit between two brothers, ii. 253.
    Lost the whole estate 254
  Warr, Joan, iii. 60
  Warren, Maria Lukey, i. 403. Thomas 10.――David, iii. 387. William 239
  ―――― a Roman fort, description of, iii. 365
  Warrick, Charles, his character, and anticipation of the machinery
    of steam-boats, iv. 91
  Warrington, i. 107
  Wars, French, of Edward 3rd, i. 85
  Warton, Thomas, ii. 266.――Mr. iv. 141
  ――――’s History of English Poetry, iv. 113
  Warwick castle, iv. 114
  Warwick, Earl of, i. 168――iii. 73.――Guy, iv. 111, 113.――Thomas, i.
    341.――Beauchamp, ii. 130. Richard Neville 38. Richard 182 _ter._
  Wash in Lincolnshire, iii. 10
  Wastrell downs, i. 239
  Water, high, time of, at various points, iii. 375
  Waterloo, battle, Sir Hussey Vivian shared the glories of, iv. 86
  ―――― bridge, built of Cornwall stone, iii. 63
  Watson, Bishop, iv. 45
  Waunford, Thomas de, iv. 13; or Waurnford family and coheir 16
  Wayne, William, iii. 426
  Wayte, William, i. 243. Arms 244
  ―――― of Lestwithiel, i. 243
  ―――― of Trewenethick, William, iii. 324 _bis_
  Webb, John, ii. 196
  Webber, Jonathan and arms, ii. 336.――Edy, iii. 387. Joseph 362.
    Thomas 181, 387
  Wedgewood, Josiah, and Mrs. iii. 34.――Mr. procured soap rock from
    Lammoran parish, ii. 360
  Wednock, St. iv. 53
  Week St. Mary, near Stratton, a tower at, iii. 363
  WEEK ST. MARY, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value,
    patron, land tax, iv. 131. Thomasine Bonaventure, her history,
    obscure birth, she falls in with a London merchant 132. Goes with
    him to London as his servant, afterwards marries him, and is early
    left a rich widow, her second marriage and widowhood 133. Marries
    thirdly, is Lady Mayoress, in her third widowhood lived piously and
    charitably, founded a chantry and school in this parish 134.
    Dissolved by Edward 6th, two fairs 135. By Editor, church
    conspicuous, tower nearly the most lofty in Cornwall, town large,
    etymology of Week, lines on _sweet saints_ ibid. Town called a
    borough, manor merged in that of Swannacot, manor of East Orchard
    Mauvais, Castle-hill, advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 136
  Weekly Miscellany, i. 283
  Weights, stone, found in Castle Dinas, i. 228
  Well, medicinal, i. 160
  Wellington, Duke, iv. 86, 159
  Wells, insurgent advance to, i. 86. Proceed from 87.――See removed
    to, iv. 36
  Welscomb, Thomas, i. 290
  Welsh bards, iii. 431.――Jones’s Relics of, ii. 166
  ―――― people, i. 307
  ―――― princes, iii. 336
  ―――― stone coal, iv. 123
  ―――― tongue, i. 337
  ―――― victory over the Picts, ii. 65
  Wen, de, iii. 214
  ―――― St. parish, sheaf of, ii. 44
  Wena, St. Bishop of Winchester, iv. 137
  Wenap, St ii. 129, 132 _bis_
  WENAP parish. _See Gwenap_
  Wenca, i. 2
  Wendron church, iii. 447.――St. Wendron, ii. 136, 137――St. Wendrone,
    iv. 5
  WENDRON parish. _See Gwendron_
  ―――― parish, i. 261.――St. Wendron, ii. 160.――St. Wendrone, iii. 5
  ―――― St. vicarage, ii. 138
  Wendyn, Robert, i. 313
  Wenheder, i. 2
  Wenn, St. iv. 160
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 188
  ―――― parish, i. 115, 212.――iii. 391, 395――iv. 163
  WENN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, the only
    parish in Cornwall with the prefix of saint in Domesday Book, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iv. 137.
    Tower and bells struck down by lightning, Tregury family, Michael,
    Archbishop of Dublin, his Latin epitaph, mistranslated by Hals,
    Lancorla barton 138. The dwelling of Mr. Hals, the manor of Lancorla
    and of Checkenock, Trewithan 139. Damelsa castle and house,
    Treganatha, fairs at 140. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a
    vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Borlase ibid. Family of
    Norman origin, disputed by Whitaker 141. By Editor, Great Skewish,
    Skewish family, one of them compiled the wars of Troy temp. Henry
    6th, Archbishop Tregury. Editor’s communication with Dean Dawson,
    the Archbishop’s tomb restored by Swift ibid. Engraving of the tomb
    142. Editor’s letter to the Gentleman’s Magazine with it, antiquity
    and vigour of that work, history of the Archbishop nearly lost,
    noticed by Lysons, successive possessors of the estate, tomb seen by
    a Cornish gentleman, application to the Dean 143. Records of the
    Dublin prelates, &c. lost, preservation of the tomb, Wood’s mention
    of the Archbishop as governor of the newly founded college of Caen
    144. Memoir of him from Ware’s History of Ireland 145. Said to have
    been taken prisoner at sea, doubted, certain persons excommunicated
    for laying violent hands on him, his death 146. Monument described,
    preserved, his will 147. Celebration of a jubilee at Rome, dreadful
    fatality from the crowds, Tregury ordered a fast of three days in
    his diocese, his works, documents respecting the restoration of his
    temporalities 148. Parish statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 151
  Wenna, i. 2.――A female saint, iv. 140
  Wennack, St. iii. 37
  Wennow, St. parish, i. 112.――St. Wenow, ii. 41――iv. 110
  Wensent, i. 2
  Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, iii. 152
  Werrington, i. 266.――Barton, iii. 283, 459 _quat._ Possessors of 460
  ―――― manor, iv. 64 _bis_
  ―――― parish, iii. 456, 459 _quat._, 460――iv. 152
  Werstanus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Wescombe, Robert, iii. 153
  Wesley, John, preached in Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Wessy, St. ii. 412
  West, John, iii. 387. Colonel John 419
  ―――― of Redruth, Udy, ii. 239
  ―――― of England Architecture, iv. 16
  ―――― hundred, i. 112, 167, 174, 316――ii. 291, 394, 409――iii. 13, 118,
    245, 260, 291, 347――iv. 19, 23, 110, 111, 128, 129, 155, 184
  ―――― Indies, regular communication of Falmouth with, ii. 18. Mr.
    Knill’s mission to 266. Ship supposed to have made for when driven
    to the Cornish coast 268
  ―――― Looe, Mr. Daniell, M.P. for, ii. 318
  ―――― Saxon Kings, iii. 139
  ―――― Saxons, Kingill, King of, ii. 284.――St. Richard, King of, iv. 126
  ―――― North, account of, i. 319
  Westbury of Winston Westbury, Edward, i. 400
  Westcot, iii. 163
  ―――― down, iv. 18
  Western circuit, ii. 227. Lawyers of 53
  ―――― lighthouse, its latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Westlake of Elmsworthy, ii. 347. The last of the family died in
    destitution, twice pricked for Sheriff while in the poorhouse 347.
    Memorials in Kilkhampton church ibid.
  Westmacott, the sculptor, iii. 229
  Westminster, i. 345――ii. 403――iii. 242
  ―――― abbey, i. 170――iii. 65, 167.――Monuments in, iv. 38
  ―――― abbot of, ii. 149
  ―――― hall, ii. 190, 191, 192――iii. 131. The Bishops tried in 296
  ―――― school, iii. 296, 300
  ―――― statute, ii. 4
  Weston, William, English prior of the Knights of Malta, i.
    411.――Stephen, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 40. Judge 144.――Mr. and
    Bishop, iv. 118
  Wetherall, Sir Charles, ii. 162
  Weymouth, sea fight near, ii. 26
  Whaddon, i. 104
  Whalesborough family, iv. 114. _See Walesborough_
  Wharton’s History of English Poetry, i. 342
  ――――’s London, i. 251
  Wheal tower mine, ii. 33
  Wheare, Degory, his history and works, ii. 233
  Whele, Alfred, i. 143――iii. 345
  ―――― Etherson, i. 414
  ―――― Fortune, ii. 83, 219――Copper, iii. 47
  ―――― Reath, tin, account of, iii. 113
  ―――― Treliston, ii. 143
  ―――― Vor, i. 127, 128――iii. 13, 447
  Wherry mine, account of, iii. 99
  Whetstone, iv. 54
  Whetton, Samuel, i. 112
  Whichcott, Colonel Christopher, commissioner for the parliament
    army, iv. 189
  Whigs were joined by George I. and George II. the battle of Culloden
    caused their fall, ii. 244
  Whitaker, Rev. John, i. 96.――Some particulars of his Life, rector of
    Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 406. His literary character 407.――His history
    of Cornwall, ii. 123, 127, 143, 153, 199, 231, 240, 254 _bis_, 255,
    273, 274――iii. 278, 292, 302, 321, 348, 363, 364 _ter._, 365, 366,
    398 _bis_, 399. His style, &c., 342.――His remarks upon Truro castle
    and town, iv. 78. General remarks at the end of the work 167.――Mr.
    i. 73
  Whitaker’s cathedrals of Cornwall, i. 299
  Whitchurch, Ranulph de, iv. 16
  White, i. 266.――John and Robert, ii. 300. Rev. Mr. 151.――Thomas,
    Bishop of Peterborough, one of the seven, iii. 299
  White’s “Natural History of Selborne,” iii. 206
  White Friars, house at Truro, iv. 76, 79
  ―――― works mine, ii. 302
  Whitechapel, iii. 188
  Whitechurch parish, near Tavistock, iii. 390
  Whiteford barton, iv. 9, 11. Purchased by Mr. Call 10
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Lestwithiel, iii. 24
  Whitehall, iii. 143
  Whiteleigh of Efford, John, i. 313, and Richard 313 _bis_.――Richard,
    ii. 43, 109, 189. Whitleigh of Efford 419. Joanna, Margaret, and
    Richard, ib.
  Whitford, Rev. Mr. of Poundstock, iii. 352
  Whiting, Rev. William, of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 126
  Whitminster family and heir, iv. 16
  Whitmore, Mr. iii. 90
  Whitsand, or Whitsend bay, iii. 310, 433, 435.――Excavation at, ii. 252
  Whitstone parish, i. 133――iii. 86――iv. 39, 40
  WHITSTONE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, barton of Bennet, iv. 152. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, etymology, ib. A rectory, value, patron,
    incumbent, manor, name of the parish derived from it, Whitaker
    153. By Editor, church and tower fine and well seated, monuments,
    patron, and incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Whitsuntide, iii. 427.――Celebrated at Wilton by Canute, iv. 96
  Whittington, i. 121, 262.――Blanche, John and Thomas, iii. 317.
    William 316, 317 _bis_
  Wickliffe, iii. 163.――John, i. 314
  Widemouth, west, manor, iii. 353
  Widislade, ii. 427
  Wiedbury, ii. 292
  Wight, Isle of, a battle off, ii. 342
  Wike St. Mary, parish, i. 296――iv. 40, 59, 152 _bis_
  Wilgress, Rev. J. T. ii. 144
  Wilkes, John, i. 173.――Mr. ii. 245
  Wilkin, John, ii. 189
  Wilkins, Rev. Mr. ii. 372
  Wilkinson, William, ii. 189
  William, Rev. Anthony, rector of St. Keverne, rendered insensible by
    a storm during divine service, ii. 324. Sends an account of it to
    the Royal Society, ib.
  ―――― son of the Earl of Morton, ii. 211
  ―――― the Conqueror, i. 43, 241, 367――ii. 89, 118, 130, 147, 175, 176
    _bis_, 210, 211 _ter._, 235, 237, 238, 259, 310, 344, 379, 384, 399,
    418――iii. 22, 44, 46, 114, 129, 134, 142, 276, 291, 346, 349, 352,
    422, 451 _bis_, 456. Charter of 114, 117――iv. 14, 15, 62, 67, 102,
    118, 153
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 50, 51, 59, 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 129, 145, 155,
    175, 253, 257, 259, 273, 299, 315, 332, 335――iii. 64, 74, 79, 101,
    114, 115, 118, 139, 391――iv. 184
  ―――― Rufus, ii. 147, 211 _bis_, 344――iii. 462――iv. 140
  ―――― 3rd, i. 46――ii. 51, 54, 76, 89, 112, 127, 255, 277, 278,
    301――iii. 15, 78, 148, 168, 176, 182, 186, 195, 199, 208, 222, 237,
    297 _bis_, 417, 421――iv. 22, 107, 116 _ter._, 152, 160
  ―――― and Mary, ii. 236
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― of Malmesbury, i. 200――iv. 96
  Williams, i. 16, 158, 210, 387. Edward 272, 276. Rev. Humphrey 355.
    Jane 357. John 154, 277.――John, ii. 134. Richard 256. Mr. 157.
    Family 336.――Rev. Anthony of St. Kevern, iii. 88. Courtenay 367.
    John 350. Thos. of Lombard Street, London 162. Three Misses 343. Mr.
    82, 363. Family 343, 363.――John, iv. 55. Mr. 74. Henry 77
  ―――― of Bodenick, or Boderick, William, i. 319.――William, ii. 410, 411
  ―――― of Carmanton, John, i. 225.――(or Willyams) of Carnanton, Anne,
    iii. 229. Humphrey 151. John 229
  ―――― of Carvean, Catherine, John, iii. 355. Mary 355, 362. Arms 355
  ―――― of Dorset or Wilts, arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of Helston, John, i. 357
  ―――― of Herringston in Dorset, Mr. family, and arms, iii. 356
  ―――― of Probus, i. 396――ii. 54
  ―――― of Rosworthy, John, and arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of St. Blazey, Hugh, his marriages, and death, i. 53. Building
    a new house 54. Arms 53
  ―――― of Tregenna, John, i. 420
  ―――― of Trehane, i. 400.――Mary and Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― of Trevorva, arms, iii. 355
  ―――― of Trewithan, Richard, i. 53, 225.――Courtenay, iii. 356
  ―――― of Trewithgy, William, iii. 355
  ―――― of Truthan, i. 398 _bis_. John 396, 398. Arms 396
  Willington family, iii. 348
  Willis, Andrew, killed at Skewis, i. 276 _bis_
  ―――― Browne, ii. 200――iii. 120, 268, 459.――His additions to Camden,
    i. 257, 339. Notitia Parliamentaria 200――ii. 68, 403――iii. 14, 16,
    17, 24, 25, 26, 27――iv. 117.――Account of St. German’s priory, ii.
    69, 71, 72. Of Launceston 422, 423
  ―――― of Fen Ditton, Bart. Sir Thomas and Sir William, ii. 97
  ―――― of London, Dorothy and Thomas, ii. 97
  Willoughby, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186. Family 313
  ―――― de Broke, Lord, ii. 231.――Family, iii. 47
  Wills, Rev. Mr. i. 383.――Anthony offers himself and six sons to King
    William 3rd, ii. 112. Rev. Thomas 139 _bis_. Rev. Thomas, vicar of
    Wendron 326.――Rev. Mr. of Mullion, iii. 257
  Wills of Helston, Matthew, ii. 139, 326
  ―――― of Wivelscomb, iii. 269
  Willyams of Cannerton, Anne, John, John and Oliver, ii. 85
  Wilow, St. ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279
  Wilson’s Martyrology, iii. 385
  Wilton, Canute celebrated Whitsuntide at, iv. 96
  ―――― abbey, Wilts, iii. 291.――St. Udith, abbess of, iv. 93. Built
    St. Denis church at, and was buried there 94.――Priors of, ii. 291
  ―――― convent at, iv. 96
  ―――― of Dunveth, Miss, John, iv. 3
  Wiltshire, i. 334
  ―――― William Lord Scrope, Earl of, Lord treasurer, iii. 129
  Wimbourn Minster, iv. 126
  Winchelsea, its naval armaments defeated Fowey, ii. 45
  Winchester, i. 326, 327, 336――ii. 139.――Rebels march through, i. 87
  ―――― Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of, ii. 194.――Jonathan Trelawney, iii.
    295,  297
  ―――― Levignus, monk of, ii. 60
  ―――― measure, iii. 182
  Windham, Madam, iii. 449. Mr. 449 _ter._
  Windsor, i. 146 _bis_
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 341
  ―――― dean and chapter of, ii. 72
  ―――― poor knights of, ii. 52, 54, 55
  ―――― Gerald de, i. 34. Otho de 34 _bis_. Walter de 34. William de
    34, 35
  ―――― Lord, i. 34
  Winenton in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Winfred, St. iv. 126
  Wingfield, Miss, i. 266――ii. 243.――Family, iv. 156
  Winnocus, St. and his history, iv. 157
  Winnous, St. by Leland, iv. 278
  Winnow manor, ii. 252
  ―――― St. downs, iv. 29, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― St. parish, i. 113, 421, 358, 376, 379, 390――iii. 24――iv. 111,
    184.――Rev. Robert Walker, vicar of, ii. 34
  WINNOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint’s name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, St. Nectan’s
    chapel. History of the saint, his chapel at Hartland, built by
    Goditha, daughter of Earl Godwin, the Earl attributing his
    preservation in a tempest at sea to the saint’s intercession, iv.
    155. Barton and manor of St. Winow, its possessors 156. Tethe,
    Trevego, Laran bridge 157. By Tonkin, saint, his history, Bergh St.
    Winnox, benefice, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation ibid. By Editor, beautiful situation of the church,
    vicarage house and glebe, Mr. Walker, chapel, Ethy, notice of
    Admiral Penrose 158. Statistics, the vicars, value of the benefice,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 159
  Winnow, St. vicarage, beauty of, iv. 158
  Winock, St. abbey, at Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  Winotus, St. iv. 155
  Winow, St. barton and manor, iv. 156
  Winslade, i. 7
  ―――― of Tregarrick, or St. Agnes, William, ii. 192
  Winsloe, Mr. ii. 399
  Winslow, Rev. R. of Minster, iii. 236 _bis_. Thomas, took the name
    of Phillips 235
  Winstanley of Littlebury, Essex, built the first lighthouse at
    Eddystone, iii. 376 _ter._
  Winter of Sydney, Sir John, i. 398
  ―――― of Kellyfreth, ii. 304. Arms, ib.
  ―――― an eminent family of Gloucestershire, ii. 304
  Winwaloe, St. iv. 60
  Winwallo, St. ii. 127. His history 127, 128 _ter._
  Winwolaus of Tremene chapel, iv. 60
  Wise, i. 370
  ―――― of Stoke Damarel, i. 266
  Witchalse, Benet and his daughter, iii. 199
  Withal rectory house, i. 75
  Withel parish, iii. 391, 395.――Withell, ii. 94, 335.――Withiel, i.
    115――ii. 384――iv. 137, 140
  Withell goose manor, iv. 160 _bis_
  Withering, Dr. ii. 331.――The botanist, iii. 173
  Witherington, Dr. i. 150
  Withiel church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, _see Withel_
  WITHIEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, iv. 160.
    Rectory house built, Burnevas, Trenance, family, and arms, Bryn 161.
    Birth of Sir Bevill Grenville 162. By Tonkin, situation, value of
    benefice, appropriation, a rectory, value, incumbent ibid. By
    Editor, rectory house improved, Trewren monument, statistics,
    incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 163
  Withroe manor, ii. 252
  Withyel, Richard Trewren, rector of, i. 376
  Wivelsberge, advowson of, iii. 115
  Wodehouse, ii. 117. Lord, is the representative of the Killigrew
    family 23
  Wolf, the, iv. 173
  Wolfchild, Lady, mother of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Wolfe, General, iii. 218
  Wolfran, St. and his festival, iv. 117
  Wollacombe of Devon, Mr. iii. 222 _bis_
  Wollas, iii. 258
  Wolphard, abbot, iv. 126
  Wolpher, King of Mercia, iv. 125
  Wolridge, Thomas, iii. 374
  ―――― of Gorminick, John, i. 420
  Wolrige, Dr. Hugh, monument to, and John, iii. 454
  Wolsey, Cardinal, ii. 361――iii. 299 _bis_
  Wolsey’s survey, iii. 340
  Wolvedon, or Goulden, barton, in St. Probus and Tregony, iii. 359.
    Fort on 365
  ―――― of Golden, Charles or Christopher, i. 297
  Wolverston, i. 136
  ―――― of Wolverston, ii. 5
  Wood, i. 76, 210――ii. 215.――Anthony, iii. 251――iv. 144. His Annals
    144.――His Athenæ Oxonienses, ii. 233――iii. 296――iv. 86. His Fasti
    144.――William, ii. 353.――Rev. William, junior, iii. 450.――Rev.
    William of Withiel, iv. 162. Rev. Mr. of Treneglos 61. Rev. Mr. of
    Warbstow 125. Rev. Mr. of Withiel 160
  ―――― Knowle, iii. 117
  Woodberry, i. 168
  Woodland, Sir William, iii. 239
  ―――― street, i. 79
  Woodley, Rev. C. W. of Stithians, iv. 5
  Woodly village, ii. 385
  Woodvill, Lionel, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 194. Richard Earl Rivers 194
  Woolcock, ii. 192.――J. H. iii. 387
  Woolcombe, Rev. Charles of Minster, iii. 236. Rev. William of
    Pillaton 347
  Woolcumbe, Mr. ii. 279
  ―――― of Longford hill, ii. 279
  Woolford village, iii. 255
  Woolley, J. T. i. 314, 315.――James, iii. 346. Mr. 163
  ―――― village, iii. 255
  Woolridge, Rector of St. Michael Penkivell, i. 256.――Rev. Mr. of
    Tywardreth, iv. 99
  ―――― of Carlynike, John, and arms, i. 256
  Woolrington, John de, i. 246
  Woolston, George, shot in Rogers’s affray, i. 274 _quat._, 275
    _ter._――Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― manor, iii. 353
  Worcester, St. Chad, patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― Florence of, iii. 310――iv. 168
  ―――― William of, ii. 203, 204, 206――iii. 223, 292, 350.――His
    Itinerary, Appendix 6, iv. 222 to 256. Containing his life 222.
    List of Cornish castles 228. Itinerary from Polston Brygge to
    Porthenys 229. List of the Scilly islands and of obits 230.
    Memoranda 231. List of rivers 233. Memoranda from Thomas Peperelle
    234. Extracts from the Bodman kalendar 236. Sources of the rivers,
    and a list of islands 237. Account of Bodman, and an extract from
    the Martyrology 238. From Bodman kalendar 239. From Bodman
    register respecting the plague, and memoranda from Robert Bracey
    240. Verses at Tavistock and extract from the Tavistock kalendar
    241. Property of Penryn college 242. Itinerary from North sea to
    the Thamar river 243. List of the havens 244. Itinerary from
    Penzance to Plymton 245. Memoranda from the kalendar of Mont
    Myghele, journey from Weare to Manchew 249. Various memoranda 250
    to 252. Dates of the above journey 252 to 255. Bridges in Cornwall
    from Exeter to St. Michael’s mount 255
  Worcester, William Worth, Archdeacon of, iii. 62
  ―――― William Lloyd, Bishop of, iii. 299
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 233
  Worcestershire, ii. 147――iii. 344
  Woronus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Worsley, Rev. Charles, rector of Leskeard, iii. 23
  Worth, i. 240.――Mr. ii. 97.――John, iii. 60, 62 _bis_. Built a house
    at Tremogh 62. Family and marriage of the heiress ibid.
  ―――― of Penryn, John son of John, William, and William, D.D. iii. 62
  ―――― of Worth, family and arms, iii. 60
  Wortha, Higher, iii. 258
  ―――― Lower, iii. 258
  Worthyvale manor, iii. 234 _bis_, 236. King Arthur received his
    death wound at 236
  Wotton, account of, ii. 362. The barton of Trelugan manor 363
  ―――― cross village, ii. 362
  Wray, William, iii. 358
  Wrey, Elizabeth and Sir William, i. 210.――Rev. H. B. ii. 416.――Sir
    William, iii. 16.――Sir Bourchier, iv. 112. Rev. W. B. 50. Family 110
    _bis_. Of Devon 50
  ―――― of Trebigh, Sir Bourchier, Sir Chichester John _bis_, William
    _bis_, and arms, i. 411
  Wright, ii. 130, 253, 375
  Wring Cheese, i. 178, 179. Described 184, 190
  Wringworthy, Higher, iii. 246
  ―――― manor, iii. 252
  Wroughton, Miss, ii. 218
  Wulrington, ii. 430
  Wulvedon, by Leland, iv. 272
  Wykeham, William of, iii. 171
  Wyllacombe, iv. 29
  Wylliams of Roseworthy in Gwyniar, Ann, iii. 159. Rev. Cooper 159,
    160. Rector of Kingston near Canterbury, his works 160. Humphrey
    James and James 159. John 159 _bis_, 160. John and John 159. John O.
    159 _bis_. An anecdote he told 160. Thomas Captain 159
  Wymer, St. ii. 142
  Wymond, Mr. i. 78.――Family and coheirs, iv. 113
  Wymondesham, W. de, iv. 44
  Wymondeston, W. de, iv. 46
  Wymondham, William de, i. 383
  Wymp, i. 2
  Wynn, Right Hon. Charles Williams, M.P. ii. 20
  Wynnanton, ii. 126, 128
  Wynne, i. 163, 400, 401. Rev. Dr. Luttrell 164, 401 _ter._, 402
    _ter._, 403.――Rev. Dr. ii. 114
  Wynnenton, i. 241
  Wynnock, St. parish, ii. 358
  Wyse, William, iv. 147

  Xantus, Prince of Caretica, i. 300
  Xenophon, translations from, ii. 76
  Xysten, St. i. 88

  Yealm bridge, iii. 283
  Yeard, Richard, i. 210
  Yellow Leigh manor, ii. 416
  Yeo family, ii. 86, 416.――Arms 87
  ―――― of Trevelver family, iii. 240
  Yescombe, E. B. monument to, iii. 229
  York, i. 397――ii. 213
  ―――― Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 90.――St. Paulinus the first, iii.
    284, 285
  ―――― county, i. 258――ii. 76――iv. 42.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 94. James 27. His engagement with the Dutch fleet,
    and letter of thanks to Captain Penrose 28.――Richard, i. 168, 169
    _ter._――ii. 260
  ―――― William, ii. 189
  ―――― house of, i. 169――ii. 108, 185, 186 _bis_, 187
  ―――― street, near Covent Garden, iii. 252
  ―――― and Lancaster wars, iii. 199
  Yorke of Somersetshire, Humphrey settled at Trevassack, Richard of
    Wellington, Sarah, and family, iii. 342
  Young, Rev. Denis, iii. 256
  Yse, i. 2

  Zamkees the Samothracian, i. 24
  Zealand, iii. 227
  Zela, i. 20
  ZENNAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, founder and
    impropriator, soil, tin, Chapel Jane, iv. 164. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent
    ibid. By Editor, beauty of the scenery, fertile, church and tower,
    bells inscribed, no saint to be found, feast, St. John Lateran
    church at Rome, Trereen Dinas, or the Gurnet’s head 165. Editor
    purchased it for its geological interest, impropriation,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 166
  Zennor parish, i. 132――iii. 242――iv. 52, 53, 54
  Zouch, Lord, i. 170――John Lord, iii. 102




END OF VOL I.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT STREET.




Transcriber’s Note:

This book was written in a period when many words and names had not
become standardized in their spelling. Words may have multiple
spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These
have been left unchanged. Dialect, obsolete and alternative spellings
were left unchanged, as were misspelled words, incorrect use of
homonyms, and sentences without verbs. Words and phrases in italics
are surrounded by underscores, _like this_. The book used hyphens, dots, and
spaces of various lengths to indicate unknown names, dates or words.
For consistency, these were changed to four dashes: ――――. Insular
letters were replaced with contemporary equivalents.

Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, missing or
partially printed letters, were corrected. Unprinted punctuation and
final stops missing at the end of abbreviations and sentences were
added. Duplicated words were removed, as were duplicate letters after
rejoining words that were hyphenated at the end of a line. Carats
were used to indicate superscripts in the inscription in the
chapter on St. Ewe.

Footnotes were numbered in order and moved to the end of the chapter
in which the related anchors occur. The anchor for Footnote [17] was
missing in the original; it was added where it likely should have
been. There are two anchors to Footnote [39].

The Geology section of St. Colomb Major was printed twice including
the population section of the preceding table. At the end of the
second geology section were two paragraphs about Castle-An-Dinas that
do not discuss geology. The three duplicated geology paragraphs were
deleted and the two paragraphs about the castle were moved to precede
the table of parish property values.

Noted, not changed:

  ――In the section for St. Anthony in Powder, St. Augustine rules of
      order omits item number 4.
  ――Total population of Bodmin in 1811 does not equal the sum of items
      in the table.
  ――In the section of St. Clement’s, the year 1016 should likely be 1066.

The book contains the following pen and ink changes made by an unknown
hand. The changes were not made to the text, but are indicated below in
parentheses:

  ―― Penconnow (Pencarrow)
  ―― Foow (Foote)
  ―― Pennemer (Pennance)
  ―― sine (sive)

The Index appears only at the end of Volume 4. It was added to this volume
as a convenience to readers. Page numbers for Index items occasionally are missing in
the original.




