GREEKS ***







[Frontispiece: HERMES OF PRAXITELES.  4th Century BC.]



  The Book of the Ancient Greeks

  An Introduction to the History and Civilization of Greece
  from the Coming of the Greeks to the Conquest
  of Corinth by Rome in 146 B.C.


  By

  Dorothy Mills, M.A.

  Teacher of History at the Brearley School, New York
  Author of "The Book of the Ancient World"



  _With 16 Illustrations and a Map_



  G. P. Putnam's Sons
  New York & London
  The Knickerbocker Press




  Copyright, 1925
  by
  Dorothy Mills

  Published, August, 1925
  Second impression, March, 1928
  Third impression, October, 1928
  Fourth impression, September, 1929
  Fifth impression, October, 1930
  Sixth impression, October, 1931

  All rights reserved.  This book, or parts thereof, must
  not be reproduced in any form without permission.


  The Knickerbocker Press
  New York

  Made in the United States of America




To

M. C. S. M.




{v}

PREFACE

This book, like the first of the series the _Book of the Ancient
World_, was used in its original manuscript form by one of my history
classes.  It carries on the story of the way in which man has been
learning how to live from the time of the Coming of the Greeks to the
loss of Greek independence in 146 B.C.

The spirit of a nation is expressed and its history is recorded in
three ways: in its political history, in its literature and in its
art.  The aim of this book has been to use such parts of the
political history of the Greeks, of their literature and of their art
as seem to have been the outward and visible signs of the spirit that
inspired them.

It would not have been possible to write this book in this way
without the kind permission of translators and publishers to use
copyright translations.  I gladly take this opportunity to
acknowledge my debt to Professor Gilbert Murray and the Oxford
University Press for the translation of the _Iphigenia in Tauris_; to
Mr. A. W. Pickard--Cambridge and the Oxford University Press for the
translations from _Demosthenes_; to Mr. A. E. Zimmern and the Oxford
University Press for passages from the _Greek Commonwealth_; and to
the Trustees of the Jowett Fund and the Oxford University Press for
translations {vi} from _Plato_ and _Thucydides_; to Sir Arthur Evans
for passages from an article in the _Monthly Review_; to Mr. G. S.
Freeman for translations from the _Schools of Hellas_ by the late
Kenneth J. Freeman; to Mr. A. S. Way for a passage from the
_Persians_; to Mr. A. W. Crawley for passages from the translation of
the _Odyssey_ by Butcher and Lang; to Mrs. Putnam for an extract from
_The Lady_; to Miss Leslie White Hopkinson for her arrangement of one
of the _Elegiacs of Solon_; to Messrs. Macmillan and Co. for
translations from the _Iliad_ by Lang, Leaf and Myers, from
_Pausanias_ by Sir J. G. Frazer, from _Plato's Republic_ by Davies
and Vaughan, from the_ Trial and Death of Socrates_ by F. G. Church,
from _Herodotus_ by G. C. Macaulay, from _Xenophon_ by H. G. Dakyns,
and for various translations in _Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals_
(E. N. Gardiner), _The City State of the Greeks and Romans_ (W. Warde
Fowler) and _Our Hellenic Heritage_ (H. R. James); to Messrs. J. M.
Dent and Sons for translations from _Plutarch's Lives_; to Messrs. G.
Bell and Sons for translations from _Aristophanes_ by B. B. Rogers,
from _Theocritus_ by S. C. Calverley and from _Aristotle_ by Sir F.
G. Kenyon; to Messrs. George Allen and Unwin for translations from
the _Homeric Hymns_ by Andrew Lang; to Messrs. Edward Arnold and Co.
for three poems from _Love, Worship and Death_ by Sir Rennell Rodd;
and to Messrs. Longmans, Green and Co. for translations from _Select
Epigrams from the Greek Anthology_ by J. W. Mackail, and from _Greek
History for Young Readers_ by Alice Zimmern.

{vii}

This book is only intended as an introduction to the history of Greek
civilization, and the difficulty of my task has been to decide on
what to omit.  Everyone will not agree with me as to what I have
taken and what I have left, but my aim will have been accomplished,
if the book should create a desire to know something more of the
great heritage which has come to us from the Greeks.

DOROTHY MILLS.

NEW YORK, March, 1925.




{ix}

CONTENTS

CRETE AND THE CIVILIZATION OF THE EARLY AEGEAN WORLD

CHAPTER

I.--THE MEDITERRANEAN WORLD

II.--CRETE

  I.--LEGENDS OF CRETE
  II.--THE PALACES OF CRETE
  III.--DRESS
  IV.--RELIGION AND LITERATURE
  V.--A DAY IN CRETE
  VI.--THE DESTROYERS

III.--THE MAINLAND

  I.--TROY AND THE FIRST DISCOVERIES
  II.--MYCENAE AND TIRYNS
  III.--LIFE IN THE HOMERIC AGE
  IV.--THE GREEK MIGRATIONS


THE GREEKS

I.--THE LAND OF GREECE

II.--GREEK RELIGION AND THE ORACLES

{x}

III.--THE OLYMPIC GAMES

IV.--THE GREEK CITY-STATE

V.--SPARTA

  I.--THE GOVERNMENT OF SPARTA: LAWS OF LYCURGUS
  II.--CUSTOMS IN SPARTA
  III.--SPARTAN EDUCATION

VI.--THE GROWTH OF ATHENS

  I.--EARLIEST ATHENS
  II.--THE RULE OF THE FEW: THE OLIGARCHY
  III.--SOLON, THE WISE MAN OF ATHENS
        AND THE RULE OF THE MANY
  IV.--THE TYRANTS

VII.--GREEK COLONIES

  I.--THE FOUNDING OF A COLONY
  II.--IONIA AND LYDIA

VIII.--THE BEGINNING OF THE PERSIAN WARS

  I.--DARIUS AND THE IONIAN REVOLT
  II.--MARATHON

IX.--THE GREAT PERSIAN INVASION UNDER XERXES

{xi}

  I.--THE PREPARATIONS:
      (a) THE PERSIANS
      (b) THE GREEKS
  II.--THERMOPYLAE
  III.--THEMISTOCLES
  IV.--SALAMIS TO THE END

X.--THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE

  I.--THE FORTIFICATIONS OF ATHENS
  II.--THE CONFEDERACY OF DELOS
  III.--THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE UNDER PERICLES

XI.--LIFE IN ANCIENT ATHENS IN THE TIME OF PERICLES

  I.--A WALK IN ANCIENT ATHENS
  II.--ATHENIAN DRESS
  III.--THE ATHENIAN HOUSE
  IV.--ATHENIAN TRADE
  V.--ATHENIAN POTTERY

XII.--A DAY WITH AN ATHENIAN

  I.--THE ATHENIAN GENTLEMAN
  II.--THE ATHENIAN LADY

XIII.--THE ATHENIAN SCHOOLBOY

XIV.--THE GREEK THEATRE

{xii}

XV.--THE TEMPLES OF ATHENS

  I.--GREEK TEMPLES
  II.--THE ACROPOLIS IN THE TIME OF PERICLES
  III.--LATER HISTORY OF THE ACROPOLIS

XVI.--THE DOWNFALL OF ATHENS

  I.--RIVALRY BETWEEN ATHENS AND SPARTA AND THE BEGINNING
      OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR
  II.--ATHENS DURING THE WAR
  III.--ALCIBIADES
  IV.--THE DOWNFALL OF ATHENS AND THE SUPREMACY OF SPARTA
  V.--THE MARCH OF THE TEN THOUSAND

XVII.--THE GREAT DAYS OF THEBES

  I.--LEGENDS AND EARLY HISTORY OF THEBES
  II.--EPAMINONDAS

XVIII.--ALEXANDER THE GREAT

  I.--PHILIP OF MACEDON
  II.--DEMOSTHENES
  III.--ALEXANDER THE GREAT

{xiii}

XIX.--THE GIFTS OF GREECE TO THE WORLD

  I.--THE GREEK SPIRIT
  II.--SOCRATES
  III.--GREEK LITERATURE: THE PHILOSOPHERS
  IV.--GREEK LITERATURE: THE HISTORIANS
  V.--GREEK LITERATURE: THE DRAMATISTS
  VI.--GREEK ART

XX.--THE HELLENISTIC AGE

  I.--THE EXTENT OF GREEK INFLUENCE
  II.--ALEXANDRIA
  III.--SCIENCE IN THE HELLENISTIC AGE
  IV.--THE END OF GREEK INDEPENDENCE AND THE POWER FROM
       THE WEST

SUGGESTIONS ABOUT BOOKS FOR FURTHER READING

INDEX




{xv}

ILLUSTRATIONS

Hermes of Praxiteles . . . Frontispiece

Outline Map of Greece and Coasts of the Aegean Sea [missing from
source book]

Snake Goddess and Cupbearer

The Birth of Aphrodite

Discobolus of Myron

A Girl Racer

The Temple of Poseidon at Paestum

Pericles

Athens with the Acropolis

Greek Vases

The Flute Lesson, and the Writing Lesson

The Lyre Lesson, and the Poetry Lesson

Music School Scenes

{xvi}

The Theatre at Epidaurus

The Parthenon

Alexander the Great

Sophocles

Chronological Chart


[Transcriber's Note: the above Chronological Chart and the map
mentioned on the title page were both missing from the source book.]




{1}

  CRETE AND THE CIVILIZATION OF
  THE EARLY AEGEAN WORLD



{3}

  CRETE AND THE CIVILIZATION
  OF THE EARLY AEGEAN WORLD



CHAPTER I

THE MEDITERRANEAN WORLD

To the people of the ancient world the Mediterranean was "The Sea";
they knew almost nothing of the great ocean that lay beyond the
Pillars of Hercules.  A few of the more daring of the Phoenician
navigators had sailed out into the Atlantic, but to the ordinary
sailor from the Mediterranean lands the Ocean was an unknown region,
believed to be a sea of darkness, the abode of terrible monsters and
a place to be avoided.  And then, as they believed the world to be
flat, to sail too far would be to risk falling over the edge.

But the Mediterranean was familiar to the men of the ancient world,
it was their best known highway.  In those ancient times, the Ocean
meant separation, it cut off the known world from the mysterious
unknown, but the Mediterranean did not divide; it was, on the
contrary, the chief means of communication between the countries of
the ancient world.  For the world was then the coast {4} round the
sea, and first the Phoenicians and later the Greeks sailed backwards
and forwards, North and South, East and West, trading, often
fighting, but always in contact with the islands and coasts.  Egypt,
Carthage, Athens and Rome were empires of the Mediterranean world;
and the very name Mediterranean indicates its position; it was the
sea in the "middle of the world."

In the summer, the Mediterranean is almost like a lake, with its calm
waters and its blue and sunny sky; but it is not always friendly and
gentle.  The Greeks said of it that it was "a lake when the gods are
kind, and an ocean when they are spiteful," and the sailors who
crossed it had many tales of danger to tell.  The coast of the
Mediterranean, especially in the North, is broken by capes and great
headlands, by deep gulfs and bays, and the sea, more especially that
eastern part known as the Aegean Sea, is dotted with islands, and
these give rise to strong currents.  These currents made serious
difficulties for ancient navigators, and Strabo, one of the earliest
writers of Geography, in describing their troubles says that
"currents have more than one way of running through a strait."  The
early navigators had no maps or compass, and if they once got out of
their regular course, they ran the danger of being swept along by
some unknown current, or of being wrecked on some hidden rock.  The
result was that they preferred to sail as near the coast as was safe.
This was the easier, as the Mediterranean has almost no tides, and as
the early ships were small and light, landing was generally a simple
{5} matter.  The ships were run ashore and pulled a few feet out of
the water, and then they were pushed out to sea again whenever the
sailors were ready.

Adventurous spirits have always turned towards the West, and it was
westwards across the Mediterranean that the civilization we have
inherited slowly advanced.  The early Mediterranean civilization is
sometimes given the general name of Aegean, because its great centres
were in the Aegean Sea and on the adjoining mainland.  The largest
island in the Aegean is Crete, and the form of civilization developed
there is called Cretan or Minoan, from the name of one of the
legendary sea-kings of Crete, whilst that which spread on the
mainland is called Mycenaean from the great stronghold where dwelt
the lords of Mycenae.




{6}

CHAPTER II

CRETE

The long narrow island of Crete lies at what might be called the
entrance to the Aegean Sea.  This sea is dotted with islands which
form stepping stones from the mainland of Europe to the coast of Asia
Minor.  Crete turns her face to these islands and her back to Egypt,
and the Egyptians, who did not travel very much themselves, called
the inhabitants the "Great Men of Keftiu," Keftiu meaning _people at
the back of_.  They were the men who dwelt beyond what was familiar
to the Egyptians.

The Aegean world is a very beautiful one.  The Islands rise out of
the sea like jewels sparkling in the sunshine.  It is a world
associated with spring, of "fresh new grass and dewey lotus, and
crocus and hyacinth,"[1] a land where the gods were born, one rich in
legend and myth and fairy tale, and, most wonderful of all, a world
where fairy tales have come true.  In 1876 a telegram from an
archaeologist flashed through the world, saying he had found the tomb
of wide-ruling Agamemnon, King of Men and Tamer of Horses; and later
on, in Crete, traces were {7} found of the Labyrinth where Theseus
killed the Minotaur.  The spade of the archaeologist brought these
things into the light, and a world which had hitherto seemed dim and
shadowy and unreal suddenly came out into the sunshine.



I. LEGENDS OF CRETE

There is a land called Crete in the midst of the wine-dark sea, a
fair land and a rich, begirt with water, and therein are many men
innumerable and ninety cities.[2]


Legend tells us that it was in this land that Zeus was born, and that
a nymph fed him in a cave with honey and goat's milk.  Here, too, in
the same cave was he wedded and from this marriage came Minos, the
legendary Hero-King of Crete.  The name Minos is probably a title,
like Pharaoh or Caesar, and this Minos, descendant of Zeus, is said
to have become a great Sea-King and Tyrant.  He ruled over the whole
of the Aegean, and even demanded tribute from cities like Athens.
But Theseus, helped by the King's daughter Ariadne, slew the
Minotaur, the monster who devoured the Athenian youths and maidens,
and so defeated the vengeance of the King.  This Minos fully realized
the importance of sea-power in the Aegean.  Thucydides, the Greek
historian, tells us that he was the first ruler who possessed a navy,
and that in order to protect his increasing wealth, he did all that
was in his power to clear the sea of pirates.  Piracy was a
recognized {8} trade in those days, and when strange sailors landed
anywhere, the inhabitants would come down to the shore to meet them
with these words: "Strangers, who are ye?  Whence sail ye over the
wet ways?  On some trading enterprise or at adventure do ye rove,
even as sea-robbers over the brine?"[3]  Minos himself may have been
a great pirate who subdued all the others and made them subject to
him, but whether this were so or not, he was evidently not only a
great sea-king; legend and tradition speak of him as a great Cretan
lawgiver.  Every year he was supposed to retire for a space to the
Cave of Zeus, where the Father of Gods and Men gave him laws for his
land.  It is because of the great mark left by Minos on the Aegean
world, that the civilization developed there is so often called
Minoan, thus keeping alive for ever the name of its traditional
founder.

The Labyrinth in which the Minotaur was slain was built by Daedalus,
an Athenian.  He was a very skilful artificer, and legend says that
it was he who first thought of putting masts into ships and attaching
sails to them.  But he was jealous of the skill of his nephew and
killed him, and so was forced to flee from Athens, and he came to
Knossos where was the palace of Minos.  There he made the Labyrinth
with its mysterious thousand paths, and he is also said to have
"wrought in broad Knossos a dancing-ground for fair-haired
Ariadne."[4]

But Daedalus lost the favour of Minos, who imprisoned him with his
son Icarus.  The cunning of {9} the craftsman, however, did not
desert him, and Daedalus skilfully made wings for them both and
fastened them to their shoulders with wax, so that they flew away
from their prison out of reach of the King's wrath.  Icarus flew too
near the sun, and the wax melted, and he fell into the sea and was
drowned; but Daedalus, we are told, reached Sicily in safety.

The Athenians believed that Theseus and Minos had really existed, for
the ship in which, according to tradition, Theseus made his voyage
was preserved in Athens with great care until at least the beginning
of the third century B.C.  This ship went from Athens to Delos every
year with special sacrifices, and one of these voyages became
celebrated.  Socrates, the philosopher, had been condemned to death,
but the execution of the sentence was delayed for thirty days,
because this ship was away, and so great was the reverence in which
this voyage was held that no condemned man could be put to death
during its absence.[5]  It was held that such an act would bring
impurity on the city.



II.  THE PALACES OF CRETE

The first traces of history in Crete take us back to about 2500 B.C.
but it was not till about a thousand years later that Crete was at
the height of her prosperity and enjoying her Golden Age.  Life in
Crete at this time must have been happy.  The Cretans built their
cities without towers or fortifications; they were a mighty sea
power, but they lived more {10} for peace and work than for military
or naval adventures, and having attained the overlordship of the
Aegean, they devoted themselves to trade, industries and art.

The Cretans learnt a great deal from Egypt, but they never became
dependent upon her as did the Phoenicians, that other seafaring race
in the Mediterranean.  They dwelt secure in their island kingdom,
taking what they wanted from the civilization they saw in the Nile
Valley; but instead of copying this, they developed and transformed
it in accordance with their own spirit and independence.

The chief city in Crete was Knossos, and the great palace there is
almost like a town.  It is built round a large central court, out of
which open chambers, halls and corridors.  This court was evidently
the centre of the life of the palace.  The west wing was probably
devoted to business and it was here that strangers were received.  In
the audience chamber was found a simple and austere seat, yet one
which seizes upon the imagination, for it was said to be the seat of
Minos, and is the oldest known royal throne in the world.

In the east wing lived the artisans who were employed in decorating
and working on the building, for everything required in the palace
was made on the spot.  The walls of all the rooms were finished with
smooth plaster and then painted; originally that the paint might
serve as a protection, but later because the beauty-loving Cretans
liked their walls to be covered with what must have been a joy to
look at, and which reminded them at every turn of {11} the world of
nature in which they took such a keen delight.  The frescoes are now
faded, but traces of river-scenes and water, of reeds and rushes and
of waving grasses, of lilies and the crocus, of birds with brilliant
plumage, of flying fish and the foaming sea can still be
distinguished.

The furniture has all perished, but many household utensils have been
found which show that life was by no means primitive, and the palaces
were evidently built and lived in by people who understood comfort.
In some ways they are quite modern, especially in the excellent
drainage system they possessed.  These Cretan palaces were warmer and
more full of life than those in Assyria, and they were dwelt in by a
people who were young and vigorous and artistic, and who understood
the joy of the artist in creating beauty.

Near the palace was the so-called theatre.  The steps are so shallow
that they could not have made comfortable seats, and the space for
performances was too small to have been used for bull-fights, which
were the chief public entertainments.  The place was probably used
for dancing, and it may have been that very dancing ground wrought
for Ariadne.[6]



III. DRESS

The dress of the Cretan women was surprisingly modern.  The frescoes
on the walls, as well as small porcelain statuettes that have been
found, give us {12} a very clear idea of how the people dressed.  The
women had small waists and their dresses had short sleeves, with the
bodice laced in front, and wide flounced skirts often richly
embroidered.  Yellow, purple and blue seem to have been the favourite
colours.  They wore shoes with heels and sometimes sandals.  Their
hair was elaborately arranged in knots, side-curls and braids, and
their hats were amazingly modern.

The men were not modern-looking.  Their only garment was a short
kilt, which was often ornamented with designs in colours, and like
the women, they had an elaborate method of hair-dressing.  In general
appearance the men were bronzed, slender and agile-looking.

[Illustration: SNAKE GODDESS.  From Knossos.        ca. 2000 B.C.
               CUP-BEARER.     Fresco from Knossos, ca. 1500 B.C.
Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.]

Some of the frescoes are so lifelike that as they were brought to
light during the excavations, it almost seemed as if the spirits of
the long-dead Cretans were returning to the earth.  The workmen felt
the spell, and Sir Arthur Evans, who excavated Knossos, has described
the scene as the painting of a young Cretan was found:


    The colours were almost as brilliant as when laid down over three
    thousand years before.  For the first time the true portraiture
    of a man of this mysterious Mycenaean race rises before us.
    There was something very impressive in this vision of brilliant
    youth and of male beauty, recalled after so long an interval to
    our upper air from what had been till yesterday a forgotten
    world.  Even our untutored Cretan workmen felt the spell and
    fascination.

    They, indeed, regarded the discovery of such a painting {13} in
    the bosom of the earth as nothing less than marvellous, and saw
    in it the "ikon" of a saint!  The removal of the fresco required
    a delicate and laborious process of under-plastering, which
    necessitated its being watched at night, and one of the most
    trustworthy of our gang was told off for the purpose.  Somehow or
    other he fell asleep, but the wrathful saint appeared to him in a
    dream.  Waking with a start he was conscious of a mysterious
    presence; the animals round began to low and neigh, and there
    were visions about; in summing up his experiences the next
    morning, "The whole place spooks!" he said.[7]


Crete seems to have had more than the other earlier civilizations of
what today is called society.  The women were not secluded but mixed
freely at court and in all social functions, and life seems to have
been joyous and free from care.



IV.  RELIGION AND LITERATURE

(a) _Religion_

We know almost nothing of the Cretan religion.  There were no idols
or images for worship and no temples.  The people worshipped in their
houses, and every house seems to have had a room set apart for this
purpose with its shrine and altar; pillars were one of the
distinguishing marks of these shrines.  The chief goddess was the
Mother Earth, the Source of Life, a spirit who had a good and kindly
character.  Sometimes she was called the Lady of the Wild Creatures,
and bulls were sacrificed in her honour.  Scenes representing such
sacrifices are to be found {14} on engraved gems, and the horns of
the bull are frequently found set up on altars and shrines.  This
Earth Goddess was Goddess both of the Air and of the Underworld: when
she appears as the Goddess of the Air, she has doves as her symbol;
when she appears as the Goddess of the Underworld, she has snakes.

Another sacred symbol found in connection with shrines and altars is
the Axe and often a Double Axe.  This seems to have been looked upon
as a divine symbol representing power, for it is the axe which
transforms all kinds of material into useful articles and by means of
man's toil it supplies much of what man needs.  Ships could not be
built without an axe, and as it was the ship which gave Crete power
in the Aegean, the axe came to be looked upon as symbolizing this
spirit.

These early Aegean people did not feel the need of any temples.  When
they worshipped in what they thought was the dwelling place of the
gods, they chose lonely places, remote hill-tops or caverns or the
depths of a great forest.  They selected for this worship some place
that was apart from the daily human life and one that had never been
touched by the hand of man, for they felt that it was such places
that the god would choose for his dwelling.  From such spots
developed the idea of a temple; it was to be a building enclosed and
shut out from the world, just as the forest grove had been surrounded
by trees, a place apart from the life of man.

It was the custom in these early times for people to bring to the god
or goddess offerings of that which {15} was most valuable to them.
The best of the flock, the finest fruit, the largest fish, the most
beautiful vase, were all looked upon as suitable offerings.  But many
people could not afford to part with the best of the first-fruits of
their toil, and so it became the custom to have little images made of
the animal or other offering they wished to make, and these were
placed in the shrine.  Such images are called _votive offerings_, and
they are a source of rich material out of which the archaeologist has
been able to rebuild parts of ancient life.



(b) Writing and Literature

One reason why it has been so difficult to know much about the Cretan
religion is because the writing has not yet been deciphered.  Over
sixty different signs have been recognized, but no key has yet been
found by means of which the writing can be read.  In the palace at
Knossos a great library was found, consisting of about two thousand
clay tablets.  These had evidently been placed in wooden chests,
carefully sealed, but at the destruction of Knossos the fire
destroyed the chests, though it helped to preserve the clay records.
Some of these were over-charred and so became brittle and broke, but
there are still quantities awaiting decipherment.  The writing does
not look as if it represented literature, but more as if it were
devoted to lists and records.  It seems strange that people dwelling
in a land so rich in legend and story, and possessed of the art of
writing, should not have left a literature.  But in those days the
songs of minstrels preserved the {16} hero-tales in a form that was
then considered permanent, for the minstrel gathered his tales
together and handed them down to his successor by word of mouth in a
way that we, with our careless memories, deem marvellous.  This was
actually considered a safer way of preserving the tales and poems
than trusting them to the written form.  Be that as it may, however,
the writing that is there still awaits the finding of a key.  But in
spite of these difficulties, life in Crete can be partially
reconstructed, and so it will be possible for us to spend a day in
the palace of ancient Knossos.



V. A DAY IN CRETE

It is early dawn about the year 1500 B.C.  The great palace of
Knossos lies quiet and still, for the inhabitants have not yet begun
to stir.  When they are aroused, the noise will be like the bustle of
a town, for everything used in the palace is made there, from the
bronze weapons used by the King when he goes out hunting to the great
clay vessels in which not only wine and oil, but also other articles
of food are kept.  The palace is guarded by sentries, and the first
person to come out of it in the morning is an officer who goes the
rounds and receives the reports of the night's watch from each
sentry.  He then goes into the royal storerooms, where rows of large
vessels stand against the wall, and he inspects them to make sure
that no robbery has taken place and also that there are no leaks and
no wine or oil lost.

{17}

By this time the sun is up and the workmen are going to the palace
workshops, where some are at work on pottery, others are weaving, and
others working with metals.  Some of the potters are fashioning
beautiful vases, the younger workmen copying the well-known patterns,
the more experienced thinking of new forms, but all of them handing
over the finished vessel to the artist who paints beautiful designs
on them.  The weavers have been very busy of late, for today is the
birthday of the Princess, and great festivities are to be held in her
honour, and not only the Princess but the Queen and her maidens and
all the ladies of the court need new and dainty robes for the
functions of the day.  The goldsmiths also have been hard at work,
for the King has ordered exquisite jewellery as a gift for his
daughter.  All these workmen are now putting the finishing touches to
their work, and in a few hours they will take it to the officials who
will see that it is delivered to the royal apartments.

Soon all is bustling in the kitchens, for later in the day a great
banquet will be held.  Farmers from the country-side come with the
best of their flocks, with delicious fruits and honey; fishermen from
the shore have been out early and have caught fine fish.  Nearly
every one who comes has brought some special dainty as a particular
offering for the Princess, for she is much beloved in Knossos and in
all the country round about.

The morning is spent in preparation for the festivities of the
afternoon.  The Princess is arrayed by her maidens in her new and
beautiful robes; her hair {18} is elaborately arranged, a long and
tiresome process, but the time is enlivened by the merry talk of the
maidens who give to their young mistress all the gossip of the
palace.  At length she is ready, and she goes to the great audience
chamber, where the King her father presents to her the shining
ornaments he has had made for this day.  Then, sitting between her
parents, she receives the good wishes of the courtiers, all of whom
have brought her rich gifts.

This reception is followed by an exhibition of boxing and
bull-fighting, favourite amusements of the Cretan youths; but the
great excitement of the day is the wild boar hunt which follows.  All
the youths and younger men take part, and each hopes that he may
specially distinguish himself in order that on his return he may have
some trophy to present to the Princess, and that she will reward him
by giving him her hand in the dance that evening.

While the young men are all away at the hunt, the Princess sits with
her parents in the great hall or wanders with her maidens in the
gardens.  Great excitement prevails when the hunters return.  On
arriving, they hasten to the bath and anoint themselves with oil and
curl their long hair and make themselves ready for the dance.  When
all are ready they go out to that


    dancing place, which Daedalus had wrought in broad Knossos for
    Ariadne of the lovely tresses.  There were youths dancing and
    maidens of costly wooing, their hands on one another's wrists.
    Fine linen the maidens had on, and the youths well-woven doublets
    faintly {19} glistening with oil.  Fair wreaths had the maidens,
    and the youths daggers of gold hanging from silver baldrics.  And
    now they would run around with deft feet exceeding lightly, as
    when a potter sitting by his wheel maketh trial of it whether it
    run; and now anon they would run in lines to meet one another.
    And a great company stood around the lovely dance in joy; and
    among them a divine minstrel was making music on his lyre, and
    through the midst of them, as he began his strain, two tumblers
    whirled.[8]


The dance over, the feasting and banqueting begins.  The Queen and
the Princess with their maidens retire early to their own apartments,
but the merrymaking goes on in the hall, where tales of the day's
hunt are told, and old tales of other adventures are recalled by the
old men, until weariness overcomes them.  Then the Queen sends her
handmaids who "set out bedsteads beneath the gallery, and cast fair
purple blankets over them, and spread coverlets above, and thereon
lay thick mantles to be a clothing over all.  Then they go from the
hall with torch in hand."  So the youths and men lie down and go to
sleep, and after the excitements of the day "it seemed to them that
rest was wonderful."[9]



VI. THE DESTROYERS

After the glory of the Golden Age of Crete came destruction.  Some
tremendous disaster broke for ever the power of the Sea-Kings.  We do
not know {20} what happened, beyond the fact that Knossos was burned,
but from our knowledge of the life of the time and the methods of
warfare, we can make a picture of what probably took place.  There
may have been some terrible sea fight, in which the fleet was worsted
and driven back upon the shore.  Then the conquerors would march upon
the town and besiege it.  The inhabitants, knowing that all was at
stake, would defend it to the last with the most savage fury, cheered
on by the women, who knew that if the city was taken there would be
no hope for them.  Their husbands and sons would be slain, the city
utterly destroyed by fire and themselves taken captive.  This is what
happened at Knossos.  We know the fate of the city, but nothing of
the conquerors.  Egyptian records of this time say that "the isles
were restless, disturbed among themselves," but that is all we know.

The invaders, whoever they were, and from whereever they came, do not
seem to have been men of a highly civilized type, for they left
untouched many works of real art, and carried off only such articles
as could be turned into material wealth.  These were the things they
evidently valued, and the degree of civilization to which nations or
individuals have attained, can usually be measured by the comparative
values they put on things.

And so Knossos fell, and she tasted of "the woes that come on men
whose city is taken: the warriors are slain, and the city is wasted
of fire, and the children and women are led captive of strangers."[10]

{21}

The old Knossos was never rebuilt, though another city grew up in the
neighbourhood.  The site of the old palace became more and more
desolate, until at length the ruins were completely hidden under a
covering of earth, and the ancient power and glory of Crete became
only a tradition.  And so it remained for long centuries, until
archaeologists, discovering what lay beneath those dreary-looking
mounds, recalled for us that spring-time of the world.



[1] Iliad, XIV.

[2] Odyssey, XIX.

[3]Odyssey, III.

[4] Iliad, XVIII.

[5] See p. 374.

[6] Important excavations in other parts of Crete have been carried
on by Mr. and Mrs. Hawes.  (See Bibliography, p. 410).

[7] Sir Arthur Evans: in the _Monthly Review_, March, 1901.

[8] Iliad, XVIII.

[9] Odyssey, VII.

[10] Iliad, IX.




{22}

CHAPTER III

THE MAINLAND


I. TROY AND THE FIRST DISCOVERIES

An ancient tradition told the story of how Helen, the beautiful wife
of Menelaus King of Sparta, had been carried off by Paris, son of the
King of Troy, and of how the Greeks collected a mighty army under
Agamemnon, King of Argos and his brother Menelaus and sailed to Troy
to bring back the lost Helen.  For ten years they besieged Troy,
during which time they had many adventures and many hero-deeds were
performed.  Glorious Hector of the glancing helm was slain by
Achilles fleet of foot, and the gods and goddesses themselves came
down from high Olympus and took sides, some helping the Trojans and
some the Greeks.  At length Troy was taken and the Greek heroes
returned home, but their homeward journey was fraught with danger and
they experienced many hardships.  The wise Odysseus, especially, went
through many strange adventures before he reached Greece again.  All
these tales were put together by the Greek poet Homer, and may be
read in the Iliad and the Odyssey.

Until the beginning of the nineteenth century no {23} one had
seriously thought that there was any truth in these tales.  But in
1822 a boy was born in Germany who was to make the most extraordinary
discoveries about these lands of legend.

Henry Schliemann was the son of a German pastor who was well versed
in all these ancient legends, and as he grew up, he learned all about
Troy and the old Greek tales.  He lived in a romantic neighbourhood.
Behind his father's garden was a pool, from which every midnight a
maiden was said to rise, holding a silver bowl in her hand, and there
were similar tales connected with the neighbouring hills and forests.
But there was not much money to educate the young Schliemann, and
when he was fourteen years old he was taken as errand boy by a
country grocer.  This was not perhaps the occupation a
romantic-minded youth would have chosen, but there was no help for
it.  One evening, there came into the shop a man, who after sitting
down and asking for some refreshment, suddenly began to recite Greek
poetry.  The errand boy stopped his work to listen, and long
afterwards he described the effect this poetry had on him:


    That evening he recited to us about a hundred lines of the poet
    (Homer), observing the rhythmic cadence of the verses.  Although
    I did not understand a syllable, the melodious sound of the words
    made a deep impression upon me, and I wept bitter tears over my
    unhappy fate.  Three times over did I get him to repeat to me
    those divine verses, rewarding his trouble with three glasses of
    whiskey, which I bought with the few pence that made up my whole
    wealth.  From that moment I never {24} ceased to pray God that by
    His grace I might yet have the happiness of learning Greek.


A few years later, Schliemann was taken as errand boy in a business
house in Amsterdam, and he had to run on all kinds of errands and
carry letters to and from the post.  He says of this time:


    I never went on my errands, even in the rain, without having my
    book in hand and learning something by heart.  I never waited at
    the post-office without reading or repeating a passage in my mind.


Schliemann got on well and the time came when he was able to found a
business of his own.  Now at last he had time to learn Greek, and he
read everything written by or about the ancient Greeks on which he
could lay his hands.  And then came the time to which he had been
looking forward all his life.  He was able to free himself from his
business and to sail for the Greek lands.

Schliemann believed that the tales of Troy were founded on true
historic facts, but everybody laughed at this opinion, and he was
often ridiculed for holding it so firmly.  Now, however, he was to
prove himself victorious, for he went to the place where he believed
Troy had once stood and began to dig.  His expectations were more
than realized, for he found six cities, one of which was later
conclusively proved to be the Troy of Homer!  Homer had written about
what was really true, and though legends and myths had been woven
into his poem, the main events had really taken place, and a
civilization {25} which up to that time had, as it was thought, never
existed, suddenly came out into the record of history.



II. MYCENAE AND TIRYNS

All these discoveries sent a thrill of excitement through the world,
and of course at first many mistakes were made.  Because Troy was
found to have really existed, everything found there was immediately
connected with the Trojan heroes of the Iliad, and some things which
were obviously legendary were treated as facts.  Schliemann himself
was not entirely free from these first exaggerations, but encouraged
by what he had already discovered, he determined to find still more.

Now Pausanias, an ancient Greek traveller, had written a book about
his travels, and one of the places he had visited was Mycenae on the
mainland of Greece.  Here, he said, he had seen the tomb of
Agamemnon, who on his return from Troy had been murdered by his wife,
Clytemnestra, and hastily buried.  Up to the time of Schliemann no
one had seriously believed that there had ever been such a person as
Agamemnon, but the spirit of discovery was in the air, and what might
not still be found!  Schliemann determined that having proved that
Troy had once existed, he would find truth in still more legends, and
he went to Mycenae and began to excavate.  The early Greeks had not
the same beliefs about the future life that the Egyptians had, but
they did believe that death meant removing the dwelling-place on
earth to one beneath the {26} earth, and so the early Greek tomb was
built in much the same shape as the earthly house.  These Greeks did
not allow man to go naked and alone into the other world; they gave
to the departed to take with him all that was best and finest of his
earthly possessions.  They filled the tomb with everything that could
add to his comfort, and if he were a king or great chief, he would be
surrounded by things which would mark him out from other men and
point to his great position.  This being so, Schliemann thought that
a king's tomb would be easily recognized, and he opened what he
thought was probably the burial place of Agamemnon.  What he saw
swept him off his feet with excitement!  Before doing anything else
he sent a telegram to the King of Greece, which was speedily
published throughout the world.  The telegram said: "With great joy I
announce to Your Majesty that I have found the tomb of Agamemnon!"

The sensation created by this news was tremendous.  That it was
really the tomb of the wide-ruling King of Argos was perhaps
uncertain, but it was undoubtedly the tomb of a great lord who had
lived at the same time, and at his death had been buried in barbaric
magnificence.  Diadems, pendants, necklaces, ornaments of all kinds,
goblets, plates, vases, all of pure gold were piled high in confusion
in the tomb, and close by were other tombs also filled with untold
treasure.  In one grave alone Schliemann counted 870 objects made of
the purest gold.  This was only the beginning of excavations at
Mycenae.  Later on, a great palace was uncovered, and other {27} work
at Tiryns, nearer the sea, showed that another palace had existed
there.

These buildings were very unlike the palace at Knossos; the latter
had no fortifications, but these were strongly fortified.  They had
great walls, so mighty that in ancient times the Greeks thought the
walls of Tiryns had been built by demons, and Pausanias considered
them even more wonderful than the Pyramids.  The fortress palace of
Mycenae was entered by the gate of the Lionesses, which was reached
by a rather narrow road, along which only seven men could march
abreast.  This seems a rather mean approach to so splendid a palace,
but such narrow approaches were necessary in those war-like times,
for they made it more difficult for an enemy to approach the gates.

Mycenae and Tiryns are the best known today of the ancient
fortress-palaces on the mainland of Greece, but at the time when they
were built there were many others.  The great lords frequently chose
the hill-tops for their dwellings, for the sake of better security
and for the protection they could then in their turn afford the
surrounding country people in times of danger.  Most of these
fortress-palaces were in the neighbourhood of the coast, for no true
Greek was ever quite happy unless he were within easy reach and sight
of the sea.



III. LIFE IN THE HOMERIC AGE

The Homeric Age was the age of the great hero-kings and chiefs.  Most
of these were supposed to {28} be descended from the gods, and they
shine through the mists of the early days in Greece as splendid,
gorgeous figures.  Heaven was nearer to the earth in those days, and
the gods came down from Olympus and mixed familiarly with man.  Life
was very different in this heroic age from the life of historic
Greece, and it is evident from the excavations and discoveries that
have been made, that it was a civilization with distinct
characteristics of its own which preceded what is known as the Greece
of history.  It was an age when the strong man ruled by the might of
his own strong arm, and piracy was quite common.  Manners and customs
were very primitive and simple, yet they were combined with great
material splendour.  Women held a high position in this society and
they wore most gorgeous clothes.  A Mycenaean lady, arrayed in her
best, would wear a dress of soft wool exquisitely dyed or of soft
shining linen, and she would glitter with golden ornaments: a diadem
of gold on her head, gold pins in her hair, gold bands round her
throat, gold bracelets on her arms, and her hands covered with rings.
Schliemann says that the women he found in one of the tombs he opened
were "literally laden with jewellery."

The fortress-palaces were the chief houses and the huts of the
dependents of the king or chief would be crowded round them, but
these huts have, of course, disappeared.  The palaces themselves were
strongly built, with courtyards and chambers opening from them.
"There is building beyond building, and the court of the house is
cunningly wrought with a wall {29} and battlements, and well-fenced
are the folding doors; no man may hold it in disdain."[1]
Excavations have proved that the Homeric palaces did indeed exist:
and well fortified though they were, their gardens and vineyards and
fountains must have made of them very pleasant dwelling-places.


    There was a gleam as it were of sun or moon through the
    high-roofed hall of great-hearted Alcinous.  Brazen were the
    walls which ran this way and that from the threshold to the
    inmost chamber, and round them was a frieze of blue, and golden
    were the doors that closed in the good house.  Silver were the
    door-posts that were set on the brazen threshold, and silver the
    lintel thereupon, and the hook of the door was of gold.  And on
    either side stood golden hounds and silver, which Hephaestus had
    wrought by his cunning, to guard the palace of great-hearted
    Alcinous, being free from death and age all their days.  And
    within were seats arrayed against the wall this way and that,
    from the threshold even to the inmost chamber, and thereon were
    spread light coverings finely woven, the handiwork of women.
    There the chieftains were wont to sit eating and drinking for
    they had continual store.  Yea, and there were youths fashioned
    in gold, standing on firm-set bases, with flaming torches in
    their hands, giving light through the night to the feasters in
    the palace.  And he had fifty handmaids in the house, and some
    grind the yellow grain on the mill-stone, and others weave webs
    and turn the yarn as they sit, restless as the leaves of the tall
    poplar tree: and the soft olive oil drops off that linen, so
    closely is it woven.  And without the courtyard hard by the door
    is a great garden, and a hedge runs round on either {30} side.
    And there grow tall trees blossoming, pear-trees and
    pomegranates, and apple-trees with bright fruit, and sweet figs,
    and olives in their bloom.  The fruit of these trees never
    perisheth, neither faileth, winter nor summer, enduring through
    all the year.  Evermore the West Wind blowing brings some fruits
    to birth and ripens others.  Pear upon pear waxes old, and apple
    on apple, yea and cluster ripens upon cluster of the grape, and
    fig upon fig.  There too hath he a fruitful vineyard planted,
    whereof the one part is being daily dried by the heat, a sunny
    spot on level ground, while other grapes men are gathering, and
    yet others they are treading in the wine-press.  In the foremost
    row are unripe grapes that cast the blossom, and others there be
    that are growing black to vintaging.  There too, skirting the
    furthest line, are all manner of garden beds, planted trimly,
    that are perpetually fresh, and therein are two fountains of
    water, whereof one scatters his streams all about the garden, and
    the other runs over against it beneath the threshold of the
    courtyard and issues by the lofty house, and thence did the
    townsfolk draw water.  These were the splendid gifts of the gods
    in the palace of Alcinous.[2]


A blue frieze just like the one described above has been found both
at Mycenae and Tiryns.

The furniture in these houses was very splendid.  We read of
well-wrought chairs, of goodly carven chairs and of chairs inlaid
with ivory and silver; of inlaid seats and polished tables; of
jointed bedsteads and of a fair bedstead with inlaid work of gold and
silver and ivory; of close-fitted, folding doors and of doors with
silver handles; and of rugs of soft wool.  Rich and varied were the
ornaments and vessels {31} used: goodly golden ewers and silver
basins, two-handled cups, silver baskets and tripods, mixing bowls of
flowered work all of silver and one that was beautifully wrought all
of silver and the lips thereof finished with gold.  The most famous
cup of all was that of the clear-voiced orator Nestor; this had four
handles on which were golden doves feeding and it stood two feet from
the ground.  Very skilful was all the work done in metal at this
time, and the warriors went out arrayed in flashing bronze, bearing
staves studded with golden nails, bronze-headed spears and
silver-studded swords, their greaves were fastened with silver
clasps, they wore bronze-bound helmets, glittering girdles and belts
with golden buckles.  Only a god could have fashioned a wondrous
shield such as Achilles bore, on which were depicted scenes from the
life of the time (the description of it can be read in the Iliad),
but the tombs at Mycenae and elsewhere have yielded weapons and
treasures very similar to those used by the heroes in Homer.



IV. THE GREEK MIGRATIONS

It was more than a thousand years after the Pyramids had been built
that Crete reached her Golden Age.  When Knossos was destroyed, the
centres of civilization on the mainland, such as Mycenae and Tiryns,
became of greater importance, and life was lived as Homer has
described it.  All this was the Greece of the Heroic Age, the Greece
to which the Greeks of the later historical times {32} looked back as
to something that lay far behind them.

Nearly two thousand years ago the site of Mycenae was just as it had
remained until the excavations of Schliemann, and in the second
century A.D. a Greek poet sang of Mycenae:

  The cities of the hero-age thine eyes may seek in vain,
  Save where some wrecks of ruin still break the level plain.
  So once I saw Mycenae, the ill-starred, a barren height
  Too bleak for goats to pasture--the goat-herds point the site.
  And as I passed a greybeard said: "Here used to stand of old
  A city built by giants and passing rich in gold."[3]


Even to the Greeks of historical times there was a great gap between
the return of the heroes from Troy and the beginnings of their own
historic Greece.  That gap has not yet been entirely filled up; it is
even now a more shadowy and misty period to us than the Age of the
Heroes, but it was during these mysterious centuries that there were
wanderings among the peoples, that restlessness and disturbance
spoken of by the Egyptians.  It was a dark period in the history of
Greece.  Wandering tribes, tall and fair men, came from out the
forests of the north, over the mountains and through the passes into
Greece.  Others came from the East.  Some again came by sea, driven
out from their island homes by invaders.  There was fighting and
slaying and {33} taking of prisoners.  The old civilization was
broken down, but slowly something new arose in its place.  There were
enemies on all sides, but gradually those who were left of the
conquered made terms with the conquerors; they abandoned their old
language and adopted that of the newcomers, and they dwelt together,
and were known as Greeks.  The older civilizations had done their
work and had perished.  The time had come for the mind of man to make
greater advances than he had ever before dreamed of, and in the land
of Greece this period begins with the coming of the Greeks.



[1] Odyssey, XVII.

[2] Odyssey, VII.

[3] Alpheus, translated by Sir Rennell Rodd in _Love, Worship and
Death_.




{37}

THE GREEKS


CHAPTER I

THE LAND OF GREECE

The land to which people belong always helps to form their character
and to influence their history, and the land of Greece, its mountains
and plains, its sea and sky, was of great importance in making the
Greeks what they were.  The map shows us three parts of Greece:
Northern Greece, a rugged mountainous land; then Central Greece with
a fertile plain running down to more mountains; and then, across a
narrow sea, the peninsula known as the Peloponnesus.  One striking
feature of the whole country is the nearness of every part of it to
the sea.  The coast is deeply indented with gulfs and bays, and the
neighbouring sea is dotted with islands.  It is a land of sea and
mountains.

The soil is not rich.  About one-third of the country is mountainous
and unproductive and consists of rock.  Forests are found in the
lower lands, but they are not like our forests; the trees are smaller
and the sun penetrates even the thickest places.  The trees most
often found are the laurel, the oleander and the myrtle.  The forests
were thicker in ancient times; {38} they are much thinner now owing
to the carelessness of peasants who, without thinking of the
consequences, have wastefully cut down the trees.

The land used by the Greeks for pasture was that which was not rich
enough for cultivation.  Goats and sheep and pigs roamed over this
land, and the bees made honey there.  In ancient times there was no
sugar and honey was a necessary article of food.

The cultivated land lay in the plains.  The mountains of Greece do
not form long valleys, but they enclose plains, and it was here that
the Greeks cultivated their corn and wine and oil, and that their
cities grew up separated from each other by the mountains.  Corn,
wine and oil were absolutely necessary for life in the Mediterranean
world.  Every Greek city tried to produce enough corn, chiefly wheat
and barley, for its inhabitants, for the difficulties and sometimes
dangers were great when a city was not self-sufficing.  Wine, too,
was necessary, for the Greeks, though they were a temperate nation,
could not do without it.  Oil was even more important, for it was
used for cleansing purposes, for food and for lighting.  Even to-day
the Greeks use but little butter, and where we eat bread and butter,
they use bread and olives or bread and goat's cheese.  The olive is
cultivated all over Greece, but especially in Attica, where it was
regarded as the gift of Athena herself.  It was looking across the
sea to Attica that--

  In Salamis, filled with the foaming
    Of billows and murmur of bees,
{39}

  Old Telamon stayed from his roaming,
    Long ago, on a throne of the seas;
  Looking out on the hills olive-laden,
    Enchanted, where first from the earth
  The grey-gleaming fruit of the Maiden
    Athena had birth.[1]


The olive is not a large tree and its chief beauty is in the shimmer
of the leaves which glisten a silvery-grey in the sunshine.  Olive
trees take a long time to mature.  They do not yield a full crop for
sixteen years or more, and they are nearly fifty years old before
they reach their fullest maturity.  It is no wonder that the olive is
a symbol of peace.

Herodotus, the earliest of the Greek historians, wrote that "it was
the lot of Hellas to have its seasons far more fairly tempered than
other lands."  The Mediterranean is a borderland, midway between the
tropics and the colder North.  In summer the cool winds from the
North blow upon Greece making the climate pleasant, but in winter
they blow from every quarter, and according to the poet Hesiod were
"a great trouble to mortals."  Greek life was a summer life, and the
ancient Greeks lived almost entirely out-of-doors: sailing over the
sea, attending to all their affairs in the open air, from the
shepherd watching his flock on the mountain side to the philosopher
discussing politics in the market place.  But the Greeks were a hardy
race, and though the winter life must have been chilly and
uncomfortable, life went on just the same, until the {40} warm spring
sunshine made them forget the winter cold.

What kind of people were made by these surroundings and what was
their spirit?

The hardy mountain life developed a free and independent spirit, and
as the mountains cut off the dwellers in the different plains from
each other, separate city-states were formed, each with its own laws
and government.  This separation of communities was a source of
weakness to the country as a whole, but it developed the spirit of
freedom and independence in the city dweller as well as in the
mountaineer.  As all parts of Greece were within easy reach of the
sea, the Greeks naturally became sailors.  They loved the sea and
were at home upon it, and this sea-faring life developed the same
spirit of freedom and independence.

The mild climate relieved the Greeks of many cares which come to
those who live in harsher lands, but the atmosphere was clear and
bracing, which stimulated clear thinking.  The Greeks were the first
great thinkers in the world; they were possessed of a passion for
knowing the truth about all things in heaven and earth, and few
people have sought truth with greater courage and clearness of mind
than the Greeks.

The poor soil of their land made it necessary for them to work hard
and to form habits of thrift and economy.  It was not a soil that
made them rich and so they developed a spirit of self-control and
moderation, and learned how to combine simple living with high
thinking to a greater degree than {41} any other nation has ever
done.  But if their soil was poor, they had all round them the
exquisite beauty of the mountains, sea and sky, surroundings from
which they learned to love beauty in a way that has never been
excelled, if, indeed, it has ever been equalled.

The spirit of a nation expresses itself and its history is recorded
in various ways: in the social relations of the people both with each
other and with other nations, and this is called its political
history; in its language which expresses itself in its literature;
and in its building, which is its architecture.  The Greek people
were lovers of freedom, truth, self-control and beauty.  It is in
their political history, their literature and their architecture that
we shall see some of the outward and visible signs of the spirit that
inspired them, and the land of Greece is the setting in which they
played their part in the history of civilization.



[1] Euripides: _The Trojan Women_, translated by Gilbert Murray.




{42}

CHAPTER II

GREEK RELIGION AND THE ORACLES

The city-dwellers in Greece lived in the plains separated from their
neighbours by mountains, and this caused the development of a large
number of separate communities, quite independent of each other, each
having its own laws and government, but there were three things which
all Greeks had in common wherever they lived: they spoke the same
language, they believed in the same gods, and they celebrated
together as Greeks their great national games.

The Greeks called themselves Hellenes and their land Hellas.  Like
the Hebrews and the Babylonians, they believed that there had been a
time when men had grown so wicked that the gods determined to destroy
the old race of man and to create a new one.  A terrible flood
overwhelmed the earth, until nothing of it was left visible but the
top of Mount Parnassus, and here, the old legend tells us, a refuge
was found by two people, Deucalion and his wife Pyrrha, who alone had
been saved on account of their righteous lives.  Slowly the waters
abated, until the earth was once more dry and habitable, but
Deucalion and Pyrrha were alone and did not {43} know what they
should do.  So they prayed to the gods and received as an answer to
their prayer the strange command: "Depart, and cast behind you the
bones of your mother."  At first they could not understand what was
meant, but at length Deucalion thought of an explanation.  He said to
Pyrrha: "The earth is the great mother of all; the stones are her
bones, and perhaps it is these we must cast behind us."  So they took
up the stones that were lying about and cast them behind them, and as
they did so a strange thing happened!  The stones thrown by Deucalion
became men, and those thrown by Pyrrha became women, and this race of
men peopled the land of Greece anew.  The son of Deucalion and Pyrrha
was called Hellen, and as the Greeks looked upon him as the legendary
founder of their race, they called themselves and their land by his
name.

These earliest Greeks had very strange ideas as to the shape of the
world.  They thought it was flat and circular, and that Greece lay in
the very middle of it, with Mount Olympus, or as some maintained,
Delphi, as the central point of the whole world.  This world was
believed to be cut in two by the Sea and to be entirely surrounded by
the River Ocean, from which the Sea and all the rivers and lakes on
the earth received their waters.

In the north of this world, were supposed to live the Hyperboreans.
They were the people who lived beyond the North winds, whose home was
in the caverns in the mountains to the North of Greece.  The
Hyperboreans were a happy race of beings who {44} knew neither
disease nor old age, and who, living in a land of everlasting spring,
were free from all toil and labour.

Far away in the south, on the banks of the River Ocean, lived another
happy people, the Aethiopians.  They were so happy and led such
blissful lives, that the gods used sometimes to leave their home in
Olympus and go and join the Aethiopians in their feasts and banquets.

On the western edge of the earth and close to the River Ocean were
the Elysian Fields, sometimes called the Fortunate Fields and the
Isles of the Blessed.  It was to this blissful place that mortals who
were specially loved by the gods were transported without first
tasting of death, and there they lived forever, set free from all the
sorrows and sufferings of earth, it was a land--

  Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
  Nor ever wind blows loudly; but it lies
    Deep-meadow'd, happy----.


The Sun and the Moon and the Rosy-fingered Dawn were thought of as
gods who rose out of the River Ocean and drove in their chariots
through the air, giving light to both gods and men.

What kind of religion did the Greeks have?  Now _religion_ may be
explained in many different ways, and there have been many different
religions in the world, but there has never been a nation that has
had no religion.  From the earliest times men have realized that
there were things in the world that {45} they could not understand,
and these mysteries showed them that there must be some Being greater
than man who had himself been created; and it is by what is called
religion that men have sought to come into relationship with this
Being greater than themselves.

The Egyptians in their religious beliefs had been very much occupied
with the idea of the life after death, but at first the Greeks
thought of this very little.  They believed that proper burial was
necessary for the future happiness of the soul, and want of this was
looked upon as a very serious disaster, but beyond the insisting on
due and fitting burial ceremonies their thoughts were not much
occupied with the future.  The reason of this was probably because
the Greeks found this life so delightful.  They were filled with the
joy of being alive and were keenly interested in everything
concerning life; they felt at home in the world.  The gods in whom
the Greeks believed were not supposed to have created the world, but
they were themselves part of it, and every phase of this life that
was so full of interest and adventure was represented by the
personality of a god.  First, it was the outside life, nature with
all its mysteries, and then all the outward activities of man.
Later, men found other things difficult to explain, the passions
within them, love and hatred, gentleness and anger, and gradually
they gave personalities to all these emotions and thought of each as
inspired by a god.  These gods were thought of as very near to man;
men and women in the Heroic Age had claimed descent from them, and
they were supposed to come {46} down to earth and to hold frequent
converse with man.  The Greeks trusted their gods and looked to them
for protection and assistance in all their affairs, but these gods
were too human and not holy enough to be a real inspiration or to
influence very much the conduct of those who believed in them.

The chief gods dwelt on Mount Olympus in Thessaly and were called the
Olympians; others had dwellings on the earth, in the water, or in the
underworld.  Heaven, the water and the underworld were each under the
particular sovereignty of a great overlord amongst the gods.


    Three brethren are we [said Poseidon], Zeus and myself and Hades
    is the third, the ruler of the folk in the underworld.  And in
    three lots are all things divided, and each drew a domain of his
    own, and to me fell the hoary sea, to be my habitation for ever,
    when we shook the lots; and Hades drew the murky darkness, and
    Zeus the wide heaven, in clear air and clouds, but the earth and
    high Olympus are common to all.[1]


Zeus was the greatest of the gods.  He was the Father of gods and
men, the lord of the lightning and of the storm-cloud, whose joy was
in the thunder.  But he was also the lord of counsel and ruler of
heaven and earth, and he was in particular the protector of all who
were in any kind of need or distress, and he was the guardian of the
home.  The court of every house had an altar to Zeus, the Protector
of the Hearth.  A great statue of Zeus stood in the temple at
Olympia.  It was the work of Pheidias {47} and was considered one of
the Seven Wonders of the ancient world.[2]  This statue was destroyed
more than a thousand years ago by an earthquake, but a visitor to
Olympia in ancient times tells us how perfectly it expressed the
character of the god:


    His power and kingship are displayed by the strength and majesty
    of the whole image, his fatherly care for men by the mildness and
    lovingkindness in the face; the solemn austerity of the work
    marks the god of the city and the law--he seems like to one
    giving and bestowing blessings.[3]


Hera was the wife of Zeus.  She was "golden-throned Hera, an immortal
queen, the bride of loud-thundering Zeus, the lady renowned, whom all
the Blessed throughout high Olympus honour and revere no less than
Zeus whose delight is the thunder."[4]

Poseidon went to Olympus when he was summoned by Zeus, but he was the
God of the Sea, and he preferred its depths as his home.  His symbol
was the trident, and he was often represented as driving over the
waves in a chariot drawn by foaming white horses.  All sailors looked
to him for protection and they sang to him: "Hail, Prince, thou
Girdler of the Earth, thou dark-haired God, and with kindly heart, O
blessed one, do thou befriend the mariners."[5]

Athena, the grey-eyed Goddess, was the Guardian of Athens, and she
stood to all the Greeks, but especially to the Athenians, as the
symbol of three {48} things: she was the Warrior Goddess, "the
saviour of cities who with Ares takes keep of the works of war, and
of falling cities and the battle din."[6]  She it was who led their
armies out to war and brought them home victorious.  She was Athena
Polias, the Guardian of the city and the home, to whom was committed
the planting and care of the olive trees and who had taught women the
art of weaving and given them wisdom in all fair handiwork; she was
the wise goddess, rich in counsel, who inspired the Athenians with
good statesmanship and showed them how to rule well and justly; and
she was Athena Parthenos, the Queen whose victories were won, and who
was the symbol of all that was true and beautiful and good.

Apollo, the Far Darter, the Lord of the silver bow, was the god who
inspired all poetry and music.  He went about playing upon his lyre,
clad in divine garments; and at his touch the lyre gave forth sweet,
music.  To him


    everywhere have fallen all the ranges of song, both on the
    mainland and among the isles: to him all the cliffs are dear, and
    the steep mountain crests and rivers running onward to the salt
    sea, and beaches sloping to the foam, and havens of the deep.


When Apollo the Far Darter "fares through the hall of Zeus, the Gods
tremble, yea, rise up all from their thrones as he draws near with
his shining bended bow."[7]  Apollo was also worshipped as Phoebus
the {49} Sun, the God of Light, and like the sun, he was supposed to
purify and illumine all things.

Following Apollo as their lord were the Muses, nine daughters of
Zeus, who dwelt on Mount Parnassus.  We are told that their hearts
were set on song and that their souls knew no sorrow.  It was the
Muses and Apollo who gave to man the gift of song, and he whom they
loved was held to be blessed.  "It is from the Muses and far-darting
Apollo that minstrels and harpers are upon the earth.  Fortunate is
he whomsoever the Muses love, and sweet flows his voice from his
lips."[8]  The Muse who inspired man with the imagination to
understand history aright was called Clio.

The huntress Artemis, the sister of Apollo, was goddess of the moon
as her brother was god of the sun.  She loved life in the open air
and roamed over the hills and in the valleys, through the forests and
by the streams.  She was the


    Goddess of the loud chase, a maiden revered, the slayer of stags,
    the archer, very sister of Apollo of the golden blade.  She
    through the shadowy hills and the windy headlands rejoicing in
    the chase draws her golden bow, sending forth shafts of sorrow.
    Then tremble the crests of the lofty mountains, and terribly the
    dark woodland rings with din of beasts, and the earth shudders,
    and the teeming sea.[9]


Hermes is best known to us as the messenger of the gods.  When he
started out to do their bidding,


    {50} beneath his feet he bound on his fair sandals, golden,
    divine, that bare him over the waters of the sea and over the
    boundless land with the breathings of the wind.  And he took up
    his wand, wherewith he entranceth the eyes of such men as he
    will, while others again he awaketh out of sleep.[10]


Hermes was the protector of travellers, and he was the god who took
special delight in the life of the market place.  But there was
another side to his character, he was skilful in all matters of
cunning and trickery, and legend delighted in telling of his
exploits.  He began early.  "Born in the dawn," we are told, "by
midday well he harped and in the evening stole the cattle of Apollo
the Far Darter."[11]

Hephaestus was the God of Fire, the divine metal-worker.  He was said
to have first discovered the art of working iron, brass, silver and
gold and all other metals that require forging by fire.  His workshop
was on Mount Olympus and here he used to do all kinds of work for the
gods.  Perhaps his most famous piece was the divine armour and above
all the shield he made for Achilles.  Some great quarrel in which he
was concerned arose in Olympus, and Zeus, in rage, threw him out of
heaven.  All day he fell until, as the sun was setting, he dropped
upon the isle of Lemnos.

Athena and Hephaestus were always regarded as benefactors to mankind,
for they taught man many useful arts.

[Illustration: THE BIRTH OF APHRODITE.  Early 5th Century B.C.  Museo
delle Terme, Rome.]

{51}


    Sing, Muse, of Hephaestus renowned in craft, who with grey-eyed
    Athena taught goodly works to men on earth, even to men who
    before were wont to dwell in mountain caves like beasts; but now,
    being instructed in craft by the renowned craftsman Hephaestus,
    lightly the whole year through they dwell, happily in their own
    homes.[12]


Hestia, the Goddess of the Hearth, played an important part in the
life of the Greeks.  Her altar stood in every house and in every
public building, and no act of any importance was ever performed,
until an offering of wine had been poured on her altar.

Laughter-loving, golden Aphrodite was the Goddess of Love and Beauty.
She rose from the sea born in the soft white foam.  "She gives sweet
gifts to mortals and ever on her lovely face is a winsome smile."[13]

To the ancient Greeks the woods and streams, the hills and rocky
crags of their beautiful land were dwelt in by gods and nymphs and
spirits of the wild.  Chief of such spirits was Pan,


    the goat-footed, the two-horned, the lover of the din of the
    revel, who haunts the wooded dells with dancing nymphs that tread
    the crests of the steep cliffs, calling upon Pan.  Lord is he of
    every snowy crest and mountain peak and rocky path.  Hither and
    thither he goes, through the thick copses, sometimes being drawn
    to the still waters, and sometimes faring through the lofty crags
    {52} he climbs the highest peaks whence the flocks are seen
    below; ever he ranges over the high white hills and at evening
    returns piping from the chase breathing sweet strains on the
    reeds.[14]


These were the chief gods in whom the Greeks believed.  How did they
worship them?  The centre of their worship was the altar, but the
altars were not in the temples, but outside.  They were also found in
houses and in the chief public buildings of the city.  The temple was
looked upon as the home of the god, and the temple enclosure was a
very sacred place.  A man accused of a crime could flee there and
take refuge, and once within the temple, he was safe.  It was looked
upon as a very dreadful thing to remove him by force, for it was
believed that to do so would bring down the wrath of the god upon
those who had violated the right of sanctuary.

In the houses the altars were those sacred to Hestia, to Apollo and
to Zeus.  The altar of Hestia stood in the chief room of the house, a
libation was poured out to her before meals, and special sacrifices
were offered on special occasions; always before setting out on a
journey and on the return from it, and at the time of a birth or of a
death in the house.  The altar of Apollo stood just outside the door.
Special prayers and sacrifices were offered at this altar in times of
trouble, but Apollo was not forgotten in the time of joy: those who
had travelled far from home stopped to worship on their return; when
good news came to the house sweet-smelling {53} herbs were burnt on
his altar, and a bride took sacred fire from it to offer to Apollo in
her new home.

The Greeks had no stated day every week sacred to the gods, but
during the year different days were looked upon as belonging
specially to particular gods.  Some of these days were greater than
others and were honoured by public holidays.  Others caused no
interruption in the every-day life.

Priests were attached to the temples, but sacrifices on the altars in
the city or in the home were presented by the king or chief
magistrate and by the head of the household.  The Greeks did not
kneel when they prayed, but stood with bared heads.  Their prayers
were chiefly for help in their undertakings.  They prayed before
everything they did: before athletic contests, before performances in
the theatre, before the opening of the assembly.  The sailor prayed
before setting out to sea, the farmer before he ploughed and the
whole nation before going forth to war.  Pericles, the great Athenian
statesman, never spoke in public without a prayer that he might
"utter no unfitting word."

As time went on, the gods of Olympus seemed less near to mortal men,
and they gradually became less personalities than symbols of virtues,
and as such they influenced the conduct of men more than they had
done before.  Athena, for example, became for all Greeks the symbol
of self-control, of steadfast courage and of dignified restraint;
Apollo of purity; and Zeus of wise counsels and righteous judgments.

A particular form of worship specially practised by the Athenians was
that known as the Sacred {54} Mysteries, which were celebrated every
autumn and lasted nine days.  This worship centred round Demeter and
was celebrated in her temple at Eleusis near Athens.  Demeter was the
Corn-Goddess and it was the story of her daughter Persephone who was
carried off by Hades, lord of the realm of the dead, that was
commemorated in the Sacred Mysteries.


    Her daughter was playing and gathering flowers, roses and
    crocuses and fair violets in the soft meadow, and lilies and
    hyacinths, and the narcissus.  Wondrously bloomed the flower, a
    marvel for all to see, whether deathless gods or deathly men.
    From its root grew forth a hundred blossoms, and with its
    fragrant odour the wide heaven above and the whole earth laughed,
    and the salt wave of the sea.  Then the maiden marvelled and
    stretched forth both her hands to seize the fair plaything, but
    the wide earth gaped, and up rushed the Prince, the host of many
    guests, the son of Cronos, with his immortal horses.  Against her
    will he seized her and drove her off weeping and right sore
    against her will, in his golden chariot, but she cried aloud,
    calling on the highest of gods and the best ... and the mountain
    peaks and the depths of the sea rang to her immortal voice.[15]


Demeter heard the cry, but could not save her daughter, and she went
up and down the world seeking her.  She reached Attica and was kindly
treated, though the people did not at first know she was a goddess.
When she had revealed herself to them, she commanded them to build
her a temple {55} at Eleusis.  But still her daughter did not return
to her, and the gods of Olympus took no heed of her lamenting.  Then
she put forth her power as Goddess of the Corn, and she caused it to
stop growing over all the earth.  A fearful famine followed, and Zeus
tried to persuade her to relent.  But she declared that "she would no
more forever enter on fragrant Olympus, and no more allow the earth
to bear her fruit until her eyes should behold her fair-faced
daughter."[16]

At last Zeus consented to interfere and sent Hermes to bring
Persephone back to the earth.  When Persephone saw the messenger,
"joyously and swiftly she arose and she climbed up into the golden
chariot and drove forth from the halls; nor sea, nor rivers, nor
grassy glades, nor cliffs could stay the rush of the deathless
horses,"[17] until they reached the temple where dwelt Demeter, who
when she beheld them rushed forth to greet her daughter.  But before
leaving Hades, the God had given Persephone a sweet pomegranate seed
to eat, a charm to prevent her wishing to dwell forever with Demeter,
and it was then arranged that Persephone should dwell with Hades, the
lord of the realm of the dead, for one-third of the year, and for the
other two-thirds with her mother and the gods of Olympus.

This was the story round which centred the worship of the Sacred
Mysteries at Eleusis.  There came a time when the worship of the gods
of Olympus did not satisfy the longings of the Greeks for some
assurance that the soul was immortal and that there {56} was a life
after the death of the body.  Demeter grew to be a symbol to the
Greeks of the power of the gods to heal and save and to grant
immortality.  Her story became an allegory of the disappearance of
the corn and fruit and flowers in the winter and of their return in
the spring, bringing with them gifts to men of hope and life.  At the
festival of Eleusis, a kind of mystery play on the whole legend was
acted.  All those who attended the festival were required to prepare
for it by a certain ritual of fasting and sacrifice, and it was
believed that in the life after death all would be well with those
who had taken part in the festival with pure hearts and pure hands.

The greatest religious influence in Greece was probably that of the
Oracle.  This was the belief that at certain shrines specially sacred
to certain gods, the worshipper could receive answers to questions
put to the god.  In very early times signs seen in the world of
nature were held to have special meanings: the rustling of leaves in
the oak-tree, the flight of birds, thunder and lightning, eclipses of
both the sun and moon or earthquakes.  It is easy to understand how
this belief arose.  A man, perplexed and troubled by some important
decision he had to make, would leave the city with its bustle and
noise, and go out into the country where he could think out his
difficulty alone and undisturbed.  Perhaps he would sit under a tree,
and as he sat and thought, the rustling of the leaves in the breeze
would soothe his troubled mind and slowly his duty would become clear
to him, and it would seem to {57} him that his questions were
answered.  Looking up to the sky he would give thanks to Zeus for
thus inspiring him with understanding.  On his return home he would
speak of how he had heard the voice of Zeus speaking to him in the
rustling of the leaves, and so the place would gradually become
associated with Zeus, and others would go there and seek answers to
their difficulties, hoping to meet with the same experience, until at
last the spot would become sacred and a shrine would be built there,
and it would at length become known from far and near as an Oracle.
Plato said of these beginnings of the oracles that "for the men of
that time, since they were not so wise as ye are nowadays, it was
enough in their simplicity to listen to oak or rock, if only these
told them true."  Other places would in the same way become
associated with other gods, until seeking answers at Oracles became a
well-established custom in Greece.

The great oracles of Zeus were at Olympia, where the answers were
given from signs observed in the sacrifices offered, and at Dodona,
where they were given from the sound of the rustling of the leaves in
the sacred oak-tree.  But the greatest oracle in all Greece was that
of Apollo at Delphi.  It was at Delphi that Apollo had fought with
and slain the Python, and it was thought that he specially delighted
to dwell there, and had himself chosen it as the place where he would
make known his will.


    Here methinketh to stablish a right fair temple, to be a place of
    oracle to men, both they that dwell in rich {58} Peloponnesus and
    they of the mainland and sea-girt isles, seeking here the word of
    wisdom; to them all shall I speak the decree unerring, rendering
    oracles within my wealthy shrine.[18]


Delphi had been sacred to Apollo ever since these legendary days, and
a great shrine and temple was built there in his honour.

When a Greek came to consult Apollo, he had first to offer certain
sacrifices, and he always brought with him the richest gifts he could
afford which were placed in the treasury of the god.  Then he entered
the temple and placed his request in the hands of a priest, who took
it into the innermost sanctuary and gave it to the prophetess, whose
duty it was to present the petition to the god himself and receive
the answer.  In ancient times it was believed that a mysterious
vapour arose in this sanctuary through a cleft in the rocky floor,
and that this vapour, enveloping the prophetess, filled her with a
kind of frenzy in the midst of which she uttered the words of the
answer given her by Apollo.  This answer was written down by the
priests and often turned into verse by them and then taken out to the
enquirer.  Sometimes these answers were quite plain and
straightforward, such as the one which has remained true through all
the ages.  It was the oracle from Apollo at Delphi which said of the
poet Homer: "He shall be deathless and ageless for aye."  But
sometimes the answers were like a riddle that required much thinking
over to understand, and {59} sometimes they were so worded that they
might mean either of two things, each the opposite of the other!  The
oracle at Delphi was frequently consulted by the Greeks at great
crises of their history, and it had great influence.  It was the
priests who in writing down the answer really determined its nature.
They were men who were in constant touch with distant places, they
had had much experience with human nature, and they were well fitted
to give guidance and advice in all kinds of difficult matters.  The
oracle at Delphi was thus a power in the worldly affairs of the
Greeks, but it was more than that, it was also a source of moral
inspiration.  It encouraged all manner of civilization and the
virtues of gentleness and self-control, it marked the great reformers
with its approval, it upheld the sanctity of oaths, it encouraged
respect and reverence for women.  On one of the temples were
inscribed the sayings "Know thyself" and "Nothing in excess."  It was
said that these had been placed there by the ancient sages, and in
later times they became famous as maxims in the teaching of the great
philosophers.

The oracle was not always right in its interpretations; it sometimes
failed in seizing the highest opportunities that lay before it, but
as Greek history unfolds itself before us, we can see a gradual
raising of moral standards, which was due in great measure to the
influence of the oracle of Apollo at Delphi.



[1] Iliad, XV.

[2] See p. 64.

[3] Dion Chrysostom.

[4] Homeric Hymn to Hera.

[5] Homeric Hymn to Poseidon.

[6] Homeric Hymn to Athena.

[7] Homeric Hymn to Apollo.

[8] Homeric Hymn to Apollo.

[9] Homeric Hymn to Artemis,

[10] Odyssey, V.

[11] Homeric Hymn to Hermes.

[12] Homeric Hymn to Hephaestus.

[13] Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite.

[14] Homeric Hymn to Pan.

[15] Homeric Hymn to Demeter.

[16] Homeric Hymn to Demeter.

[17] Ibid.

[18] Homeric Hymn to Apollo.




{60}

CHAPTER III

THE OLYMPIC GAMES

The Greeks were bound together by their language, by their religion,
and also by their great national games.  The origin of these games is
still somewhat in doubt.  They probably began as some kind of
religious ceremony in connection with burials, such as the Funeral
Games described by Homer that were held in honour of Patroclus.  But
whatever may have been their origin, they were firmly established in
the earliest times of historic Greece.

Greece was never free for long at a time from warfare.  The very fact
that the country was divided into so many small and independent
states bred jealousies and hatreds, and state was often at war with
state.  This made it necessary that every Greek citizen should be
ready at any moment to take up arms in defence of his home, and so he
had to be physically always in good condition.  This was brought
about by regular athletic training which was an important part of the
education of every Greek.  It was considered just as bad to have an
ill-trained body as it was to have an ill-trained mind, and one
reason why the Greeks so despised the barbarians, as they called all
those who were not of {61} Greek race, was because the barbarian did
not train his body to the same extent, and because he loved so much
luxury.

All Greeks, then, received athletic training, and this training aimed
at developing a beautiful body, for it was believed that to run
gracefully was as important as to run swiftly, but though the Greeks
loved contests and competition and strove hard for the victory,
because they cared so much for grace of movement they did not lay
much stress on record-breaking, and so they kept no records of
exceptional athletic feats, which prevents us from knowing details of
some of their great athletic achievements.

Games were held in nearly every Greek city and were a source of great
pride to the citizens.  The more important festivals were those held
in honour of Poseidon at Corinth and called the Isthmian Games, those
at Delphi which commemorated the slaying of the Python by Apollo and
called Pythian Games, and the greatest of all, held every four years
at Olympia in honour of Zeus, and known as the Olympic Games.  These
games were the oldest in Greece and they were at all periods the most
important.  The first were held, if tradition tells truly, before
Greece had begun her history, and the last long centuries after she
had ceased to be a free state.  The first games in historic times
were held in 776 B.C. and the interval between each festival was
called an Olympiad.  These Olympiads constituted the Greek calendar,
which took 776 B.C. as its starting point.

This great festival at Olympia was held in August {62} or September
and lasted five days.  It was a national affair and Greeks from all
over the Greek world went to Olympia to take part in it.  For a whole
month a truce was proclaimed throughout Greece, all warfare had to
stop, and all ordinary business and pleasure gave way to the greater
business of going to Olympia.  The games were usually held from the
eleventh to the sixteenth day of this month of truce, the days before
and after being given up to the journey to and from Olympia.  All
roads were declared safe for these days, and great was the punishment
meted out to any who dared molest the pilgrims to Olympia, for they
were going to pay honour to Zeus and were considered as specially
under his protection.  Visitors thronged every road and they came
from every direction.  They came from all the Peloponnesian states,
from Corinth, Athens and Thebes.  They came from the far-off Greek
colonies, some from the shores of the Black Sea, looking almost like
the nomads with whom they came so much in contact; some from Ionia,
men clad in rich robes and of luxurious habits learnt from their
Oriental neighbours; others from the western colonies, from Italy and
Southern Gaul; and yet others, dark and warm-blooded men, from
distant Africa.  Yet all were Greeks, bound together in spite of
their differences by the common ties of blood and religion.  Some
were rich, and were accompanied by slaves who brought everything
necessary for their comfort, others were poor, who tramped the roads
footsore and weary, but sustained by the thought of the joys of the
festival when they reached their goal.

{63}

The gathering together of so many visitors brought all kinds of
people to Olympia: merchants with rich and rare goods for sale, for a
regular fair was carried on during the festival, makers of small
statues hoping for orders to be placed in the temples, poets who
wanted to recite their poems, musicians ready to play on their lyres
to any who would listen, gymnastic trainers from all over Greece who
hoped to learn some new method that would improve their own teaching,
people of all and every kind.  Only there were no women.  The games
were considered too public a festival for it to be fitting for women
to be present, and the journey was too long and difficult for them to
undertake it.  The women who lived near Olympia had a festival of
their own, when they, too, raced and were awarded prizes, but it was
at a different time from the great national festival.

There was no city at Olympia and but few buildings beyond the
temples, so when the throng of visitors arrived, the first thing they
did was to provide sleeping quarters for themselves.  Certain people
were allowed to sleep in some of the porticoes of the buildings
connected with the temples, others had brought tents and a regular
camp arose.  Booths of all kinds were erected in which the merchants
displayed their wares; friends and acquaintances from different parts
of Greece met and talked over all that had happened to them since
they last met.  Many announcements, too, were made by heralds at this
time; the terms of treaties between different Greek states were
recited in public, for in those days of difficult communication
between states, such a {64} gathering as that at Olympia ensured that
news made public then would be widely spread amongst the different
states.

Then there were visits to be made to the great temple of Zeus and
sacrifices to be offered.  From the middle of the fifth century B.C.
onwards every visitor to Olympia went reverently into the temple to
gaze at the great statue of Zeus.[1]  This statue was said to be so
marvellously wrought that "those who enter the temple there no longer
think that they are beholding the ivory of India and gold from
Thrace, but the very deity translated to earth by Pheidias," and it
was said that to have made such a life-like image of the god, either
Zeus must have come down from heaven and shown himself in a vision to
Pheidias, or Pheidias must have gone up to heaven and beheld him
there.


    The god is seated on a throne, he is made of gold and ivory, on
    his head is a wreath made in imitation of the sprays of olive.
    In his right hand he carries a Victory, also of ivory and gold;
    she wears a ribbon, and on her head is a wreath.  In the left
    hand of the god is a sceptre curiously wrought in all the metals;
    the bird perched on the sceptre is an eagle.  The sandals of the
    god are of gold, and so is his robe.  On the robe are wrought
    figures of animals and lily flowers.  The throne is adorned with
    gold and precious stones, also with ebony and ivory; and there
    are figures painted, and images wrought on it.[2]


It is said that "when the image was completed Pheidias prayed that
the god would give a sign if {65} the work were to his mind, and
immediately, they say, Zeus hurled a thunderbolt into the ground."[3]
"Fare ye to Olympia," said an ancient writer, "that ye may see the
work of Pheidias, and account it a misfortune, each of you, if you
die with this still unknown."  And so gracious and full of
loving-kindness was the face of the god, that


    if any one who is heavy-laden in mind, who has drained the cup of
    misfortune and sorrow in life, and whom sweet sleep visits no
    more, were to stand before this image, he would forget all the
    griefs and troubles of this mortal life.[4]


But what of the competitors in the games?  They had all been at
Olympia for the last thirty days undergoing a final and special
training.  Only men of pure Greek blood might compete, and no one who
had been convicted of any crime or who was guilty of any impiety or
disrespect to the gods.  Each candidate had to prove that in addition
to his regular athletic training, he had received special training
for ten months before coming to Olympia.  When they had practised for
the last time, the competitors were addressed by one of the officials
in charge.  He said to them:


    If you have exercised yourself in a manner worthy of the Olympic
    Festival, if you have been guilty of no slothful or ignoble act,
    go on with a good courage.  You who have not so practised, go
    whither you will.[5]


{66} The names of those who were to enter for the games were then
written up on a white board, and should a man withdraw after that, he
was branded as a coward.  As soon as the competitor was finally
enrolled, a boar was offered in sacrifice to Zeus, and then he had to
take a solemn oath that he was a full Greek citizen, that he had
fulfilled all the conditions necessary for the games, that he would
abide by the rules of the contest, and that he would play fair, and
such was the spirit of honour and fairness in which the games were
played, that in more than a thousand years there appear the names of
only six or seven competitors who were guilty of breaking their oath.

The first day of the festival was given up to sacrifices and
processions.  The different states always sent official
representatives to the Games, and these would make public entrance in
their chariots, richly arrayed and bearing costly gifts to place in
the treasury of the temple.  The next three days were devoted to the
actual contests.

Long before the dawn on the first of these three days, every seat in
the stadium was occupied.  It was situated at the foot of a hill, and
every available spot on the slope of this hill was used by the
spectators.  Should anyone leave his place, even for an instant, it
would be lost, and there the spectators sat the whole day through,
until the sun went down.  What refreshments they needed, they brought
with them.  The sun beat down on their bare heads, for the Games were
in honour of Zeus and he was looked upon as present, and no one might
enter the presence of the Father of Gods and Men with covered head.
{67} Not until the setting sun gave the signal for the end of the
day's contests, did they hurriedly rush off to their tents and snatch
an hour or two of sleep before the coming of the dawn warned them to
rise and secure their seats for the next day's spectacle.

The contests probably took place in the following order: First, there
were the foot races: there were several of these varying in length
from two hundred yards to three miles.  The shortest race of two
hundred yards was for a long time the race which brought greatest
honour to the winner.  Then followed the pentathlon which consisted
of five contests: throwing the discus, throwing the spear, running,
jumping and wrestling, and the winner was required to have won three
out of the five.  In the pentathlon, in particular, great importance
was attached to the gracefulness of every movement, and the jumping,
discus and spear throwing were generally accompanied by the music of
the flute.  Then came what was later regarded as the greatest and
most exciting race of all, the four-horse chariot race.  This was a
race that poets loved to describe.  Homer tells us how the charioteers


    all together lifted the lash above their steeds, and smote them
    with the reins and called on them eagerly with words: and they
    forthwith sped swiftly over the plain; and beneath their breasts
    stood the rising dust like a cloud or whirlwind, and their manes
    waved on the blowing wind.  And the chariots ran sometimes on the
    bounteous earth, and other whiles would bound into the air.  And
    the drivers stood in the cars, and the heart of every man beat in
    desire of victory, and they called {68} every man to his horses,
    that flew amid their dust across the plain.[6]


The boxing and wrestling matches came last, and these were the
roughest and fiercest of all the contests.

On the last day of the festival the prizes were awarded.  They were
very simple, but more highly valued than greater honours could have
been.  Each prize consisted of a wreath of olive, which had been cut
from a sacred olive tree with a golden knife by a boy especially
chosen for the purpose, and an old tradition required that both his
parents should be alive.  These wreaths used at one time to be placed
on a tripod in the sight of all the people, later, a beautiful table
of gold and ivory was made for them.  A herald announced the name of
the victor, his father's name and the city from which he came, and
then one of the judges placed the wreath on his head.  This was the
proudest moment of his life, and though other rewards followed on his
return home, nothing ever quite equalled that glorious moment.

The last day of the festival was given up to sacrifices to Zeus,
followed by banquets and feasting which lasted late into the night.
Every kind of honour was shown the victors: poets wrote odes
celebrating their victories, and sculptors made models for statues of
them, for to every athlete who had won three victories was granted
the honour of being allowed to have his statue erected in the open
space outside the temple of Zeus.


[Illustration: DISCOBOLUS OF MYRON.  5th Century B.C.  Vatican Rome.]

The festival over, the victors and their friends and {69} the great
throng of spectators returned to their homes.  The victors were not
only proud on account of their own achievements, but for the glory
they had brought to their city.  The news of the approaching arrival
of a victor was sent on ahead, and the day of his return to his
native city was always honoured by a public holiday.  In some places
it was an old custom to pull down a part of the city wall and make a
special entrance, in order that he who had brought the city such
glory might enter by a path never before trodden by other men.  Songs
of triumph were sung to greet him, and he was led to his father's
house along a road strewn with flowers.  Rich gifts were presented to
him, and in every way he was treated as a man whom the city delighted
to respect and honour.  At Athens the returning victors were honoured
by being allowed to dine thenceforth at the public expense in the
hall where the councillors and great men of the city took their meals.

Pausanias, the traveller to whom we owe descriptions of so much in
ancient Greece that has now perished, visited Olympia, and he tells
us that


    many a wondrous sight may be seen, and not a few tales of wonder
    may be heard in Greece; but there is nothing on which the
    blessing of God rests in so full a measure as the rites of
    Eleusis and the Olympic Games....


and Pindar, the Greek poet who has most often sung of the Olympic
Games, summed up the feelings of every victor in the words: "He that
overcometh hath, because of the games, a sweet tranquillity
throughout his life for evermore."



[1] See p. 47.

[2] Pausanias.

[3] Pausanias.

[4] Dion Chrysostom.

[5] From E. N. Gardiner: _Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals_.

[6] Iliad, XXIII.




{70}

CHAPTER IV

THE GREEK CITY-STATE

Whenever men live together in communities, no matter how small they
may be, some form of law has to be observed, in order to maintain
order, and that there may be justice between man and his neighbours.
The form that this law takes in different places and in different
communities is what is called government.

The earliest form of government in Greece was, like all primitive
government, that of the family, and the word of the head of the
family was law to all those belonging to it.  The land on which they
lived belonged to the family as a whole, not to separate individuals,
and the dead were always buried there, until in time the family
claimed as their own that land, where they had lived for generations,
and where their ancestors were buried.

After a time it became more convenient for families to join together
and live in one community.  By this means the labour of cultivating
the land could be more evenly distributed, and in times of attack
from enemies, larger and stronger forces could be used for defence.
This grouping of families {71} together made a _village_ and the
strongest and most capable man in the village would become its chief.

In time, just as families had found it more to their advantage to
group themselves together and form villages, so did the villages
living in the same neighbourhood find it a better thing to join
together and form a still larger community, which became known as a
kingdom, because instead of having a chief they were ruled by a king.
At first the kings, like the chiefs, were chosen because of their
ability and power, later the office became hereditary and was handed
down from father to son.

Now because the Greek communities lived in the plains, separated from
each other by mountains, instead of forming one large kingdom, they
formed a great many small ones.  There was in ancient times no King
of Greece, but Athens, Sparta, Corinth, Thebes and countless other
cities had their own independent forms of government, their own
rulers, their own armies, their own ships, and except that they were
all Greek and were all bound together by ties of language and
religion, they were quite independent of each other.  All these
independent cities became known in time as City-States, for to the
Greek the state meant the city, the territory immediately surrounding
it was included in the state, but the city was the most important
part of it.

All communities are always governed in one of three ways: either by
one man, or by a few men, or by many men, and the Greeks tried all
these ways, until they found the one that answered best to their
ideals of what a city-state should be.  All states did not {72}
develop in the same way, but one stands out from the others as having
most nearly reached the Greek ideal.  That state was Athens.  Her
story shall be told in its own place; in this chapter we will see
what the Greeks thought an ideal state should be, and what they
believed to be the duties of a good citizen.

The Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote a book in which these ideals
were set forth.[1]  He believed that the end for which the State
existed was that all its citizens could lead what he called a "good
life," and by that he meant the life which best gives opportunities
for man to develop his highest instincts, and which makes it possible
for every citizen to develop his own gifts whatever they may be, in
the highest and truest way.  To realize such a life there must be law
and order in a state, and Aristotle considered that the first thing
necessary to ensure this was that the state must not be too large.
He believed that the greatness of a state was not determined by the
size of its territory or the number of its population, but that
though a certain size and certain numbers helped to make a state
dignified and noble, unless these were combined with good law and
order, the state was not great.  States, he said, were like animals
and plants or things made by human art which, if they are too large,
lose their true nature and are spoilt for use.  But how is one to
know when the limit in size and population has been reached?  Is
there any test by which it can be discovered whether a state has
grown or is in danger of growing too large?

{73}

Aristotle answered this question by saying that the state must be
large enough to include opportunities for all the variety and
richness of what he called the "good life," but not so large that the
citizens could not see it or think of it in their minds as one whole
of which they knew all the parts.  He also thought it necessary that
the character of all citizens should be well-known, an impossibility
in too large a community, but how else, he asked, could men elect
their magistrates wisely?

The duty of the State was, then, to ensure the possibility of a "good
life" to all its citizens.  What was the Greek ideal of citizenship?
First of all, every citizen was expected to take a direct and
personal share in all the affairs of the State.  To the Greek there
was no separation between private and public life, all things
concerning the State were his affairs, and it was expected that
everyone should have an opinion of his own, that he should think
clearly on all matters of common interest and not allow himself to be
swayed by his feelings without honestly thinking the matter out, and
to a Greek, thinking meant straight thinking, the power to know right
from wrong, to judge justly without prejudices or passion, to
separate the important from the unimportant, and to follow undismayed
wherever the truth might lead.

This belief in the duty of the citizen to be personally active in the
affairs of the State tended to keep the State small, for if every
citizen was to attend the meetings of the Assembly, the latter must
be of such a size that everyone could be heard if he desired to {74}
speak, and it was necessary that a very short journey should bring
the country-dweller into the city to attend to the State business,
for frequent journeys and long absences from his farm or his flocks
would be impossible for the countryman.

Further, the Greek believed that wealth was allowed to a man only as
a trust.  Certain privileges and rights came to him because of its
possession, but they were privileges and rights that required of
their owner distinct duties.  The more a man had, the more did the
State require of him; he had to give his time to the making of laws,
his wealth built ships, bore the expense of public festivals, adorned
the city with beautiful buildings, it was spent not on himself alone,
but shared with his fellow-citizens, and given to that which was
their common interest.  This resulted in a passionate devotion of
every Greek to his city, for every individual had a definite share in
some way or other in the making of it, and by the sacrifice of his
life in times of danger, he proved again and again that he was in
very truth ready to die for it.

The ideal city demanded very high standards of her citizens, and no
Greek State attained these perfectly.  But in their search for what
they conceived to be the highest perfection, the Greeks found out
truths both concerning government and the real meaning of citizenship
that have remained one of the priceless possessions of mankind.



[1] _The Politics of Aristotle_.  See p. 384.




{75}

CHAPTER V

SPARTA[1]

Of all the city-states in Greece, two stand out from the others as
having played the leading part in Greek history.  These two are
Athens, which most nearly approached the ideal city-state, and
Sparta, the foremost military state in Greece.

Sparta was the chief city in the peninsula in the south of Greece
called the Peloponnesus, or the Land of Pelops, one of the ancient
mythical heroes of that land.  During the period of the Greek
migrations, the Peloponnesus was probably the last district to be
settled, and the tribes which came down into it were called the
Dorians.  They invaded Laconia, of which the chief city was Sparta,
and settled it and the surrounding country.  Only the citizens of the
city itself were called Spartans; those who owed allegiance to the
city, but who lived in the country outside were known as
Lacedaemonians.

Unlike most other Greek cities, which were well fortified and
defended by a citadel built on high ground, Sparta, "low-lying among
the caverned hills," had grown out of a group of villages and had
{76} no walls.  But if she had no outward signs of security from her
foes, she had the mightiest warriors in Greece ready to defend her to
the utmost.  Lycurgus, the wise man of Sparta, was once consulted as
to whether it would not be a wise thing to build a wall round the
city, and he answered those who came to him with the words: "The city
is well fortified which hath a wall of men instead of brick."

The Spartans were always afraid of attack from their slaves.  These
had been the former inhabitants of the land and had been conquered
and made slaves by the Spartans.  These slaves were called Helots;
they were severely and often cruelly treated by their masters, and
were always ready to revolt when opportunity came.  This was one of
the reasons that made the Spartans spend more time than other Greeks
in military training.  This common danger also had the result of
drawing all Spartans very closely together, and of making them
subordinate all other interests to the supreme duty of protecting the
state.



I. THE GOVERNMENT OF SPARTA: LAWS OF LYCURGUS

The Spartans always held Lycurgus to have been their great lawgiver,
though they never agreed as to when he lived.  It is probable that
the laws were not made by one single lawgiver, but that many wise
men, whose names were unknown to later generations, had helped to
create the laws over a long period of time.  As Lycurgus was the wise
man whose name was known to the Spartans, they came to look {77} back
to him as their only lawgiver, because it was by the government he
was supposed to have established and the laws he made that Sparta
became so great a state.  He was the brother of a King of Sparta who
died leaving a child as his heir.  Everyone thought that Lycurgus
would take the opportunity to seize the throne and make himself King,
but he declared that he would only rule until his nephew should be
old enough to become King.  Some people, however, would not believe
this, and plots were made against his life.  This decided Lycurgus to
leave Sparta for a time and to visit some other countries with the
intention of learning things from them that might be of use to his
own land.  He went first to Crete, where,


    having considered their several forms of government, and got an
    acquaintance with the principal men amongst them, some of their
    laws he very much approved of and resolved to make use of them in
    his own country.  From Crete he sailed to Asia, with design, as
    is said, to examine the difference betwixt the manners and rules
    of life of the Cretans who were very sober and temperate, and
    those of the Ionians, a people of sumptuous and delicate habits,
    and so to form a judgment.  Lycurgus was much missed at Sparta,
    and often sent for, "for kings indeed we have," the people said,
    "who wear the masks and assume the titles of royalty, but as for
    the qualities of their minds, they have nothing by which they are
    to be distinguished from their subjects."


Lycurgus only, they said, knew both how to rule and how to make the
people obey him.

{78} So Lycurgus returned, but on his way he went to Delphi to
consult Apollo, and the oracle called him "beloved of God," and said
to him:


    Lo, thou art come, O Lycurgus, to this rich shrine of my temple,
    Beloved thou by Zeus and by all who possess the abodes of
    Olympus.  Whether to call thee a god, I doubt, in my voices
    prophetic, God or a man, but rather a god I think, O Lycurgus.[2]


The oracle then went on to say "that his prayers were heard, that his
laws should be the best, and the commonwealth which observed them the
most famous in the world."

On his return to Sparta, the first thing Lycurgus did was to reform
the government.  This was now to consist of three parts: the Kings,
the Senate or Council, and the Assembly.  Sparta had always had two
Kings at a time, who succeeded each other from father to son.  It was
they who had the right of commanding the army in war, they were
always accompanied by a bodyguard of specially picked men, at the
public sacrifices and games they had special seats of honour, and at
all banquets and feasts double portions of everything were served to
them.  When it was necessary for the State to consult the Oracle, it
was one of the Kings who decided on the messenger to be sent.

The Senate or Council consisted of the two Kings who were members by
right of their birth, and of twenty-eight other men who were elected
as Senators {79} for life.  Every candidate had to be sixty years
old, for Lycurgus believed that until a man had reached that age, he
was not wise enough nor fit enough to be


    entrusted with the supreme authority over the lives and highest
    interests of all his countrymen.  The manner of their election
    was as follows: the people being called together, some selected
    persons were locked up in a room near the place of election, so
    contrived that they could neither see nor be seen, but could only
    hear the noise of the assembly without; for they decided this, as
    most other affairs of moment, by the shouts of the people.  This
    done, the competitors were not brought in and presented all
    together, but one after another by lot, and passed in order
    through the assembly without speaking a word.  Those who were
    locked up had writing tables with them, in which they recorded
    and marked each shout by its loudness, without knowing in favour
    of which candidate each of them was made, but merely that they
    came first, second, third, and so forth.  He who was found to
    have the most and loudest acclamations was declared senator duly
    elected.  Upon this he had a garland set upon his head, and went
    in procession to all the temples to give thanks to the gods.


The duties of the Senate were to prepare all the laws and matters of
public interest which were to be brought before the general Assembly;
it acted as a court of justice for criminal cases, and its
deliberations carried great weight.

Every Spartan citizen over thirty years of age was a member of the
Assembly.  It was the duty of the Spartans in the Assembly to give or
withhold {80} approval of all the matters brought before them by the
Senate.  It was they who elected the Senators and all other
magistrates, and they declared war and made peace.  In spite of this
Assembly of citizens, the government of Sparta was really in the
hands of the Senate, for the members of the Assembly might not
discuss the laws submitted for their approval, but only ratify or
reject them.  At no time were the ordinary citizens given much
opportunity to speak at length in public.  The Spartans did not like
long speeches, and Lycurgus believed that no one should be allowed to
talk much unless he could say a great deal that was useful and to the
point in a few words.  This way of talking became so characteristic
of the men of Laconia, that it was called by their name, and even
today speech that is short and sharp and to the point is called
_laconic_.  Many stories are told of this Spartan manner of speech.
King Leonidas said once to a man who was speaking about some
important matter, but at the wrong time and place, "Much to the
purpose, Sir, elsewhere"; and one who kept pressing for an answer to
the question "Who is the best man in Lacedaemon?" received as his
answer: "He, Sir, that is least like you."

Long after the death of Lycurgus, another special body of men was
elected to help in the government.  These men were called Ephors, and
there were five of them.  It was their business to watch the conduct
of the Kings, to see that the laws were all carried out and that
order and discipline were maintained in the state.  Probably no other
Greek state would have submitted to such oversight, but the Spartans
were {81} well-disciplined and did not look upon such an office as
one that interfered in any way with their personal freedom.  Plato,
writing long after of their authority, said that it was, "exceedingly
like that of a tyrant."



II. CUSTOMS IN SPARTA

Having established the government, Lycurgus next set himself to
introduce what he considered good customs amongst the Spartans.  The
first thing he did was to re-distribute the land amongst the
citizens.  He found that some were very rich and others poor, and he
determined that they should all live together sharing in everything
alike.  So he divided the land into lots and distributed it equally
amongst all the citizens.  After this had been done, and the time of
harvest had come, Lycurgus, "seeing all the stacks standing equal and
alike, smiled, and said to those about him, 'methinks all Laconia
looks like one family estate just divided among a number of
brothers.'"

During his travels in other parts of the world, Lycurgus had had
opportunities to compare rich states with poor ones, and he had
concluded that the richest were not always the best governed, and
that wealth did not always bring happiness.  He was determined that
the Spartans should become good soldiers and that they should be
great in war, for he believed that simple habits and simplicity of
living were more easily acquired by a nation of warriors than by one
devoted only to peace.  To this end he {82} wanted to have neither
rich nor poor in Sparta, but that all should be alike.  Lycurgus,
however, was wise enough to know that some people would always manage
to make more money or to save more than others, so instead of
dividing up all the money in the state equally between everyone, he


    commanded that all gold and silver coin should be called in, and
    that only a sort of money made of iron should be current, a great
    weight and quantity of which was but very little worth; so that
    to lay up twenty or thirty pounds there was required a pretty
    large closet, and, to remove it, nothing less than a yoke of oxen.


Not only did this prevent any one man from becoming too rich, but it
lessened the crime of theft in Sparta, for no one would want to steal
what was of no value.

This lack of money also resulted in doing away with luxuries; for


    there was no more means of purchasing foreign goods; merchants
    sent no shiploads into Laconian ports; no gold or silversmith,
    engraver or jeweller set foot in a country which had no money, so
    that luxury wasted to nothing and died away of itself.


Everything needed in their houses had to be made by the Spartans
themselves, with only the simplest tools, and the houses were roughly
built.  The law required that the


    ceilings of their houses should only be wrought by the axe, and
    their gates and doors smoothed only by the {83} saw, and as no
    man would furnish such plain and common rooms with silver-footed
    couches and purple coverlets and gold and silver plate,


all Spartans grew accustomed to the plainest and simplest
surroundings.


    It is reported that one of their Kings was so little used to the
    sight of any other kind of work, that being entertained at
    Corinth in a stately room, he was much surprised to see the
    timber and ceiling so finely carved and panelled, and asked his
    host whether the trees grew so in his country.


The last law made by Lycurgus to ensure simplicity of living was that
all Spartan men and youths should eat at common dining-tables, and
they were only allowed to eat such food as was permitted by the law.
Each table seated about fifteen men, who shared in providing the
food; each of them was "bound to bring in monthly a bushel of meal,
eight gallons of wine, five pounds of cheese, two and a half pounds
of figs and some very small sum of money to buy flesh and fish with."
All the food was prepared in a very simple manner, but "their most
famous dish was the black broth, which was so much valued that the
elderly men fed only upon that, leaving what flesh there was to the
younger."  Other Greeks, however, thought this black broth very
disagreeable.

It was the custom that at any one table, only those should sit who
were friendly to each other.  When a newcomer wanted to join a
certain table, all those already seated at it voted as to whether
they would {84} have him or not.  An urn was passed round the table
and everyone present dropped into it a small ball of bread.  Those
who voted for the newcomer dropped their balls without altering their
shape, those who voted against him flattened the ball with their
fingers before placing it in the urn.  One flat ball was enough to
exclude a man from the table.

When dinner was over, "every man went to his home without lights, for
the use of them was on all occasions forbidden, to the end that they
might accustom themselves to march boldly in the dark."



III. SPARTAN EDUCATION

Lycurgus was determined that every Spartan should be so trained that
he might become a good soldier, and some of his most important laws
concerned the education of children.  As soon as a child was born, he
was carried to


    the elders of the tribe to which he belonged; their business it
    was carefully to view the infant, and if they found it stout and
    well-made, they gave order for its rearing, but if they found it
    puny and ill-shaped, ordered it to be taken to a cavern on Mount
    Taygetus, where it was left to perish, for they thought it
    neither for the good of the child itself, nor for the public
    interest that it should be brought up, if it did not, from the
    very outset, appear made to be healthy and vigorous.


There was a belief in Sparta that wine was more strengthening than
water for a bath, and so the first bath a baby had was always in wine.

{85}


    There was much care and art, too, used by the nurses; the
    children grew up free and unconstrained in limb and form, and not
    dainty and fanciful about their food; not afraid in the dark, or
    of being left alone; without any peevishness or ill-humour.  Upon
    this account, Spartan nurses were often hired by people of other
    countries.


At the age of seven, Spartan boys left their homes and their mothers,
and the State took charge of the rest of their education.


    As soon as they were seven years old they were to be enrolled in
    certain companies and classes, where they all lived under the
    same order and discipline, doing their exercises and taking their
    play together.  Of these, he who showed the most conduct and
    courage was made captain; they had their eyes always upon him,
    obeyed his orders, and underwent patiently whatsoever punishment
    he inflicted; so that the whole course of their education was one
    continued exercise of a ready and perfect obedience.  Reading and
    writing they gave them, just enough to serve their turn; their
    chief care was to make them good subjects, and to teach them to
    endure pain and conquer in battle.


As they grew older, Spartan boys were taught to undergo all kinds of
hardships.  They wore very little clothing, even in the cold of
winter, and one coat had to serve them for a year.


    After they were twelve years old they lodged together in little
    bands upon beds made of the rushes which grew by the banks of the
    river Eurotas, which they were to break off with their hands
    without a knife.  The old {86} men had an eye upon them at this
    time, coming often to the grounds to hear and see them contend
    either in wit or strength with one another, and this seriously
    and with much concern; so that there scarcely was any time or
    place without someone present to put them in mind of their duty,
    and punish them if they had neglected it.

    Besides all this, there was always one of the best and honestest
    men in the city appointed to undertake the charge and governance
    of them; he again arranged them into their several bands, and set
    over each of them for the captain the most temperate and boldest
    of those they called Irens, who were usually twenty years old.
    This young man, therefore, was their captain when they fought,
    and their master at home, using them for the offices of his
    house; sending the oldest of them to fetch wood, and the weaker
    and less able, to gather salads and herbs and these they must
    either go without or steal; which they did by creeping into the
    gardens, or conveying themselves cunningly and closely into the
    eating-houses; if they were taken in the act, they were whipped
    without mercy, for thieving so ill and awkwardly.  They stole,
    too, all other meat they could lay their hands on, looking out
    and watching all opportunities, when people were asleep or more
    careless than usual.


If they were caught, they were not only punished with whipping, but
hunger too, for they were then reduced to their ordinary allowance,
which was purposely kept very small, in order to force them to use
cunning and skill if they wanted to add to it.  "So seriously did the
Lacedaemonian children go about their stealing, that a youth having
stolen a young fox, and hid it under his coat, suffered it so to tear
{87} with its teeth and claws, that he died rather than let it be
seen."

In every way the Spartan youths as they grew up were severely
disciplined.  Every year the older boys were whipped in public before
the altar of Artemis, in order to teach them to endure pain without
crying out, and it is said that some boys died under this whipping
rather than utter a complaint.


    The Iren used to stay a little with them after supper, at which
    time he would bid one of them sing a song, to another he put a
    question which required an advised and deliberate answer; for
    example, Who was the best man in the city?  What he thought of
    such an action of such a man?  They accustomed them thus early to
    pass a right judgment upon persons and things, and to inform
    themselves of the abilities or defects of their countrymen.
    Besides this, they were to give a good reason for what they said,
    and in as few words as might be; he that failed of this, or
    answered not to the purpose, had his thumb bit by his master.
    Sometimes the Iren, did this in the presence of the old men and
    magistrates, that they might see whether he punished justly or
    not; and when he did amiss, they would not reprove him before the
    boys, but, when they were gone, he was called to account, and
    underwent correction, if he had run far into either of the
    extremes of indulgence or severity.

    Furthermore, in his desire firmly to implant in their youthful
    souls a root of modesty Lycurgus imposed upon these bigger boys a
    special rule.  In the very streets they were to keep their two
    hands within the folds of the cloak; they were to walk in silence
    and without turning their heads to gaze, now here now there, but
    rather to keep their eyes fixed upon the ground before them.  And
    {88} you might sooner expect a stone image to find a voice than
    one of those Spartan youths; to divert the eyes of some bronze
    statue were less difficult.[3]


Not very much time was spent by the boys in learning to read and
write; most of their education was given to their gymnastic training,
to running, jumping, boxing and wrestling, and to every kind of
exercise that would fit them to be brave and hardy soldiers.  They
learnt some music, chiefly singing, but they only sang such songs as
would put life and spirit into them, and their battle songs were sung
with great enthusiasm.

During a war, the Spartan young men were treated a little less
severely than when in training at home.  They were allowed to curl
and adorn their hair, to have costly arms and fine clothes.  They had
better clothes, too, and their officers were not so strict with them.
They marched out to battle to the sound of music.  "It was at once a
magnificent and terrible sight to see them march on to the tune of
their flutes, without any disorder in their ranks, any discomposure
in their minds or change in their countenance, calmly and cheerfully
moving with the music to the deadly fight."

Spartan discipline did not end when the boys and youths had become
men.


    Their discipline continued still after they were grown men.  No
    one was allowed to live after his own fancy; but the city was a
    sort of camp, in which every man had {89} his share of provisions
    and business set out, and looked upon himself not so much born to
    serve his own ends as the interest of his country.


[Illustration: A GIRL RACER.  Early 5th Century B.C Vatican, Rome.]

The girls were educated at home, but, like the boys, they were given
a gymnastic training, and they learned to run and wrestle, to throw
the quoit and dart, and to be as strong and brave as their brothers.
As the Spartan boys were trained to become good soldiers, ready to
die for Sparta, so were the girls trained to become good wives and
mothers of Spartan men, and if they could not themselves die for
their country, to be willing to sacrifice those whom they loved the
best.  Every Spartan when he went to war, carried a shield that was
so heavy that if he fled from the enemy, he would have to throw it
away, so it was considered a great disgrace to return home without
one's shield; if he died in battle the Spartan was carried home upon
it.  The Spartan mothers knew this, and when they said farewell to
their sons who were setting out to war, they bade them return home
with their shields or upon them.

The Spartans held their women in great honour; they listened to their
counsel and often acted upon it.  A lady of another city once said to
a Spartan, "You are the only women in the world who can rule men."
"With good reason," was the answer, "for we are the only women who
bring forth men."

Having established all these laws and customs, Lycurgus forbade the
Spartans to travel, for he was afraid that contact with foreign
people would teach them bad habits and make them discontented with
{90} their simple way of living.  "He was as careful to save his city
from the infection of foreign bad habits, as men usually are to
prevent the introduction of a pestilence."

At last the time came when Lycurgus felt that his laws and customs
were firmly established, and that they were all familiar to the
people, but he was afraid that after his death they might be changed.
So he thought of a plan whereby he might make them last forever.  He
called a special Assembly of the people together and told them that
everything was well-established, but that there was still one matter
on which he would like to consult the Oracle.  Before he departed on
this journey, he made the two Kings, the Senate and the whole
Assembly take a solemn oath that they would observe his laws without
the least alteration until his return.  "This done, he set out for
Delphi, and having first offered a sacrifice to Apollo, he asked the
god whether his laws were good and sufficient for the happiness and
virtue of his people."  The Oracle answered that the laws were
excellent, and that the state which kept them should be greatly
renowned.  Lycurgus sent this oracle in writing to Sparta, and then
having once more offered a solemn sacrifice, he took leave of his
friends, and in order not to release the Spartans from the oath they
had taken, he put an end to his own life, thus binding them to keep
his laws for ever.  Nor was he deceived in his hopes, for Sparta
continued to be one of the greatest of the Greek states, so Plutarch
tells us, as long as she kept the laws of Lycurgus.



[1] Except where noted otherwise, all the quotations in this chapter
are from Plutarch: _Life of Lycurgus_.

[2] Herodotus, I.

[3] Xenophon: _Constitution of the Lacedaemonians_.




{91}

CHAPTER VI

THE GROWTH OF ATHENS


I. EARLIEST ATHENS

Athens was the most beautiful city in Greece.  It grew up at the foot
of the high rock known as the Acropolis, which in the earliest times
was the citadel that defended the city.  The Acropolis had very
strong walls, and the main entrance was guarded by nine gates, which
must have made it almost impossible for an enemy to take, and there
was a well within the fortress, so that there was always water for
those who defended it.  But history has told us almost nothing about
the mighty lords who built this fortress or about the life of the
people over whom they ruled.

But if history is silent, legend has much to say.  The earliest
rulers of Athens were Kings, and of these one of the first was
Cecrops.  All kinds of stories gathered round his name, and it was
believed that he was not altogether human, but a being who had grown
out of the earth and was half-man and half-serpent.  It was when he
was King that the contest took place as to whether Athena, the {92}
grey-eyed Goddess of Wisdom, or Poseidon, Lord of the Sea, should be
the special guardian of the city.  The victory was awarded to Athena,
who, taking her spear, thrust it into the ground, whereupon an olive
tree marvellously appeared.  Poseidon gave the horse as his gift to
Athens, and legend adds that, striking the rock with his trident, he
brought forth clear salt water, which he also gave to the Athenians.
For all time the olive was associated not only with Athena, but with
Attica and Athens her city, and to the Athenian, the sea became
almost like a second home.

The ancient kings claimed descent from the gods.  They were not only
the lawgivers, but they acted as judges, as chief priests, and in
time of war as generals.  All who were oppressed had the right to
appeal to the judgment seat of the King and his decisions were final.
Though the King was the supreme ruler, there were assemblies of the
chief men, always called the Elders, and of the People, who met
whenever the King called them together.  These gatherings are
important, not because of any real power they possessed in early
times, for they only met to hear what the King intended to do and
never to discuss, but because it was from these assemblies that the
power of the people to govern themselves developed.

The greatest of the early Kings was Theseus, he who slew the Minotaur
and freed Athens from paying tribute to Minos the Sea-King of Crete.
His greatest claim to be held in the remembrance of his countrymen
was that it was believed to have been Theseus {93} who united all
Attica under the leadership of Athens.  Before this time all the
towns and villages in Attica had been independent, but he "gathered
together all the inhabitants of Attica into one town, and made them
people of one city ... and gave the name of Athens to the whole
state."[1]  Legend tells of him that he was good and merciful to all
who were in need, and a protector of all who were oppressed, but he
offended the gods in some way, and died in exile far from Athens.
Long centuries after, Cimon, an Athenian general, took possession of
the island in which it was said that Theseus had been buried.  Cimon


    had a great ambition to find out the place where Theseus was
    buried and by chance spied an eagle on a rising ground, when on a
    sudden it came into his mind, as it were by some divine
    inspiration, to dig there, and search for the bones of Theseus.
    There were found in that place a coffin of a man of more than
    ordinary size, and a brazen spear-head, and a sword lying by it,
    all of which he took aboard his galley and brought with him to
    Athens.  Upon which the Athenians, greatly delighted, went out to
    meet and receive the relics with splendid processions and with
    sacrifices, as if it were Theseus himself returning alive to the
    city.  His tomb became a sanctuary and refuge for slaves, and of
    all those of mean condition that fly from the persecution of men
    in power, in memory that Theseus while he lived was an assister
    and protector of the distressed, and never refused the petitions
    of the afflicted that fled to him.[2]


    {94}

    II. THE RULE OF THE FEW: THE OLIGARCHY

    It is not known with any certainty how long the rule of the Kings
    lasted in Athens, but they seem to have slowly lost their power
    and at last other magistrates were appointed to help them rule.
    The earliest Kings had been hereditary rulers; when they became
    less powerful, though they were no longer the sole rulers of
    Athens, these hereditary Kings still kept their office for life.
    Later they ruled for life but were elected; the next change made
    was to elect a new king every ten years, and at last the greatest
    change of all took place when the old office of King was done
    away with, and the power that had once been in the hands of one
    man was entrusted to three: the Archon, a Greek title meaning
    _ruler_, who was the chief representative of the State and who
    gave his name to the year, the King-Archon, who was the chief
    priest and who had authority over all the sacrifices offered by
    the State, and the Polemarch, or War-Archon, who was the chief
    general.  Six other archons were also elected whose duty it was
    to assist the others and to see that the laws of the State were
    obeyed.

    Not everyone could be an Archon; only men from noble families
    could be elected, and so the power passed into the hands of a few
    men.  The rule of a few is called an _oligarchy_, and it was the
    second step the Athenians took on their way to be a
    self-governing community.

    At first this rule was good, for by experience the nobles learnt
    a great deal about the art of governing; {95} they realised that
    order was better than disorder in a state, and they set high
    standards of devotion to public duty.  But the nobles all
    belonged to one class of people, they were the best educated and
    the more wealthy, and instead of using their advantages of
    position and education and wealth as a trust for the good of the
    whole state (the ideal developed in later years by the
    Athenians), they grew to consider these things their own
    exclusive property and they became very narrow and intolerant.
    They considered themselves in every way superior to the common
    people, and began to make laws which benefited themselves alone,
    ignoring the rights of others, especially those of the poor.

    Now the nobles had acquired their power because of their
    opposition to the rule of one man, but when the authority had
    been placed in their hands, they proved themselves equally unable
    to be just towards all, and their rule became as intolerant as
    that of the Kings.  Then it was that their authority was
    questioned in its turn, and the people began to ask each other
    questions.  What is the difference, they asked, between rich and
    poor, between the noble and the plain man, between the freeman
    and the slave?  Who, they asked, are citizens, and what does it
    mean to be a citizen?  The more the people questioned, the
    greater grew the oppression and injustice of the nobles, and
    conditions in Athens grew very bad.  Many things helped to create
    this spirit of discontent: there had been wars, the harvests had
    been bad and famine had resulted, and there were very harsh laws
    which allowed debtors who could not pay their {96} debts to sell
    themselves as slaves.  Quarrels arose, and more and more the
    people questioned as to the justice of all this.  They said:

  But ye who have store of land, who are sated and overflow,
  Restrain your swelling soul, and still it and keep it low;
  Let the heart that is great within you be trained a lowlier way;
  Ye shall not have all at your will, we will not forever obey.[3]



    III. SOLON, THE WISE MAN OF ATHENS AND THE RULE OF THE MANY[4]

    It was at this time of confusion and distress that Solon, one of
    the Seven Wise Men of Greece, appeared.  By birth he was a noble,
    but he was a poor man and in the early part of his life he had
    been a merchant.  There came a time later when the merchant was
    not looked upon as the equal of the noble, for Plutarch, in
    writing the life of Solon about seven hundred years after his
    death, makes an apology for his having been engaged in trade.


    In his time, as Hesiod says, "Work was a shame to none," nor was
    any distinction made with respect to trade, but merchandise was a
    noble calling, which brought home the good things which the
    barbarous {97} nations enjoyed, was the occasion of friendship
    with their kings, and a great source of experience.


Solon enjoyed the experience of travelling and seeing new things, a
delight that remained with him even to the days of his old age, for
when he was old he would say that he


    Each day grew older, and learnt something new.


Just before this time Athens had been at war with Megara, a
neighbouring state, over the possession of Salamis, which had
formerly belonged to Athens, an island so near the Athenian harbour
that it was absolutely necessary that it should belong to Athens.
But the war had been long and unsuccessful, and no victory had been
gained by either side.  The Athenians were so "tired with this
tedious and difficult war that they made a law that it should be
death for any man, by writing or speaking, to assert that the city
ought to endeavour to recover the island."  Solon felt this to be a
great disgrace, and knowing that thousands of Athenians would follow,
if only one man were brave enough to lead, he composed some fiery
verses which he recited in the market place.

  I come as a herald, self-sent, from Salamis, beautiful island,
  And the message I bring to your ears, I have turned it into a song.

  Country and name would I change, rather than all men should say,
  Pointing in scorn, "There goes one of the cowardly, lazy Athenians,

{98}

  Who let Salamis slip through their fingers, when it was
      theirs for a blow!"

  On then to Salamis, brothers!  Let us fight for the
      beautiful island,
  Flinging afar from us, ever, the weight of unbearable shame.[5]


Only parts of these verses have come down to us, but they so inspired
the Athenians that it was determined to make one more effort to
regain Salamis, and this time they were successful.  Salamis was
recovered, but conditions in Athens remained as unhappy as before.
Solon was now held in such high honour that we are told, "the wisest
of the Athenians pressed him to succour the commonwealth."  He
consented, and was elected Archon in 594 B.C.

The first thing Solon did was to relieve the debtors.  He did this by
cancelling all debts and by setting free all who were slaves for
debt, and by forbidding by law any Athenian to pledge himself, his
wife or his children as a security for debt.  This brought such
relief to the state that the act was celebrated by a festival called
the "Casting off of Burdens."

Solon wanted to bring order into the distracted city he loved, for he
held that order was one of the greatest blessings a state could have,
so he set to work to reform the government of the state, to reduce
the power of the nobles and to give justice to the people.  "First,
he repealed all Draco's laws," (Draco had been an earlier lawgiver in
Athens), "because they were too severe, and the punishments too {99}
great; for death was appointed for almost all offences, so that in
after times it was said that Draco's laws were written not with ink,
but blood."

Solon reformed the government of the state in such a way, that even
the poorest citizens had political rights.  They could not all be
Archons, but Athens, like Sparta and other Greek states, had her
general Assembly of the people, and they could all vote at this, and
they could all take part in electing the magistrates.  Whilst
recognizing the rights of the poorer citizens, Solon believed in
preserving a certain part of the power of the nobles, and he arranged
the taxation and public service to the state in such a way that the
greater the wealth of a man and the higher his position, the more the
state demanded of him, both in service and money.  Solon himself said
of these laws:

  I gave to the mass of the people such rank as befitted their need,
  I took not away their honour, and I granted nought to their greed;
  While those who were rich in power, who in wealth were glorious
        and great,
  I bethought me that naught should befall them unworthy their
        splendour and state;
  So I stood with my shield outstretched, and both were safe
        in its sight,
  And I would not that either should triumph, when the triumph
        was not with the right.[6]

{100}

Solon did not please everyone with his laws, and when


    some came to him every day, to commend or dispraise them, and to
    advise, if possible, to leave out, or put in something, and
    desired him to explain, and tell the meaning of such and such a
    passage, he, knowing that it was useless, and not to do it would
    get him ill will, it being so hard a thing, as he himself says,
    in great affairs to satisfy all sides, bought a trading vessel,
    and having obtained leave for ten years' absence, departed,
    hoping that by that time his laws would have become familiar.


He stayed away the ten years and then returned to Athens.  He took no
further part in public affairs, but was reverenced by all and
honoured until his death.

During his travels, Plutarch tells us that he visited Croesus, the
rich King of Lydia.  This visit could never have taken place, for
Solon died in Athens just as Croesus came to the throne.  As a matter
of fact, Plutarch knew that quite well, but he says that he must tell
so famous a story, even if it were not true, because it was so
characteristic of Solon and so worthy of his wisdom and greatness of
mind, and that it would be foolish to omit it because it did not
agree with certain dates about which in any case everybody differed!


    They say that Solon, coming to Croesus at his request, was in the
    same condition as an inland man when first he goes to see the
    sea; for as he fancies every river he {101} meets with to be the
    ocean, so Solon, as he passed through the court, and saw a great
    many nobles richly dressed, and proudly attended with a multitude
    of guards and footboys, thought everyone had been the king, till
    he was brought to Croesus, who was decked with every possible
    rarity and curiosity, in ornaments of jewels, purple and gold,
    that could make a grand and gorgeous spectacle of him.  Now when
    Solon came before him and seemed not at all surprised, he
    commanded them to open all his treasure-houses and carry him to
    see his sumptuous furniture and luxuries, though he did not wish
    it; and when he returned from viewing all, Croesus asked him if
    ever he had known a happier man than he.  And when Solon answered
    that he had known one Tellus, a fellow-citizen of his own, and
    told him that this Tellus had been an honest man, had had good
    children, a competent estate, and died bravely in battle for his
    country, Croesus took him for an ill-bred fellow and a fool.  He
    asked him, however, again, if besides Tellus, he knew any other
    man more happy.  And Solon replying, Yes, two men who were loving
    brothers and extremely dutiful sons to their mother, and when the
    oxen delayed her, harnessed themselves to the waggon and drew her
    to Hera's temple, her neighbours all calling her happy, and she
    herself rejoicing; then, after sacrificing and feasting, they
    went to rest, and never rose again, but died in the midst of
    their honour a painless and tranquil death.  "What," said Croesus
    angrily, "and dost thou not reckon us amongst the happy men at
    all?"  Solon, unwilling either to flatter or exasperate him more,
    replied, "The gods, O King, have given the Greeks all other gifts
    in moderate degree, and so our wisdom, too, is a cheerful and
    homely, not a noble and kingly wisdom, and him only to whom the
    divinity has continued happiness unto the end, we call happy."

    {102}

    This story is not only characteristic of Solon, but of the Greek
    spirit.  That spirit did not like the extreme of extravagance and
    luxury and display, and it believed that there was glory that
    money could not buy.  The Greek who had been rewarded by a wreath
    of olive leaves had achieved the greatest success known in
    Greece.  This was once told to a noble who had come with the
    Persian King to invade Greece, and when he heard it, he exclaimed
    to the King: "What kind of men are these against whom thou hast
    brought us to fight, who make their contest not for money but for
    honour!"  That was the spirit of Greece.



    IV. THE TYRANTS

    Athens did not attain her political freedom without a struggle.
    She passed from the rule of One man, the King, to the rule of the
    Few, the oligarchy, and then through the legislation of Solon to
    the rule of the Many, the people.  But during this period of
    change, attempts were made from time to time by powerful leaders
    to get the rule entirely into their own hands.  These leaders who
    wanted to seize the power and rule alone were called by the
    Greeks _Tyrants_.  There was always the danger that such a ruler,
    with no authority in the state to control him, would become
    harsh, and oppressive, but this was not always the case.  Though
    the rule of one man alone is never the best kind of rule, some of
    the Greek Tyrants made a real contribution to the states they
    governed.  They were generally well-educated men, {103} who
    encouraged art and literature; they were always ambitious men,
    and they often dreamed of extending their power beyond the limits
    of their own state, and though it was a purely personal and
    selfish ambition, the efforts at realizing it brought the Greeks
    into contact with things which had hitherto lain beyond their
    horizon, for in the Age of the Tyrants, no Greek had yet dreamed
    dreams or seen visions of empire.

    A man was not always successful in his efforts to become a
    Tyrant.  About forty years before Solon was made Archon, Cylon, a
    rich Athenian, of good family and popular as a winner at Olympia,
    tried to seize the power.  He consulted the Oracle, which told
    him to make the attempt at the time of the great festival of
    Zeus.  He took this, as all Greeks would, as meaning the Olympic
    Games, so he waited until the time came for them, and then he and
    his friends attacked the Acropolis and actually took possession
    of the citadel.  But it seemed that the Oracle, giving one of
    those answers of which the meaning was uncertain, had referred to
    the festival held in honour of Zeus near Athens and not to that
    at Olympia, and Cylon's attempt was unsuccessful.  Some of the
    conspirators fled, and others took refuge in the Temple of
    Athena.  Here they were safe, for no one would dare touch anyone
    who had placed himself under the protection of the goddess in her
    sanctuary.  But there was no food or drink in the temple, and as
    nobody brought them any, some of them died of hunger, and Cylon
    was forced to escape secretly.  Then the Archon told the
    remainder that if they {104} would surrender, their lives should
    be spared.  They consented, but not quite trusting the Archon,
    they fastened a long rope to the Statue of Athena and held it as
    they descended the hill, so that they might still be secure under
    the protection of the goddess.  Half-way down the hill, however,
    the rope broke, and the Archon, declaring that this showed that
    Athena had withdrawn her protection, had the men put to death.
    This was looked upon as a great crime by the Athenians, for they
    considered it not only treachery, but also sacrilege, and it made
    the Archon many enemies.  These declared that as a punishment for
    this act a curse would rest on him and on all his descendants.
    His family was descended from Alcmaeon, and so the curse was
    spoken of as the curse on the Alcmaeonids, and the enemies of
    this family always attributed to it any calamities that happened
    to the city.

    The most famous Tyrant in Athens was Peisistratus.  Whilst Solon
    was away on his travels, quarrels broke out again, and when he
    returned, though he took no active part in affairs, he tried by
    privately talking with the leaders of the various factions to
    restore peace, but he was unsuccessful.  "Now Peisistratus was
    extremely smooth and engaging in his language, a great friend to
    the poor and moderate in his resentments, so that he was trusted
    more than the other leaders."[7]  In this way he became very
    popular, and he deceived people into thinking that he was only
    desirous of serving the state, when in reality he was doing all
    in his power to further his own {105} ambition and to become sole
    ruler of Athens.  In order to gain supporters, he appeared one
    day in the market place in his chariot, which was sprinkled with
    blood, and he himself appeared to be wounded.  On being asked
    what was the matter, he said his enemies had inflicted these
    injuries upon him.  One of his friends then declared that the
    Athenians should not permit such a thing to happen, and advised
    that a bodyguard of fifty men should accompany him to protect him
    from any further assault.  This was done, whereupon with their
    help, Peisistratus took possession of the Acropolis.  But his
    power was not great enough to hold it, and he and his followers
    were driven out of Athens.

    Peisistratus soon returned, however, having thought of a curious
    plot by which he might deceive the Athenians into believing it to
    be the will of the gods that he should rule.  During a festival,
    accompanied by a large number of youths, he entered Athens in his
    chariot, and at his side stood a tall and beautiful woman,
    dressed as Athena herself and carrying a shield and spear.  The
    people shouted that the goddess herself had come from Olympus to
    show her favour to Peisistratus, and he was received as Tyrant.
    But again he was driven out by his enemies.  He stayed away ten
    years, and then once more he collected an army and advanced on
    Athens.  Once more he was successful and entered the city.  This
    time no one opposed him, he became sole ruler and remained so
    until his death some ten years later.

    Peisistratus showed himself to be a wise ruler; he improved the
    city and brought water into it by an {106} aqueduct, and he built
    new roads.  Along these roads, especially in places near springs
    and fountains, were placed small statues of Hermes, and on the
    pedestals under some of them verses were engraved, perhaps
    similar to the following lines, to cheer the traveller on his way:

  I, Hermes, by the grey sea-shore
    Set where the three roads meet,
  Outside the wind-swept garden,
    Give rest to weary feet;
  The waters of my fountain
    Are clear and cool and sweet.[8]


    It was Peisistratus who made the law that men wounded in battle
    and the families of those who were killed should be cared for by
    the state.  He built a new Temple to Athena and made her festival
    more splendid, and he had the ancient poems of Homer collected
    and written down, so that they might be more carefully preserved.
    But good ruler as he was, he was still a Tyrant, and during his
    rule the people were deprived of their right to govern
    themselves, but so long as he lived, no one opposed him.

    After his death, his sons Hippias and Hipparchus succeeded him,
    but they forgot that, after all, they could only remain Tyrants
    if the people permitted it, and they grew insolent, harsh and
    overbearing.  Two young Athenians formed a plot to assassinate
    these oppressors at the next festival.  The day came, and
    Hipparchus was slain, though Hippias escaped.  The {107}
    conspirators were instantly seized and put to death, and Hippias
    continued to rule alone.  He became more and more cruel and the
    Athenians were bowed down under his oppression.  At last the
    Spartans came to their help.  They came, because for some time
    whenever they sent to Delphi to ask any advice of the Oracle, the
    answer always came, "First set Athens free."  With this help,
    Hippias was driven out and sent into exile.

    Athens was free.  The rule of the Tyrants was over, and Athens
    was once more able to rule herself, to become that state of
    which, when it was asked "what shepherd rules and lords it o'er
    their people?" the answer could be given, "Of no man are they
    called the slaves or subjects."[9]



    [1] Plutarch: _Life of Theseus_.

    [2] Ibid.

    [3] Poem of Solon, from _Aristotle on the Athenian Constitution_,
    translated by P. G. Kenyon.  (By permission of Messrs. G. Bell
    and Sons).

    [4] Except where otherwise noted, the quotations in this section
    are from Plutarch: _Life of Solon_.

    [5] Poem of Solon, translated by Leslie White Hopkinson.

    [6] Poem of Solon, from Aristotle on the Athenian Constitution,
    translated by P. G. Kenyon.  (By permission of Messrs. G. Bell
    and Sons).

    [7] Plutarch: _Life of Solon_.

    [8] Written by Anyte, a poetess, probably in the 4th century
    B.C., translated by Sir Rennell Rodd in _Love, Worship and Death_.

    [9] Aeschylus: _The Persians_.




    {108}

    CHAPTER VII

    GREEK COLONIES


    I. THE FOUNDING OF A COLONY

    The Greeks were a sea-faring people, and they were an adventurous
    people.  Their own land was small, but the islands of the Aegean
    formed stepping-stones, as it were, to the coast of Asia Minor,
    and the Aegean world was very familiar to the Greek sailor.
    Greek galleys were found in most ports, and the Greek trader
    became a formidable rival of the Phoenician.

    As they sailed from island to island and on to the mainland, the
    Greeks came to realize that some of these places would make
    suitable homes, and by degrees they began to colonize them; that
    is to say, parties of settlers went from their mother-cities to
    found new homes overseas.  Pioneers, adventurous explorers, had
    always gone out first and brought back reports of the new land.
    A suitable site required a good water supply, and fertile land
    where corn could be grown, and the vine and the olive cultivated.
    The settlers needed timber from which they could build their
    ships, and of course a good harbour was {109} necessary.  They
    also hoped to find friendly natives who would help them in their
    farm-work and who would in no way oppose them or interfere with
    their plans.  The natives must have looked with eyes of wonder
    upon the newly arrived Greeks.  Most of them had never seen men
    of this kind before.  The only foreign traders they knew were the
    Phoenicians, and they came only to trade, to exploit the people
    and to exhaust the resources of the place in order to gain gold.
    They knew only these "greedy merchant men with countless gauds in
    black ships."[1]  But these newcomers were different.  A Greek
    poet has described this Greek adventure over the sea, and the
    wonder of those who received the strangers:

  A flash of the foam, a flash of the foam,
      A wave on the oarblade welling,
  And out they passed to the heart of the blue:
  A chariot shell that the wild waves drew.
  Is it for passion of gold they come,
      Or pride to make great their dwelling?[2]


    All kinds of considerations took the Greeks over the sea to found
    new homes for themselves: some of them were discontented with
    their government and wanted to go where they could establish a
    new one; owing to the increasing population their home-cities
    became over crowded which created difficulties in the supply of
    food, and many thought a new land would give them greater and
    better opportunities; others {110} found that the trade of the
    colonies was a source of wealth; and others went just for the
    love of adventure.  Whenever a body of men decided to sail away
    and found a colony, they first consulted the Oracle at Delphi as
    to whether they would be successful, and whether Apollo approved
    of the place they had chosen and would bless their enterprise.
    They then chose a leader, whose name was always held in honour
    and handed down as the founder of the colony.  On leaving the
    mother-city, the colonists went in procession to the Town Hall
    and there they received fire from the sacred hearth, which they
    took with them, and from which they kindled the fire on their own
    sacred hearth in their new home.

    These colonies were quite independent of the mother-city as far
    as government was concerned, but the colonists looked back to the
    home from which their race had sprung with great affection;
    wherever they went they were still Greeks, they spoke the Greek
    language and they worshipped the Greek gods.

    Colonies were founded not only in the islands of the Aegean, but
    along the coasts of the Black Sea, which the Greeks called the
    Euxine.  These latter colonies, of which Byzantium (the ancient
    name for Constantinople) was the greatest, became very important
    to the Greeks, for they supplied them with grain which grew
    abundantly on the northern shores, and with iron from the Hittite
    land in the South-East.

    The greatest of all the colonies in the East were the Ionian
    colonies, those in the eastern part of the {111} Aegean and on
    the coast of Asia Minor.  The Greeks who colonized them were
    descended from the Ionian tribes who had settled in Greece, and
    so this whole region became known as Ionia.  Herodotus tells us
    that the "Ionians had the fortune to build their cities in the
    most favourable position for climate and seasons of any men whom
    we know."  Miletus was the greatest of the Ionian cities, and it
    developed a very rich civilization some time before the great
    days of Athens.

    Great thinkers came out of Ionia.  Thales, one of the Seven Wise
    Men of Greece, the philosopher and man of science, studied the
    heavens, and he foretold an eclipse of the sun in a certain year,
    which came to pass.  The Babylonians before him had made similar
    studies, but he carried on their work and made greater advances.
    He questioned in his mind what his discoveries might mean, and
    for the first time in the world he declared that the movements of
    the sun and moon and stars were determined by laws, and that the
    eclipse of the sun was due to certain movements of the heavenly
    bodies, and had nothing to do with the anger of the Sun-God.
    This was the first step in the freeing of men's minds from
    superstition, and though man had a long way to go and many things
    to learn before he could take the second step, it was Thales of
    Miletus and other Ionian philosophers in the sixth century B.C.
    who first set men to thinking about the real meaning of the
    things they saw about them in the world of nature.  What we
    to-day call science was born in Ionia more than two thousand
    years ago.  Many {112} wise sayings of Thales have been
    preserved.  It was he who said: "God is the most ancient of all
    things, for He has no birth: the world is the most beautiful of
    all things, for it is the work of God: ... time is the wisest of
    all things, for it finds out everything."[3]

    Another wise man of science who lived in Miletus was Anaximander.
    He was one of the earliest mapmakers, and he and Hecataeus, who
    wrote a Geography as a "text to Anaximander's map," were amongst
    the first thinkers who developed the science of Geography.

    [Illustration: TEMPLE OF POSEIDON AT PAESTUM.  End of 6th Century
    B.C.  Paestum, the ancient Poseidonia, was a flourishing Greek
    Colony in Italy.  The colony was founded early in the 6th Century
    B.C. and in ancient times it was famous for its roses.  The
    temple is one of the best preserved Greek temples out of Attica]

    The Ionian colonies could claim poets as well as men of science.
    Chios is said to have been the birthplace of Homer, and Lesbos,
    one of the largest of the island colonies, was famous as the home
    of Sappho, not only the first woman whose poetry has come down to
    us, but one of the great poetesses of the world.  Unfortunately
    we have only a few fragments of her poems.

  THE GIFTS OF EVENING

  Thou, Hesper, bringest homeward all
    That radiant dawn sped far and wide,
  The sheep to fold, the goat to stall,
    The children to their mother's side.[4]


    The face of Greece was turned towards the East, but adventurous
    spirits have always turned towards the unknown West; the
    Phoenicians had already explored western regions and the Greeks
    soon followed.  {113} The Elysian Fields lay to the west and what
    might man not discover if he sailed in that direction?  The
    Greeks did not find the Elysian Fields, but they did what proved
    to be of the most momentous importance in the history of the
    civilization of the world.  They founded colonies in the south of
    Italy, and these became so flourishing that the whole region was
    known as Magna Graecia.  These Greeks brought their writing,
    their art, and their poetry and planted them securely in the land
    that was one day to be ruled by a city, which was then only a
    little settlement at the foot of seven hills.  Rome became
    mightier than Greece in the art of governing a great empire, and
    the day was to come when she would rule Greece herself, but in
    the development of her civilization Rome acknowledged the Greeks
    as her teachers.

    Other Greek colonies were founded at Syracuse in Sicily, and
    along the north coast of the Mediterranean to what is now
    Marseilles, and in the south a few were established along the
    shores of Africa to Naucratis in Egypt.  The colonies in the
    south of Spain and along the north coast of Africa from the
    Pillars of Hercules to Carthage were in the hands of the
    Phoenicians, but by the end of the sixth century B.C. the
    prevailing civilization in the Mediterranean was Greek.



    II. IONIA AND LYDIA

    The Ionian colonies occupied the coast land of Asia Minor, but
    the mainland behind them was the {114} Kingdom of Lydia.  For a
    long time the Ionians lived in peace, developing their science,
    thinking out their ideas, and growing in power.  But at the
    beginning of the sixth century B.C. a new race of kings came to
    the Lydian throne.  They were vigorous and ambitious, and did not
    approve of the important coast towns with good harbours being in
    the hands of Greeks.  So they attacked them, beginning with
    Miletus which was besieged.  The siege lasted eleven years, but
    the city did not surrender.  At last the Lydians realized that
    Miletus was being saved by her harbour, and though it could get
    no food or supplies of any kind by land, everything needed was
    brought to the city by water.  So the King of Lydia gave up the
    idea of conquering Miletus, and he made a treaty of peace with
    her.

    It was probably not only the impossibility of conquering a
    seaport that made the King of Lydia give up the siege of Miletus,
    but the knowledge that a war cloud had arisen in the east which
    was steadily drawing nearer his land.  This was the army of the
    Medes, a nation which had already helped to destroy Assyria, and
    whose army was now coming towards Lydia.  Several battles took
    place with no very decisive result, but at length the two armies
    met in a battle


    in which it happened, when the fight had begun, that suddenly the
    day became night.  And this change of the day Thales the Milesian
    had foretold to the Ionians.  The Lydians, however, and the
    Medes, when they saw that it had become night instead of day,
    ceased from {115} their fighting and were much more eager both of
    them that peace should be made between them.[5]


So peace was made, and soon after the King of Lydia died, and Croesus
succeeded him.

Now the Ionian cities, when they saw their independence threatened,
ought to have combined together and made a joint stand against their
enemies, but each separate city so prized its independence and so
feared anything that might even seem to lessen it, that they stood
alone, and when Croesus, being at peace with the Medes, determined to
get possession of these Ionian cities, he was able to attack them one
by one and to overpower them.  He allowed them to keep their own
independent government, but he required them to pay him a regular
yearly tribute.  This was the first time in Greek history that Greeks
had paid a tribute to anybody; before the reign of Croesus, all
Greeks everywhere had been free.  Croesus left a certain amount of
independence to the Ionian cities, because of his admiration for the
Greeks and their civilization.  He sent rich and splendid gifts to
Apollo, and in return was made a citizen of Delphi, and at the
Pythian Games his envoys were given special seats of honour.

By this time Cyrus, the Mede, had become King of Persia, and Croesus
watched his increasing power with great anxiety.  He saw that war was
bound to come, so he sent a message to the Oracle at Delphi asking if
he should march against the Persians.  What Herodotus called a
"deceitful" answer came {116} back, that if he crossed the river
Halys a great empire would be destroyed.  Thinking, of course, that
this meant the destruction of the Persian empire, Croesus crossed the
river and met Cyrus in battle.  Now the Lydians were famous for their
horses, and horsemen were an important part of their army.  Cyrus
knew this, so he thought of a plan whereby he might defeat them.  He
ordered all the camels which were in the rear of his army carrying
the provisions and baggage, to be unloaded and the camels brought to
the front, and there well-armed men were mounted on them.  He did
this "because the horse has a fear of the camel and cannot endure
either to see his form or to scent his smell; and so soon as the
horses scented the camels and saw them, they galloped away to the
rear, and the hopes of Croesus were at once brought to nought."[6]

The Lydians were defeated and withdrew into Sardis, the capital.  But
after a short siege Cyrus took the city, and Croesus lost his
kingdom.  He did not want to fall into the hands of the Persians, so
he had a great pyre erected, and after pouring out a libation to the
gods, he mounted it and bade his slaves set it on fire that he might
perish in the flames, rather than fall alive into the hands of his
conqueror.  But suddenly clouds arose in the sky and rain fell,
extinguishing the flames.  It was thought that this must be the doing
of Apollo, to whom Croesus had always shown much honour, and hearing
of it, Cyrus commanded that he should be taken down from the pyre and
brought into his presence.  "Croesus," he {117} asked him, "what man
was it who persuaded thee to march upon my land and so to become an
enemy to me instead of a friend?"  And Croesus answered,


    O King, that I did this was to your gain and my loss, and the
    fault lies with the god of the Hellenes who led me to march
    against you with my army.  For no one is so senseless as to
    choose of his own will war rather than peace, since in peace the
    sons bury their fathers, but in war the fathers bury their sons.
    It was the will, I suppose, of the gods that these things should
    come to pass thus.[7]


Lydia was now added to the Persian Empire and only the Ionian cities
were still independent.  But even in the face of the great danger
from Persia, they did not unite, and one by one Cyrus conquered them
until Ionia had been reduced to subjection, and when the cities on
the mainland had been conquered, then the Ionians in the islands,
being struck with fear by these things, gave themselves to Cyrus, who
passing over the upper parts of Asia, subdued every nation, passing
over none.[8]

And thus it came about, that the Greeks who lived in Asia lost their
independence, and became subject to the Great King of Persia.



[1] Odyssey, XV.

[2] Euripides: _Iphigenia in Tauris_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

[3] Diogenes Laertius.

[4] Poem of Sappho, translated by Sir Rennell Rodd in _Love, Worship
and Death_.

[5] Herodotus, I.

[6] Herodotus, I.

[7] Herodotus, I.

[8] Ibid.




{118}

CHAPTER VIII

THE BEGINNING OF THE PERSIAN WARS[1]


I. DARIUS AND THE IONIAN REVOLT

The rule of the Lydian Kings over the Ionian cities in Asia Minor had
not been a hard one, but that of the Persians was different, for they
established tyrants in all the Greek cities, and required the
assistance of their soldiers and sailors in their wars, things which
were very bitter to the freedom-loving Greeks.

When Darius had become King, he determined, like the Great Kings
before him, to add yet more lands to his empire, and so made ready an
army which was to invade Scythia, the region north of the Black Sea.
As the Persians themselves were not naturally sailors, the Greeks in
the Ionian cities were forced to send a large number of ships to the
help of this expedition.

Darius and his army set out, and, arriving at the River Ister (now
known as the Danube), were joined by the Ionian ships.  Here Darius
commanded that a bridge of boats should be built, and then taking a
{119} cord in which he tied sixty knots, he called the Ionian leaders
together and said to them:


    Men of Ionia, do ye now keep this rope and do as I shall say:--So
    soon as ye shall have seen me go forward against the Scythians,
    from that time begin, and untie a knot on each day: and if within
    this time I am not here, and ye find that the days marked by the
    knots have passed by, then sail away to your own lands.  Till
    then, guard the floating bridge, showing all diligence to keep it
    safe and to guard it.  And thus acting, ye will do for me a very
    acceptable service.


Having said this Darius hastened forward on his march.


Scythia was a land totally unknown to the Persians, and strange tales
were told in after years of the adventures of the King and his army.
The Scythians were a nomad people, and they believed themselves to be
invincible.  When they heard that Darius was in their land with the
intention of conquering it, they "planned not to fight a pitched
battle openly, but to retire before the Persians and to drive away
their cattle from before them, choking up with earth the wells and
the springs of water by which they passed and destroying the grass
from off the ground."  For some time Darius pursued this mysterious
people, but he could never come up with them.


    Now as this went on for a long time and did not cease, Darius
    sent a horseman to the King of the Scythians and said as follows:
    "Thou most wondrous man, why dost thou fly for ever, when thou
    mightest do of these two {120} things one?--if thou thinkest
    thyself able to make opposition to my power, stand thou still and
    cease from wandering abroad, and fight; but if thou dost
    acknowledge thyself too weak, cease then in that case also from
    thy course, and come to speech with thy master, bringing to him
    gifts of earth and of water."  To this the King of the Scythians
    made reply: "My case, O Persian, stands thus: Never yet did I fly
    because I was afraid, either before this time from any other man,
    or now from thee; nor have I done anything different now from
    that which I was wont to do also in time of peace: and as to the
    cause why I do not fight with thee at once, this also I will
    declare unto thee.  We have neither cities nor land sown with
    crops, about which we should fear lest they be captured or laid
    waste, and so join battle more speedily with you; but know this
    that we have sepulchres in which our fathers are buried;
    therefore come now, find out these and attempt to destroy them,
    and ye shall know then whether we shall fight with you for the
    sepulchres or whether we shall not fight.  Before that, however,
    we shall not join battle with thee.  About fighting let so much
    as has been said suffice; but as to masters, I acknowledge none
    over me but Zeus my ancestor and Hestia the Queen of the
    Scythians.  To thee then in place of gifts of earth and water I
    shall send such things as it is fitting that thou shouldest
    receive; and in return for thy saying that thou art my master,
    for that I say, woe betide thee."


The King of Scythia sent gifts to Darius as he had promised, strange
and mysterious gifts.  He sent him a bird, a mouse, a frog and five
arrows.  At first the Persian could not imagine what these gifts
might mean, but one of his wise men interpreted them as {121} meaning
that "unless ye become birds and fly up to the heaven, or become mice
and sink down under the earth, or become frogs and leap into the
lakes, ye shall not return back home, but shall be smitten by these
arrows."

The Scythians continued to lead the Persians from place to place in
this strange campaign, until at last they brought them back again to
the Ister where the Ionians were guarding the bridge of boats.  The
Scythians arrived first, and they tried to persuade the Ionians to
break up the bridge, so that Darius would find no means of escape and
would then fall into their hands.  Some of the Greeks were in favour
of doing this, but the Tyrant of Miletus, who wanted to keep on good
terms with Darius, advised against such treachery and his word
prevailed.  In order to get the Scythians away, they pretended, by
moving a few of the boats,, that they were going to destroy the
bridge, but when Darius came, after a moment's fear that he had been
deserted, he found the bridge still there, and he crossed safely and
returned to his own land.

When Darius learned that it was owing to the advice of the Tyrant of
Miletus that the bridge had been saved, he sent for him and praised
him highly for what he had done, telling him he knew him to be a man
of understanding and well-disposed towards him, and that in
consequence he wished him to go with him to Susa, to eat at his table
and to be his counsellor.  Darius did this because in reality he
distrusted him and preferred that he should be near him in Susa,
where his movements could be watched.

{122}

In the meanwhile a kinsman of this Tyrant had been left in his place
at Miletus, and when a rebellion broke out in Naxos, he undertook to
put it down, hoping that this would bring him favour from the King.
Unfortunately for him, he was unsuccessful, and as he very much
feared the wrath of the King, he decided that as he could not put
down the rebellion, he would himself join it.  The Greeks in Miletus
were more than willing to revolt from the Persian yoke and they were
joined by other Ionian cities.  But they did not feel strong enough
to stand alone against Persia, so they sent ambassadors to Greece
asking for help from their kinsmen there.  Sparta was asked first.
The ambassador appealed to the King and told him that the Ionians
felt it was a disgrace not only to themselves but also to the
Spartans, who were looked upon as the leaders of all men of Greek
birth, that they should be slaves instead of freemen.  "Now
therefore," he said, "I entreat you by the gods of Hellas to rescue
from slavery the Ionians who are your own kinsmen."  He then went on
to describe the Persians whom he might conquer, the wealth of their
land and all the benefits that would come to him if he would help the
Ionians to become free.  The King told him he would think it over and
give him an answer on a day following.  When the day came, the King
asked the ambassador from Miletus how many days' journey it was from
the sea of the Ionians to the residence of the King.  Now it must be
remembered that no part of Greece was far from the coast, and that no
Greek, not even a Spartan who was a soldier rather than a sailor, was
{123} happy if he felt out of reach of the sea.  So the feelings of
the Spartan King can be understood, when he was told that to reach
the city of the King of Persia was a journey of three months from the
sea.  His mind was quickly made up.  "Guest-friend from Miletus," he
said, "get thee away from Sparta before the sun has set; for thou
speakest a word which sounds not well in the ears of the
Lacedaemonians, desiring to take them a journey of three months away
from the sea."

The ambassador then went to Athens, where he was more successful.
The Athenians sent twenty ships to help the Ionians, and the
Eretrians, out of gratitude for help once received from Miletus when
they were in need, added five.  With this assistance, the Greeks
marched to Sardis and seized it.  But a house accidentally caught
fire, and the fire began to spread over the whole town.  This gave
the Persians time to rally from the surprise of the attack and they
drove out the Greeks, who scattered in dismay.  Some were overtaken
and slain, and the rest retreated to their ships.

Darius was in Susa at this time, and the news of the burning of
Sardis was taken to him there.  He did not take much account of the
Ionians who had taken part,


    because he knew that they at all events would not escape
    unpunished for their revolt, but he enquired who the Athenians
    were; and when he had been informed, he asked for his bow, and
    having received it and placed an arrow upon the string, he
    discharged it upwards towards {124} heaven, and as he shot into
    the air he said: "Zeus, that it may be granted me to take
    vengeance upon the Athenians!"  Having so said he charged one of
    his attendants, that when dinner was set before the King he
    should say always three times: "Master, remember the Athenians."


Darius remembered the Athenians, but he had first to punish the
Ionian cities for their share in the revolt.  One by one he attacked
them, and they fell before him, until at last only Miletus was left.
Her only hope of safety lay in her sea-defences, and all the ships
the Ionians could collect were gathered at Lade, an island just
outside the harbour of Miletus.  Now the Ionians had copied many of
the customs of their Lydian neighbours, and they were more luxurious
and led softer lives than their kinsmen on the mainland.  Efforts
were made by one of the Greek leaders to make the Ionians drill and
exercise themselves every day, that they might all be in good
condition when the day of battle should come.  For a time they
submitted, but they were lazy and unaccustomed to such toil, and the
hard work and exercise so exhausted them, that they declared they
would prefer slavery to such hard work as was being forced upon them.
So they refused to drill any more, and "they pitched their tents in
the island like an army, and kept in the shade, and would not go on
board their ships or practise any exercises."

There could only be one result to this.  The Persians gave battle and
the Ionians were defeated, some of them even disgraced themselves by
sailing away {125} without fighting at all.  The men of Chios refused
to play the coward and fought to the end, but there were too few of
them to turn the tide of battle and the Persians overcame them
completely.  Miletus was taken by storm, the city was destroyed by
fire, the men were all put to death, and the women and children sent
as slaves to Susa.

The news of the fall of Miletus was a terrible blow to the Greek
world.  Up to that time she had been the greatest of the Greek
cities.  She was rich, not only in material wealth, but in all that
concerned the intellectual life, and now she had fallen!  It was,
above all, a blow to the Athenians, for Athens and Miletus were
closely bound by ties of kinship, and when an Athenian dramatist


    composed a drama called the "Capture of Miletus," and put it on
    the stage, the body of spectators fell to weeping, and the
    Athenians moreover fined the poet heavily on the ground that he
    had reminded them of their own calamities; and they ordered also
    that no one in future should represent this drama.


Thus it came about that again the Ionians became the subjects of the
Persian King.  They had been punished to the utmost for daring to
revolt from his power, and there was no fear that they would do it
again.  Darius was now free to remember the Athenians.



II. MARATHON

In 492 B.C. Darius sent Mardonius, a general who was high in his
favour, across the Hellespont with {126} orders to march through
Thrace and Macedonia, and having firmly secured their allegiance, to
march on to Greece, where Athens and Eretria were to be severely
punished for their share in the burning of Sardis.  Darius had
several reasons for this expedition: the punishment of Athens and
Eretria was the one about which most was said, but as it never
entered his mind that he could be defeated, Darius probably intended
so to destroy the cities on the mainland that the Greeks in Ionia
would see that it would be useless to rely on the help of their
kinsmen should they ever think of another revolt, and so to punish
the European Greeks that they would never dare to interfere again in
the affairs of the Persian Empire.  But underneath all these reasons
were dreams of conquest.  The Great King had visions of subduing the
whole of Greece and of extending his empire into Europe.

Preparations were made and Mardonius set out.  A fleet was to sail
close to the coast and to keep in constant touch with the army.  All
went well until Mount Athos was reached and here a great storm arose.


    The north wind handled them very roughly, casting away very many
    of their ships.  It is said that the number of ships destroyed
    was three hundred, and more than twenty thousand men; for as this
    sea which is about Athos is very full of sea monsters, some were
    seized by these and so perished, while others were dashed against
    the rocks; and some of them did not know how to swim and perished
    for that cause, others again by reason of cold.


{127}

The army fared little better, for it was attacked by some Thracian
tribesmen, and though Mardonius forced them to submit to him, he
suffered so much loss in the fighting, that as his fleet also had
been almost entirely destroyed, he was obliged to depart back to Asia
having gained no honour in this undertaking.

Two years went by, and then another expedition was planned.  Before
it started, Darius sent messengers to Athens and Sparta and other
Greek states demanding of them earth and water, the symbols of
submission to the Great King.  Some states agreed to the demand,
either because they were struck dumb with terror at the mere thought
that the Great King might invade their land, or because they thought
that he was certain to conquer and that by submitting at once they
would secure themselves and their land from destruction.  Athens and
Sparta, however, refused uncompromisingly.  The messengers were
thrown by the Athenians into a pit, and by the Spartans into a well,
and told that if they wanted earth and water they could get them for
themselves.  On hearing what had happened to his messengers, Darius
gave orders to the generals to set out at once for Greece, and to
punish every state which had refused submission by enslaving all the
inhabitants and bringing them bound to Susa.  In particular, Athens
and Eretria, for their other misdeeds, were to receive the severest
treatment.  So the expedition started.

Remembering the disaster at Mount Athos, the fleet sailed this time
across the Aegean, touching at Naxos, the first of the Ionian cities
that had revolted, {128} and which now received its punishment by
being burnt and its people enslaved.  Then the Persians went on to
Delos, where they offered sacrifices to Apollo, and from there they
sailed to Eretria which they immediately attacked.  The city held out
for six days and then traitors within the walls opened the gates to
the Persians who entered and took the city.  They burnt it to the
ground and carried off all the inhabitants into slavery.  And so
Eretria was punished for her share in daring to burn a city of the
Great King.

News of these movements of the Persians had, of course, reached
Athens, but up to this time the Athenians had not considered them as
having any dangerous consequences to themselves.  But Eretria was not
very far from Athens, and when the news of the utter destruction of
this city arrived, the Athenians realized the full extent of their
peril.  Now Hippias, the exiled Tyrant, had taken refuge with the
Persians, but he had never given up hope of one day returning to
Athens.  He was at this very time plotting with friends in the city,
and the Persians, knowing this, hoped for their aid in taking Athens.
So the Athenians were threatened with dangers both from within and
without.

It is easy to imagine the dismay of the Athenians when they heard
that Eretria had been destroyed, and that the Persians, the
conquerors of the world, were even then on their way to Athens.  How
could they hope, with their small army, to stand against the great
empire?  Help must be had, and that quickly.  To whom should they
turn, if not to {129} Sparta, the foremost military state in Greece,
and which, should Athens fall, would be the next state attacked?
Self-defence, if no other reason, would surely bring them with speed
to Athens.  So the Athenians sent Pheidippides, a swift runner, with
a message imploring help.  The distance from Athens to Sparta is a
hundred and fifty miles, and the hours must have seemed very long to
the Athenians as they waited for his return with the answer.  But so
swiftly did he run that he was back before they had dared expect him.
How had he done it?  For two days and nights he had raced "over the
hills, under the dales, down pits and up peaks," and in less than
forty-eight hours he had reached Sparta.  He rushed into the midst of
their Assembly with but scant ceremony, and passionately entreated
them to come to the help of Athens.

But to this cry for help the Spartans gave but a cool answer.  They
would come, certainly, but must wait five days until the moon was
full when it was their custom to sacrifice to Apollo, and to break
this custom would be to slight the god.  When the full moon had come,
then they would send help to the Athenians.  Pheidippides only waited
long enough to receive the answer, and then with despair in his
heart, he started back to Athens.  Over the hills and the plains,
through woods and across streams he raced, appealing in his heart to
the gods to whom Athens had ever shown honour, yet who seemed to have
deserted her in her utmost need.  Was there no help?  Suddenly he
stopped; whom did he see, sitting in a cleft of a rock?  It was Pan,
the Goat-God.

{130}

"Stop, Pheidippides," he cried, and stop he did.  Graciously and
kindly did the god then speak to him, asking him why it was that
Athens alone in Greece had built him no temple, yet he had always
been and would forever be her friend.  And now in her peril, he would
come to her aid.  He bade Pheidippides go home and tell Athens to
take heart, for Pan was on her side.

If Pheidippides had run swiftly before, now he ran as if wings had
been given to him.  He hardly touched the earth but seemed to race
through the air, and burst upon the waiting Athenians who had not
dared expect him so soon, with the news that Sparta indeed had failed
them, but that Pan, mighty to save, would fight for them!

But now grave news was brought: the Persians were landing in Attica.
It was September of the year 490 B.C., and the hot summer days had
not yet passed away.  The Athenians could not wait for the Spartans,
they must go out alone and meet the foe.  They marched twenty-four
miles in the heat over a rough and rugged road, until they reached
the plain of Marathon.  There they found the Persians.

Now the Persians had probably never intended to fight at Marathon.
They hoped that the friends of Hippias in Athens would in the end
betray the city to them, and their plan in landing where they did was
to bring the Athenian army away from the city, and if possible to
keep it away, until they should have received the expected signal
from the traitors.  The plain of Marathon is surrounded by hills
except where it slopes down to the sea.  The Athenians {131} occupied
the stronger and higher positions, the Persians were encamped near
the sea, and their ships were anchored close to the coast.  For
several days the armies watched each other and waited.  The Athenians
counted the days until the moon should be full, when there was hope
that the Spartans might come; the Persians knew that every added day
gave the conspirators more time to do their treacherous work in the
city.  And so both sides waited.

Suddenly help came to the Athenians from an unexpected quarter, help
which cheered and inspirited them.  Through a cloud of dust on one of
the roads leading down into the plain, they saw the gleam of spears
and helmets.  It could not be the Spartans, for they would not come
from that direction.  As the men drew nearer, they were found to be
an army from Plataea, a little city in Boeotia, to which, when some
years before Thebes had threatened her independence, Athens had sent
succour.  Now, though not thought of by the Athenians as an ally,
because she was small and not powerful, she had remembered those who
had befriended her in the hour of need, and had come down with all
her fighting men to help Athens in her peril.

Miltiades was the Athenian general at Marathon.  He knew why the
Persians were waiting, and when messengers brought him word that they
were embarking some of their men, knowing that this meant their
intention to sail round to Athens, because the conspirators in the
city were ready to act, he gave the signal to attack.  There were
probably two {132} Persians to every Greek, so the Greek army had
been arranged in the best way to face these odds.  The centre line
was thin, but the wings were very strong.  On the first onslaught
from the Persians this centre gave way, but the wings immediately
wheeled round and attacked the Persians with such force that these
gave way before them and fled down to the shore.  The Greeks pursued,
and there was terrific fighting and slaughter.  Seven of the Persian
ships were destroyed by fire, but the others escaped.  The Persians
fled to these remaining ships, leaving over six thousand dead on the
plain and quantities of rich plunder.  They set sail for Athens, and
knowing that the Athenian army was still on the plain of Marathon,
they hoped to find the city undefended and that the traitors would
open the gates to them.  But the Athenians who had won at Marathon
were not going to let their city fall into the hands of the enemy, so
when they saw the Persian ships setting sail, wearied as they were
with the strain of battle, they marched over the twenty-four miles of
rough road to the defence of their beloved city, leaving only a small
force behind to guard the bodies of the slain and to prevent thieves
from carrying off the plunder.

On his return from Sparta, Pheidippides had been asked what reward
should be given him for the race he had run.  All he asked was to be
allowed to fight for Athens, and when the Persians had been driven
away, then to wed the maid he loved and to dwell in his own home.  It
was given him as he asked.  He fought in the fight at Marathon, but
when the victory {133} had been gained, one more race was asked of
him.  Over the rough road he ran to Athens to shout in the ears of
the waiting Athenians: "Athens is saved!"  But his heart could not
contain such great joy, and having delivered his message, he died.

The Athenian army reached Athens before the enemy, and when in the
moonlight the Persian ships sailed into the bay near Athens, there,
ready to meet them, were the same men who had defeated them at
Marathon earlier in the day.  The Persians were not willing to meet
them again so soon; they realized that they had indeed suffered
grievous defeat, and commands were given for the broken army and
crippled fleet to set sail for Asia.

The Spartans came as they had promised, but too late to take any part
in the battle.


    There came to Athens two thousand of them after the full moon,
    making great haste to be in time, so that they arrived in Athens
    on the third day after leaving Sparta: and though they had come
    too late for the battle, yet they desired to behold the Medes;
    and accordingly they went on to Marathon and looked at the bodies
    of the slain; and afterwards they departed home, commending the
    Athenians and the work which they had done.


But no part of the honour of Marathon belonged to Sparta.

The Athenians lost about two hundred men in the battle.  They were
buried where they had fallen, a great mound was erected over their
graves, and their names were inscribed on tall pillars near by.  Much
rich plunder was left by the Persians on the plain, {134} some of
which was offered to Apollo as a thank-offering for the victory.  The
Athenians built a beautiful little temple, known as the Treasury of
the Athenians, at Delphi, and Pan was not forgotten.  A grotto on the
side of the Acropolis was dedicated to him, where sacrifices were
offered in memory of his help and encouragement when both had been
sorely needed.

The Greeks who had fought at Marathon had many tales to tell of the
battle, and many a wondrous deed was said to have been performed.  It
was thought that the gods themselves and the ancient heroes of Athens
had taken part.  Pan, they said, had struck such fear into the hearts
of the Persians that they had fled in disorder and terror, a terror
ever after known as a panic.  Some even said that Theseus and other
heroes had been seen, and for a long time the spirits of those who
had been slain were thought to haunt the battlefield.

The battle of Marathon was one of the great events in history.  For
the first time the East and the West had met in conflict, and the
West had prevailed.  The Athenians were the "first of all the
Hellenes who endured to face the Median garments and the men who wore
them, whereas up to this time the very name of the Medes was to the
Hellenes a terror to hear."  Never before had a little state faced
the world empire of the Persians and conquered.  The Greek soldiers
had shown themselves capable of facing the Persians, long looked upon
as the conquerors of the world, and of prevailing against them.  The
civilization of the East had met with a check on {135} the very
threshold of Europe, and Athens had saved Greece.  But the Great
Kings of Persia were not accustomed to defeat; would they accept
this, and was Greece and, through Greece, Europe, safe, or would the
Persians come again?



[1] Chapter VIII is taken chiefly from the _History_ of Herodotus.




{136}

CHAPTER IX

THE GREAT PERSIAN INVASION UNDER XERXES[1]


I.  THE PREPARATIONS

(a) _The Persians_


The Persians came again.  When the report came to Darius of the
battle which was fought at Marathon, the King, who even before this
had been greatly exasperated with the Athenians on account of the
attack made upon Sardis, then far more than before displayed
indignation, and was still more determined to make a campaign against
Hellas.  He at once sent messengers to the various cities of the
Empire and ordered that they should get ready their forces.  Each
city or community was called upon to send more men than at the former
time, and to send also ships of war, and horses, provisions and
transport vessels.  When these commands had been carried all round,
all Asia was moved for three years, for all the best men were being
enlisted for the expedition against Hellas, and were making
preparations.  {137} But before the expedition was ready, a rebellion
broke out in Egypt, and soon after Darius died, and "thus he did not
succeed in taking vengeance upon the Athenians."

Darius was succeeded by his son Xerxes.  The first thing he did was
to crush Egypt, and then he turned his attention to Greece.
Mardonius, the general who had been forced to retire from Thrace
after the wreck of the fleet off Mount Athos, was anxious to persuade
the King to undertake another invasion.  He probably wanted to
retrieve the reputation he had lost on the former occasion, and hoped
that if Greece became a Persian province, he would be made governor.
"Master," he would say to the King, "it is not fitting that the
Athenians, after having done to the Persians very great evil, should
not pay the penalty for that which they have done," and he would add
that Greece was "a very fair land and bore all kinds of trees that
are cultivated for fruit and that the King alone of all mortals was
worthy to possess it."

Xerxes did not need much persuasion.  He came of a race of kings
whose word was the law of the Medes and Persians that changeth not,
and his wrath was great against the states that had not only refused
to submit to the Persian King, but had actually defeated his army in
battle.  He would wreak his vengeance upon them for what they had
done, and he declared that he would march an army through Europe
against Greece, in order, as he said, "that I may take vengeance on
the Athenians for all the things which they have done both to the
Persians {138} and to my father.  I will not cease until I have
conquered Athens and burnt it with fire."

Our knowledge of the preparations made for this invasion by Xerxes
comes from Herodotus.[2]  He may have exaggerated some things in his
account, but his history was written for the Greeks of his own time
and he wanted to make clear to them how great was the difference
between the East and the West; how much better their freedom and
independence were than the slavery endured by states which were ruled
by the Great King.  For these states had no voice in the affairs of
the Empire; if the King went to war, they had to follow him and lay
down their lives for causes in which they had no concern, and which
generally only ministered to the greed and avarice of their rulers.

Having decided on the invasion of Greece, Xerxes sent heralds
throughout the Empire proclaiming the war and bidding all fighting
men make ready and join the King at Sardis.  There the troops were
mustered, and in the spring of 480 B.C. ten years after the battle of
Marathon, Xerxes and his army were ready to set out.  They were to
march to the Hellespont, and then, by way of Thrace and Macedonia, to
descend into Greece.  The fleet was to join the army at the
Hellespont, and by sailing close to the shore, to keep in constant
touch with the army on land.

At last all was ready and the day came for the army to leave Sardis.
First the baggage-bearers led the way together with their horses, and
after these, {139} half the infantry of all the nations who followed
the Great King.  Then a space was left, after which came the King
himself.  Before him went first a thousand horsemen, chosen from
amongst the noblest Persians, and then a thousand spearmen; these
were followed by ten sacred horses with rich trappings, and behind
the horses came the sacred chariot of the great Persian god, drawn by
eight horses, with the reins held by a charioteer on foot, for no
human creature might mount upon the seat of that chariot.  Then
followed Xerxes himself, attended by spearmen chosen from the best
and most noble of all the Persians.  They were in turn followed by a
body of men known as the Immortals, of which there were always ten
thousand.  They bore this name, because if any one of them made the
number incomplete, either by death or illness, another man filled his
place, and there were never either more or fewer than ten thousand.
These were the very flower of the Persian army; nine thousand of them
carried spears ending with silver pomegranates, and the spears of the
thousand who guarded the front and rear were ornamented with
pomegranates of gold.

Now of all the nations, the Persians showed the greatest splendour of
ornament and were themselves the best men, and they were conspicuous
for the great quantity of gold they used.  The Medes and Persians
wore tunics and trousers, for which the Greeks always felt the
greatest contempt because they were worn by the Barbarian and not the
Greek, and soft felt caps on their heads.  They carried {140} wicker
shields and had short spears and daggers and bows and arrows.
Besides these a host of nations followed the Great King: there were
Assyrians, famous throughout all ancient history as a great fighting
race, with bronze helmets, linen breastplates, and wooden clubs
studded with iron; there were Bactrians with bows of reed and short
spears; Scythians with their pointed sheepskin caps, and their battle
axes; there were Caspians dressed in skins and wielding short swords;
there were men of strange and savage appearance, some wearing dyed
garments, with high boots, others dressed in skins, and all bearing
bows and arrows, daggers and short spears.  Arabians came too, with
their loose robes caught up ready for action and long bows in their
hands; and dark Ethiopians, fearful to look upon in their garments
made of the skins of the leopard and the lion; these fought with long
bows with sharp pointed arrows, and with spears and clubs, and when
they went in to battle, each man painted half his body white and half
of it red.  And other Ethiopians there were, who wore upon their
heads horses' scalps with the ears and manes still attached.  Many
more nations and tribes were represented in this mighty army.  Some
carried small shields and small spears and daggers, others wore
bronze helmets to which the ears and horns of an ox were attached.

All these and many more made up the army of the Great King; they came
from North and South, from East and West, and from the islands of the
sea, and they marched in magnificent array from Sardis to the shores
of the Hellespont, where the fleet was to {141} meet them.  When
Xerxes reached the strait, he had a throne of white marble built for
him and there he took his seat and gazed upon his army and his ships.
Now Xerxes had given orders that a bridge should be built across the
Hellespont over which his army should pass into Europe.  But when the
strait had been bridged over, a great storm arose which destroyed the
bridge.  When Xerxes heard of it, he was exceedingly enraged and bade
his soldiers scourge the Hellespont with three hundred strokes of the
lash, and he let down into the sea a pair of fetters.  Whilst this
was being done, the sea was thus addressed:


    Thou bitter water, thy master lays on thee this penalty, because
    thou didst wrong him, though never having suffered any wrong from
    him; and Xerxes the King will pass over thee, whether thou be
    willing or no.


The sea was punished in this way, and command was given to cut off
the heads of those who had had charge of building the bridge.  Not
with impunity was the Great King disobeyed.  A new bridge was then
built, stronger and more secure than the first, and over this the
army passed in safety.

In order that no accidents might happen, honour was paid to the gods,
and incense and fragrant perfumes were burnt upon the bridge and the
road was strewn with branches of myrtle.  The crossing was to take
place early in the morning, and all were ready before the dawn broke.
As the sun was rising, Xerxes poured a libation from a golden cup
into the {142} sea, and prayed to the Sun that no accident might
befall him till he had conquered Europe, even to its furthest limits.
Having prayed, he cast the cup into the Hellespont and with it a
golden mixing bowl and a Persian sword, as gifts to the powers of the
sea.  When Xerxes had done this, the great army passed over the
bridge in brilliant array.  It took seven days and seven nights
without any pause for the whole army to pass over and it is said that
at the end, a man who dwelt on that coast and who had watched the
crossing, exclaimed:


    Why, O Zeus, in the likeness of a Persian man and taking for
    thyself the name of Xerxes instead of Zeus, hast thou brought all
    the nations of men to subdue Hellas?  Was it not possible for
    thee to do it without the help of these?"


When the whole army had crossed over safely, Xerxes inspected it.  He
drove through all the ranks in his chariot, and scribes who
accompanied him wrote down for him the names of all the nations who
were represented.  When he had done this, the ships were drawn down
into the sea, and Xerxes, changing from his chariot to a ship of
Sidon, sat down under a golden canopy and sailed along by the prows
of the ships and inspected his fleet.  The ships then set sail, and
were to go along the coast to Therma where the land army was to meet
them again.

Xerxes and the army then proceeded on their march through Thrace and
Macedonia.  Messengers {143} had been sent on ahead some time before
to make arrangements for provisioning this great host.  All the towns
through which the Persians passed were compelled to provide food and
drink for the men and the animals with them.  It was a tremendous
undertaking, and scarcity and want were left behind as the invaders
passed on.  The inhabitants had to provide great quantities of wheat
and barley, they were made to give up the best of the fatted cattle,
their birds and fowls, and to provide everything in the way of gold
and silver needed for the service of the table.  All this was a great
hardship to the people of the land, and in one place they went in a
body to their temple and entreated the gods that for the future they
would keep them from such evil.  Nevertheless they offered up a
thanksgiving to the gods for all the mercies they had shown to them
in the past, and especially for having granted that Xerxes, whilst in
their city had only thought good to take food once in each day, for
it would have been altogether impossible for them to have provided
him with breakfast in the same manner as dinner.

The fleet sailed safely to Therma and was joined there by the army as
had been arranged.  So far all had gone well for the Persians.  They
had succeeded in a great achievement, for apparently without any
serious mishaps, this tremendous army had been transported from
Sardis right round the Aegean and had been fed and cared for on the
way.  The difficulties must have been very great, and only splendid
organization could have done it successfully.  But it had been done,
and now Xerxes, in order to wreak {144} his vengeance on one Greek
city, stood with his army composed of the fighting men of forty-six
nations on the very threshold of Greece.  From Therma he could look
across to the mountains of Thessaly, he could see snow-topped
Olympus, the home of the gods who watched over the fortunes of the
freedom-loving Greeks.  The Athenians had withstood the Persians at
Marathon, but now the whole of the eastern world was marching against
them.  Could they withstand that mighty host, or would they be forced
to submit?


(b) _The Greeks_

Ten years had passed between the battle of Marathon and the arrival
of Xerxes on the borders of Greece.  In the years preceding 490 B.C.
the Persian power had been a terror to the Greek.  Not content with
subduing Asia even to the dim borders of India, the Great Kings had
pushed their way to the Aegean and had even conquered the Greeks who
dwelt along its eastern coasts.  Then, like an ominous war-cloud,
this mighty power had crossed the sea to Greece itself.  But there
the unexpected had happened.  At Marathon the Persians had sustained
at the hands of a small state, till then comparatively unknown, the
first great defeat they had ever met with.  The Plataeans had helped,
it is true, but their numbers had been small and it was the Athenians
who had really defeated the Persians.  Since then the Athenians had
enjoyed a great reputation for their military power.  Myths and
legends had woven {145} themselves round the name of Marathon with
the result that the power of the Athenians was reputed greater than
perhaps it actually was, and that of Persia was certainly
depreciated.  If she had been as formidable as had always been
supposed, how could the Athenians have defeated her almost unaided?
So for a number of years the Greeks had felt less terror at the name
of Persia, and they had been enjoying a certain feeling of security
little realizing how false it was.

But suddenly they were shaken out of their calm.  Rumours of the
Persian preparations for an invasion of Greece reached them, rumours
which were doubtless exaggerated, but which nevertheless had much
truth in them.  It is amazing how in spite of slow and difficult
communication news was swiftly carried in those days from place to
place.  So the Greeks were fairly well-informed as to what the
Persians were doing.  At this crisis the Athenians took the lead, and


    if anyone should say that the Athenians proved to be the saviours
    of Hellas, he would not fail to hit the truth; these were they
    who, preferring that Hellas should continue to exist in freedom,
    roused up all of Hellas.  Nor did fearful oracles which came from
    Delphi and cast them into dread, induce them to leave Hellas.


The first thing the Greeks did was to hold a conference at Corinth,
which was attended by envoys from all the leading states except Argos
and Thebes, which stood aloof.  At this conference the Greeks {146}
made three important decisions.  They resolved that they would
reconcile all their own differences and bring to an end the wars they
had with one another; as Hellenes they would unite against the common
foe.  Then they determined to send spies to Asia, who should bring
back accurate reports of the preparations and power of Xerxes.  And
lastly, they would send messengers to the colonies in Sicily, Corcyra
and Crete asking for assistance.

Three spies set out, but they were captured in Sardis and condemned
to death.  When Xerxes, however, heard what had happened, he sent for
the spies, who were brought into his presence.  To their surprise,
instead of being led out to immediate execution, Xerxes commanded
that they should be led round and shown the whole army, both foot and
horse, and when they had seen everything, they were to be set free to
return home.  He did this, because he said that


    if the spies had been put to death, the Hellenes would not have
    been informed of his power, how far beyond any description it
    was; while on the other hand by putting to death three men, they
    would not very greatly damage the enemy; but when these returned
    back to Hellas, he thought it likely that the Hellenes, hearing
    of his power, would deliver up their freedom to him themselves,
    before the expedition took place, and thus there would be no need
    for them to have the labour of marching an army against them.


Little did Xerxes know the kind of freedom-loving people with whom he
had to deal.  So the {147} spies looked at everything and then
returned to Greece.

Meanwhile the messengers to the colonies returned.  The answers to
the appeal for support were very disappointing.  Neither Sicily,
Corcyra nor Crete would help.  They either refused outright or made
uncertain answers.  They seem to have thought more of their own
preservation than of the safety of Greece as a whole; they thought
the Persian would probably win, and they preferred either to be on
the winning side, or to be in such a position that they could make
good terms with the Persian, did he conquer.

The Greeks now made ready to go out with their armies to meet the
Persian foe.  The chief command was given to Sparta, the greatest
military state in Greece, and they marched to the Vale of Tempe in
the north of Thessaly, where they hoped to meet Xerxes and prevent
him from coming into Greece.  When they got there, however, they
found that it would not be possible to hold the pass against the
enemy, for it was so situated that the Persians could attack them by
sea as well as by land, and there was another path over the mountains
by which the Persians could attack them in the rear.  So the Greeks
withdrew to Corinth, in order to deliberate further where they would
meet the enemy.  This retreat from Thessaly took place while Xerxes
and his army were crossing the Hellespont, and it had important
consequences for the Persians, for the Thessalians, hitherto never
very loyal to Greece, seeing the other Greeks leave their land, "took
the side of the Medes {148} with a good will and no longer
half-heartedly, so that in the course of events they proved very
serviceable to the King."

The Greeks now decided on making a stand much further south at
Thermopylae.  This was a narrow pass and easier to defend, so they
resolved


    to guard it and not permit the Barbarian to go by into Hellas,
    and they resolved that the fleet should sail to Artemisium, for
    these points are near to one another, so that each division of
    their forces could have information of what was happening to the
    other.


At Thermopylae the Greeks awaited the Persians.



II. THERMOPYLAE

It was midsummer in the year 480 B.C. when the Persian host left
Therma and marched down through Thessaly to the Pass of Thermopylae.
The Persians encamped before the Pass and a scout was sent forward to
bring back information as to what the Greeks were doing.  Only a
small force of Greeks was defending the Pass, the main part of the
Greek army was kept back further to the south to defend the Isthmus.
A small body of about three hundred Spartans had been sent under
their King Leonidas to defend the Pass of Thermopylae, and, if
possible, to prevent the Persians from advancing further into Greece.
These three hundred men were the picked body-guard of the King, a
force in which only fathers of sons might serve, so that their
families might not die out of Sparta.

{149}

The Persian scout went cautiously forward, and to his great surprise
saw some of the Spartans practising athletic exercises and others
combing their long hair.  He could not see the rest, as an ancient
wall built across the Pass hid them from sight.  He returned to
Xerxes and reported on what he had seen.  The King sent for a Greek
who was in his camp and asked him what this behaviour of the Spartans
might mean.  He told him that they were following an ancient Spartan
custom, for "whenever they are about to put their lives in peril,
then they attend to the arrangement of their hair."  The Spartans
knew against what odds they had to fight, but their duty had placed
them where they were, and no Spartan ever retreated or turned his
back upon his foe.

The Great King intended to attack at the same moment both by land and
by sea.  The fleets were at Artemisium, and there were four times as
many Persian ships as Greek.  A hot and sultry summer's day had
passed, and the signal to attack was expected in the morning.  But at
early dawn the sea began to be violently agitated and a strong east
wind arose, thunder rumbled in the distance, and soon a terrible
storm broke.  The Greek ships were in safety, but a large number of
Persian ships were wrecked and great treasure was lost.  For three
days the storm continued, and for three days Xerxes had to wait
before he could attack the Pass.  When on the fourth day the storm
died down, the sea fight began.  Three times over the Greeks attacked
the Persian ships, and each time they prevailed against them.  {150}
After the third fight, news was brought to Themistocles, the Athenian
admiral, that two hundred Persian ships, sailing to the Greek rear,
had been lost in the storm, so that there was nothing more to fear
from an attack in that direction.  The Greeks succeeded in throwing
the Persian ships into confusion and so crippled the fleet, that they
finally won the battle.  It was then that Xerxes gave the order to
his army to attack the Pass.

For the whole of a hot summer's day the Persians attacked.  First the
Medes tried to force the Pass, but it was narrow, and as they met the
Spartan spears, down they went, man after man.  Hour after hour this
continued, but every attack was repulsed and hardly a Spartan fell.
Then the Medes withdrew and the Immortals took their place.  They
were fresh and greatly superior to the Spartans in numbers, but
neither could they prevail against them.  At times the Spartans would
make a pretence of turning to flight, but when the Barbarians
followed after them with shouting and clashing of arms, then they
turned and faced the Barbarians and slew large numbers of them.  The
Spartans lost a few men, but at the end of the day the Persians drew
back, exhausted and defeated, and the Spartans still held the Pass.

The next day, the same thing happened.  So great was the slaughter of
the Persians on this day that three times Xerxes leapt up from the
seat from which he was watching the fight, in deadly fear for his
army.  But by the end of the day the Pass had not been taken, and
again the Persians withdrew, {151} exhausted and driven back, leaving
large numbers of their companions lying dead before the Pass.

Xerxes was in great straits as to what he should do next, when he was
told that a man desired audience of him.  He was a Greek who lived in
that region, and he offered, if the Persian would reward him with
enough gold, to lead his army by a path known to him, but of which
the Spartans were ignorant, over the mountain to a spot from which
the Pass might be attacked in the rear.  It was a long and difficult
path, but the traitor knew it well and would guide them surely.  The
reward was promised, and about the time when the lamps were lit in
the camp, the Immortals with their commander set out under the
guidance of the traitor.  All through the long black night they
climbed by a steep and rocky path, and when dawn appeared they had
reached the summit of the mountain.  In this region a thousand men of
Phocis were stationed to protect their own country and the path which
led down to the valley below.  They could not see the Persians as
they climbed, for the sides of the mountain were covered with oak
trees, but in the great silence which falls upon nature just before
the dawn, suddenly these men heard an unexpected sound.  It was the
Persians stepping on the dried oak leaves which lay thickly on the
ground beneath their feet.  The Greeks started up and when the
Persians, coming suddenly upon them, discharged their arrows at them,
they retreated to a higher position close at hand, where they waited
for the expected attack.  To their surprise, however, the enemy
turned away {152} and left them.  On went the traitor followed by the
Persians, until they were on the road in the rear of Leonidas.

While it was yet night, scouts came down from the mountains where
they had been keeping watch, and told Leonidas that the Pass was
turned, and that the enemy was approaching it from the rear.
Leonidas knew what that meant, the end had come, but he commanded
Spartans and he knew that whilst one remained alive, the Pass would
not be taken.

At sunrise, according to the arrangement made with the traitor,
Xerxes attacked.  The Spartans, knowing that they were going forth to
death, now advanced further out into the broader space in front of
the Pass, where there was more room.  And then followed a fight which
will never be forgotten.  The Barbarians made attack after attack,
and the Spartans slew them and drove them back every time.  Many were
driven into the sea and perished, and many more were trodden down
while still alive and trampled to death, and there was no reckoning
of the number that perished.  Two brothers of Xerxes fell fighting,
and then Leonidas fell.  The Spartans fought for the body of their
King; most of their spears were by this time broken, so they fought
and slew the Persians with their swords.  Four times the Persians had
almost taken the body of the King, and four times they were driven
back by the Spartans, when word came that the Immortals were
attacking the Pass in the rear.  Then the remaining Spartans placed
themselves with the body of Leonidas behind {153} the wall, and there
they made their last defence.  On this spot those who still had them
defended themselves with daggers, and those who had no weapons left,
fought with their hands and teeth, until, overwhelmed by the
Barbarians who were now assailing them both in the front and in the
rear, they were surrounded and cut down, until not a Spartan was left
alive.

And so the Persians took the Pass, and the road to Athens lay clear
before them.

The Spartans were buried where they fell, and a pillar was erected to
the memory of those who had died so great a death in defending the
Pass.  On it was inscribed the simple words:


    Stranger, bear word to the Spartans that we lie here obedient to
    their charge.



III. THEMISTOCLES

The Persians had taken the Pass of Thermopylae; Thebes, the chief
city in Boeotia, was anxious to be on the winning side and was a
_medizing_ state; there was nothing to save Athens from the
conquering Persian army.

But in this dark hour, a statesman arose in Athens who was to restore
her confidence and to make her place secure among the free nations of
the world.  This man was Themistocles, already known to the Athenians
as the admiral who had defeated the Persians at Artemisium.  He came
of a humble family, but the laws made by Solon and later law-givers
{154} made it possible for him, in spite of his birth, to rise to the
highest position in the state.


    From his youth Themistocles had been of a vehement and impetuous
    nature, of a quick intelligence, and a strong and aspiring bent
    for action and great affairs.  The holidays and intervals in his
    studies he did not spend in play or idleness, as other children,
    but would be always inventing or arranging some oration or speech
    to himself, so that his master would often say to him: "You, my
    boy, will be nothing small, but great one way or other, for good
    or else for bad."  He received reluctantly and carelessly
    instructions given him to improve his manners and behaviour, or
    to teach him any pleasing or graceful accomplishment, but
    whatever was said to improve him in sagacity or in management of
    affairs, he would give attention to beyond one of his years.  And
    when in company he was obliged to defend himself because he could
    not play on any stringed instrument,[3] he would retort that
    though he could not do that, yet were a small and obscure city
    put into his hands, he would make it great and glorious.  It is
    said that Themistocles was so transported with the thoughts of
    glory, and so inflamed with the passion for great actions, that
    though he was still young when the battle of Marathon was fought,
    upon the skilful conduct of the general Miltiades being
    everywhere talked about, he was observed to be thoughtful, and
    reserved, alone by himself; he passed the nights without sleep,
    and avoided all his usual places of recreation, and to those who
    wondered at the change, and inquired the reason of it, he gave
    the answer that "the trophy of Miltiades would not let him
    sleep."[4]


{155}

This was the man who was now to help Athens, and he possessed the
very qualities most needed in the serious position in which she found
herself.


    For Themistocles was a man whose natural force was unmistakable;
    this was the quality for which he was distinguished above all
    other men; from his own native acuteness, and without any study
    either before or at the time, he was the ablest judge of the
    course to be pursued in a sudden emergency, and could best divine
    what was likely to happen in the remotest future.  Whatever he
    had in hand he had the power of explaining to others, and even
    where he had no experience he was quite competent to form a
    sufficient judgment; no one could foresee with equal clearness
    the good or evil intent which was hidden in the future.


This foresight was shown in the belief held by Themistocles, who
"when others were of opinion that the battle of Marathon would be an
end to the war, thought it was but the beginning of far greater
conflicts,"[5] and because of this belief he did his best to
encourage the Athenians to be ready for whatever might happen.

Themistocles believed that the chief thing necessary for Athens was a
fleet, and he persuaded the Athenians, though with great difficulty
for they could not at first see the necessity, to build ships.  There
was not very much money in Athens just then, and without money ships
could not be built.  But at this critical time, an unexpectedly large
sum of money was paid into the public treasury.  This was {156} the
revenue from the silver mines at Laurium in the south of Attica,
which the Athenians were intending to divide amongst themselves.
"Then Themistocles persuaded them to give up this plan of division
and to make for themselves with this money two hundred ships."  This
they did, and they also improved the harbour of Athens, and


    henceforward, little by little, turning and drawing the city down
    towards the sea in the belief that with their ships they might be
    able to repel the Persians and command Greece, Themistocles, so
    Plato tells us, turned the Athenians from steady soldiers into
    mariners and seamen and gave occasion for the reproach against
    him, that he took away from them the spear and the shield and
    bound them to the bench and the oar.[6]


Themistocles did not accomplish this without opposition.  He had a
rival in Athens, Aristeides, a man who had grown up with him and
played with him as a boy, but who had always taken the opposite sides
in whatever they were doing.  Unlike Themistocles, Aristeides
belonged to a noble family, and whenever Themistocles took the side
of the people, Aristeides favoured the nobles.  Even as boys they


    were at variance with each other, and they soon made proof of
    their natural inclinations; the one being ready, adventurous and
    subtle, engaging readily and eagerly in everything; the other of
    a staid and settled temper, intent on the exercise of justice,
    not admitting any degree of falsity or trickery, no not so much
    as at his play.[7]


{157}

Of all his virtues, it was the _justice_ of Aristeides which most
appealed to the people; it never failed under any circumstances, and
so they gave him the surname of the _Just_.

Now Aristeides believed that the building of a navy for Athens was
too great a change from the former policy of the city.  The Athenians
had won the battle of Marathon and had thereby secured their
reputation as soldiers, and he thought it very ill-advised and
dangerous to depart from the old traditions and to put all their
strength into war ships.  Themistocles thought otherwise, and the two
leaders came into violent conflict with each other.

There was at Athens a custom known as Ostracism.  This was a law
which once a year allowed the Athenians to banish for ten years any
citizen who had, as they thought, assumed too much power or had
become too popular.  They were always afraid that such power might
lead to a return of the Tyranny, and in their passionate desire to
prevent that, they were often led to banish those who deserved a
better reward for their services.  In times of national danger, those
who had been ostracized were sometimes recalled before their term of
exile was over; otherwise they were not allowed to return until ten
years had passed.  The sentence of ostracism could not be passed
unless at least six thousand votes were cast.  Each vote was written
on a piece of broken pottery, called an ostrakon and then placed in
an urn set up in a special place for the purpose.  The conflict
between Themistocles and Aristeides grew so {158} great that the
Athenians decided that one or the other of them must give way and
leave Athens, and they decided to hold an ostracism.  This resulted
in the banishment of Aristeides, and Themistocles was left to carry
out his aims for Athens without opposition.  It is said that during
the voting,


    an illiterate fellow, meeting Aristeides and not recognizing him,
    gave him his sherd and begged him to write Aristeides upon it;
    and he being surprised, asked if Aristeides had ever done him any
    injury.  "None at all," said he, "neither know I the man: but I
    am tired of hearing him everywhere called the Just."  Aristeides,
    hearing this, is said to have made no reply, but returned the
    sherd with his own name inscribed.[8]


Aristeides was a noble and a conservative, and opposed to the changes
which Themistocles felt to be so necessary if Athens was to keep her
freedom, but he was a man whose honour has never been called in
question, who gave of his best to his country without ever asking for
reward, and who, when he was later recalled to power and his great
rival was falling into disgrace, never, as far as is known, by word
or deed, treated him in any way that was mean-spirited or ungenerous.

Thanks to Themistocles, the Athenians now had a navy and a good
harbour, but that would not protect them from the army of Xerxes
which was advancing through Boeotia towards Attica.  In their alarm,
they sent messengers to Delphi to ask the {159} advice of the Oracle,
but the answer they received filled them with despair.  They were
told to leave their home, for all was doomed to destruction, that
fire and the War-God were about to bring ruin upon them, that there
was no hope for them, but that they would steep their souls in
sorrow.  The Athenians could not believe that such a fate awaited
them, and they sent again to the Oracle, entreating Apollo to look
upon them with favour.  At last they received the following answer,
with which they returned to Athens:


  Pallas cannot prevail to soften Zeus the Olympian,
  Though she assail him with words and ply him with counsels of wisdom,
  Yet will I give thee afresh an answer firm and unchanging:
  Conquered must lie the land where stands the fortress Cecropian,
  Conquered the peaceful mead of sacred Cithaeron; but thenceforth
  Zeus, wide-gazing, permits to keep in honour of Pallas
  Walls of wood unshaken to shelter thee and thy children.
  Wait not for horse nor for foot that come to ruin thy country,
  Out of the mainland afar; but rather yield to the foeman,
  Turning thy back in flight, for yet shalt thou meet him in battle.
  O divine Salamis! how many children of women
  Shalt thou slay at the sowing of corn or the ripening of harvest![9]


{160}

With this answer the Athenians returned home, and there great
discussion arose as to the meaning of the Oracle.  Some interpreted
it as meaning that they should build a fence of wood round the city,
others that the "walls of wood" could only mean ships, and that they
should leave everything and betake themselves to their fleet.  Then
there were some who thought that the last lines foretold a terrible
defeat for Athens, but Themistocles rose up in the Assembly and
declared that had the god meant that, he would have said "Salamis the
cruel or the merciless," but since he had said "Salamis the divine,"
the slaughter must refer to the enemy and not to the Athenians.
Themistocles was also on the side of those who held that the wooden
walls were the ships, and he persuaded the Athenians to remove to a
place of safety out of Attica their wives and children, and as much
of their property as they could.  This they did, and then leaving
only a few men to guard the Acropolis, the fighting men betook
themselves to their ships and anchored near the island of Salamis.

All this was done none too soon, for


    the Barbarians had now arrived in Attica and all the land was
    being laid waste with fire.  They reached Athens, and took the
    lower city, and then finding that there were still a few of the
    Athenians left in the temple, they took their post upon the
    rising ground opposite the Acropolis and besieged them.  The
    Athenians continued to defend themselves although they had come
    to the extremity of distress, so for a long time Xerxes was not
    able to capture them.  But at length, finding a place {161} where
    no one was keeping guard, because no one would have supposed that
    any man could ascend that way, the Persians forced their way up
    to the Acropolis, and after entering the gates they slew all the
    defenders, plundered the temple and set fire to the whole of the
    Acropolis.


And so Athens fell into the hands of the Barbarians.



IV. SALAMIS TO THE END

Athens was burnt, her walls had been destroyed, but the Athenian men
had not yet been defeated; they were with the fleet at Salamis, and
ready to fight to the death for the freedom of their state.  They
were joined there by ships from the other Greek states, but when the
news of the burning of Athens reached the Greek commanders, those who
came from the Peloponnesus, especially the Spartans, were unwilling
to remain at Salamis any longer, but wanted to sail to their homes,
and should the enemy pursue them, make their last stand there.
Themistocles opposed this policy with all his might, and a hot
discussion followed.  The Corinthian admiral taunted Themistocles
with wishing to stay and fight at Salamis, because he had now no
native land, to which he replied that where there were Athenian ships
and Athenian men, there was Athens, and that moreover it was a larger
land than Corinth, seeing that the Athenians had sent two hundred
ships, more than the ships of all the other Greeks put together.  In
spite of his passionate appeal, the {162} commanders of the other
Greek ships decided to set sail and leave the Athenians to fight the
Barbarians alone.

In these desperate straits, Themistocles thought of a stratagem by
which he might force a battle, before his allies had time to desert
him.  He sent a secret messenger, whom he could trust, in a boat to
the encampment of the Barbarians and charged him to give this message
to Xerxes:


    The commander of the Athenians sent me privately without the
    knowledge of the other Hellenes, (for, as it chances, he is
    disposed to the cause of the King, and desires rather that your
    side should gain the victory than that of the Hellenes), to
    inform you that the Hellenes are planning to take flight, having
    been struck with dismay; and now it is possible for you to win a
    great victory, if you do not permit them to flee away: for they
    are not of one mind with one another and they will not stand
    against you in fight, but ye shall see them fighting a battle by
    sea with one another, those who are disposed to your side against
    those who are not.


Xerxes received this message with joy and immediately acted upon it,
and began to surround the Greeks so that not one might escape.
Whilst this was being done, Aristeides, the banished rival of
Themistocles, whose sentence had been lifted in this hour of peril
when Athens needed all her sons, suddenly returned from Aegina to the
Athenian fleet, with the news that it was impossible for any of the
Greeks to sail away because they were even then surrounded by the
enemy.  Aristeides gave this {163} news first to Themistocles, saying
to him that if at other times they had been rivals, there was only
one kind of rivalry in which they could now engage, a rivalry as to
which should do more service to his country.  The news he brought was
true, and the Greeks could not now escape a battle.

The sea-fight began as the day dawned.  Xerxes had erected a great
throne for himself from which he could watch the events of the day;
"and full in view of all the host the throne stood on a high knoll
hard beside the sea."

Aeschylus, a great Athenian poet, who was himself present at the
battle, wrote a play called the _Persians_ in which a messenger takes
the news of Salamis to the mother of Xerxes, waiting at Susa for the
return of her son.  Never before had he been defeated, but now she
must listen to a tale of woe:

  'Twas this began all our disaster, Queen:
  A demon or fell fiend rose--who knows whence?--
  For from the Athenian host a Hellene came,
  And to thy son, to Xerxes, told this tale,
  That when the mirk of black night should be come,
  The Greeks would not abide, but, leaping straight
  Upon the galley thwarts, this way and that
  In stealthy flight would seek to save their lives.
  Soon as he heard, discerning neither guile
  In that Greek, nor the jealousy of heaven,
  This word to all his captains he proclaims,
  That, when the sun should cease to scorch the earth,
  And gloom should fill the hallowed space of sky,
  In three lines should they range their throng of ships
  To guard each pass, each sea-ward surging strait;
{164}
  And others should enring all Aias' Isle:
  Since, if the Greeks should yet escape fell doom,
  And find their ships some privy path of flight,
  Doomed to the headsman all these captains were.
  Thus spake he, in spirit over-confident,
  Knowing not what the gods would bring to pass.
  With hearts obedient, in no disarray,
  Then supped our crews, and every mariner
  To the well-rounded rowlock lashed his oar.
  But when the splendour faded of the sun,
  And night came on, each master of the oar
  A-shipboard went, and every man-at-arms.
  Then rank to rank of long ships passed the word:
  And, as was each appointed, so they sailed.
  So all night long the captains of the ships
  Kept all the sea-host sailing to and fro.
  And night passed by, yet did the Hellene host
  Essay in no wise any secret flight.
  But when the day by white steeds chariot-borne,
  Radiant to see, flooded all earth with light,
  First from the Hellenes did a clamorous shout
  Ring for a triumphant chant; and wild and high
  Pealed from the island rock the answering cheer
  Of Echo.  Thrilled through all our folks dismay
  Of baffled expectation; for the Greeks
  Not as for flight that holy paean sang,
  But straining battleward with heroic hearts.
  The trumpet's blare set all their lines aflame.
  Straightway with chiming dip of dashing oars
  They smote the loud brine to the timing cry,
  And suddenly flashed they all full into view.
  Foremost their right wing seemly-ordered led
  In fair array; next, all their armament
  Battleward swept on.  Therewithal was heard
  A great shout--"On, ye sons of Hellas, on!
{165}
  Win for the home-land freedom!--freedom win
  For sons, wives, temples of ancestral gods,
  And old sires' graves! this day are all at stake!"
  Yea, and from us low thunder of Persian cheers
  Answered--no time it was for dallying!
  Then straightway galley dashed her beak of bronze
  On galley.  'Twas a Hellene ship began
  The onset, and shore all the figure-head
  From a Phoenician: captain charged on captain.
  At first the Persian navy's torrent-flood
  Withstood them; but when our vast fleet was cramped
  In strait-space--friend could lend no aid to friend,--
  Then ours by fangs of allies' beaks of bronze
  Were struck, and shattered all their oar-array;
  While with shrewd strategy the Hellene ships
  Swept round, and rammed us, and upturned were hulls
  Of ships;--no more could one discern the sea,
  Clogged all with wrecks and limbs of slaughtered men:
  The shores, the rock-reefs, were with corpses strewn.
  Then rowed each bark in fleeing disarray,
  Yea, every keel of our barbarian host,
  They with oar-fragments and with shards of wrecks
  Smote, hacked, as men smite tunnies or a draught
  Of fishes; and a moaning, all confused
  With shrieking, hovered wide o'er that sea-brine
  Till night's dark presence blotted out the horror.
  That swarm of woes, yea, though for ten days' space
  I should rehearse could I not tell in full.
  Yet know this well, that never in one day
  Died such a host, such tale untold, of men.[10]


Xerxes, the Great King, was defeated, and his one desire now was to
return home to Asia.  He left his {166} general, Mardonius, in
Thessaly with a picked body of men, who should carry on the war in
the spring, but he himself, with what was left of his army, marched
back through Macedonia and Thrace, to the Hellespont and so back to
his own land.  It was a very different march from the triumphant one
he had made earlier in the year.  The inhabitants of the lands
through which they had passed had no fear of a defeated King, and it
was difficult to obtain provisions.  The Persians seized what crops
there were,


    and if they found no crops, then they took the grass which was
    growing up from the earth, and stripped off the bark from the
    trees and plucked down the leaves, and devoured them.  Then
    plague seized upon the army and some of them who were sick the
    King left behind.


In such manner did Xerxes return home.

In the meanwhile, Mardonius and his army spent the winter in
Thessaly.  When the spring came, (this was the spring of 479 B.C.),
he sent a messenger to the Athenians who spoke these words to them:


    Athenians, there has come a message from the King which speaks in
    this manner: I remit to you all the offences which were committed
    against me, and this I say: I will give you back your own land
    and any other in addition, and you shall remain independent; and
    I will rebuild all your temples, provided you will make a treaty
    with me.


The Spartans heard that this message had come, and they sent
messengers to Athens imploring the {167} Athenians to make no terms
with the Barbarian, for they feared that if Athens became subject to
Persia, there would be no safety left for them.  They offered to send
supplies to Athens to make up for the loss of their harvest,
destroyed by the Persians, to support the families of those Athenians
who had been slain, to do almost anything, in fact, if only the
Athenians would stand firm.

The Spartans need not have feared.  The freedom-loving Athenians were
not likely to submit to a barbarian foe.  They sent back to the
Persian this answer:


    So long as the sun goes on the same course by which he goes now,
    we will never make an agreement with Xerxes, but trusting to the
    gods and heroes as allies, we will go forth to defend ourselves
    against him.


To the Spartans they said:


    It was natural, no doubt, that you should be afraid lest we
    should make a treaty with the Barbarian; but it was an unworthy
    fear for men who knew so well the spirit of the Athenians, namely
    that there is neither so great quantity of gold anywhere upon the
    earth, nor any land so beautiful, that we should be willing to
    accept it and enslave Hellas by taking the side of the Medes.  Be
    assured of this, that so long as one of the Athenians remains
    alive, we will never make an agreement with Xerxes.  We are
    grateful for your thought toward us, but we shall continue to
    endure as we may, and not be a trouble in any way to you.  But
    send out an army as speedily as you may, for the Barbarian will
    be here invading our land at no far distant time.  Therefore
    {168} before he arrives here in Attica come to our rescue quickly
    in Boeotia.


Thus the Athenians made answer, and upon that the envoys went away
back to Sparta.

When the messengers returned to Mardonius with the answer from
Athens, the Persian general marched out of Thessaly down through
Boeotia into Attica, and for the second time the Barbarian burnt
Athens.  Xerxes had left but little to burn, Mardonius left nothing.
He then marched back into Boeotia and set up his camp in the region
between Thebes and Plataea.  Here he waited for the Greeks.  There
was some delay before they came, for the Spartans made various
excuses for not setting out, but at length under their King,
Pausanias, they marched out and joined the Athenians.  And then at
Plataea was fought the last great battle in this great war.  All day
long it raged, and at first it seemed as if the Persians were
gaining, but whilst the outcome of the battle was still in doubt,
Mardonius was killed, and with him fled all the hopes of the
Persians.  They took to flight, but were pursued and overtaken by the
Greeks and very few were left alive.  The Greeks then entered the
camp of the Persians, and they gazed in astonishment at the riches
they found there.  There were "tents furnished with gold and silver,
and beds overlaid with gold and silver, and mixing bowls of gold, and
cups and other drinking vessels."  One tenth of this rich plunder was
sent to Delphi and the rest divided amongst those who had fought the
battle.  A bronze statue of Zeus was sent as an {169} offering to
Olympia, and one of Poseidon was sent to the Isthmus.  It was further
resolved that the land belonging to Plataea should be held sacred for
ever, and that never again should fighting take place on it.

After the Persians had taken the Pass of Thermopylae, the body of
Leonidas had been taken and cruelly used in revenge for his having
dared to withstand the Great King, and to slaughter so many of his
Persian soldiers.  It was suggested to Pausanias that he should take
vengeance for this barbarous act by mutilating the body of Mardonius
who had fallen in the battle.


    Stranger [he answered], thou holdest me as nought by advising me
    to do such a thing.  These things it is more fitting for
    Barbarians to do than for Hellenes, and even with them we find
    fault for doing so.  I do not desire in any such manner as this
    to please those who like such things.  As for Leonidas, he has
    been greatly avenged already by the unnumbered lives which have
    been taken of these men.  As for thee, come not again to me with
    such a proposal, nor give me such advice; and be thankful,
    moreover, that thou hast no punishment for it now.


In the Persian camp, the Greeks found the tent of Xerxes himself,
which he had left for Mardonius, not wishing to be cumbered with too
much baggage in his flight from Greece.  When Pausanias saw it, he,


    seeing the furniture of Mardonius furnished with gold and silver
    and hangings of different colours, ordered the {170} bakers and
    the cooks to prepare a meal as they were used to do for
    Mardonius.  Then when they did this as they had been commanded,
    it is said that Pausanias seeing the couches of gold and of
    silver with luxurious coverings, and the tables of gold and
    silver, and the magnificent apparatus of the feast, was
    astonished at the good things set before him, and for sport he
    ordered his own servants to prepare a Laconian meal; and as, when
    the banquet was served, the difference between the two was great,
    Pausanias laughed and sent for the commanders of the Hellenes;
    and when these had come together, Pausanias said, pointing to the
    preparation of the two meals severally: "Hellenes, for this
    reason I assembled you together, because I desired to show you
    the senselessness of this leader of the Medes, who having such
    fare as this, came to us who have such sorry fare as ye see here,
    in order to take it away from us."  Thus it is said that
    Pausanias spoke to the commanders of the Hellenes.


After the battle of Salamis, the Persian ships had withdrawn to
Samos, and those of the Greeks to Delos, where they had spent the
winter.  In the spring, when the armies were marching out to meet at
Plataea, the fleets moved slowly towards the Ionian coast, and on the
same day as the battle of Plataea, so Herodotus tells us, they met in
a fierce sea-fight, in which the Persians were completely routed.
Thus on the same day, by land and sea, the Barbarian was defeated and
Greece was free.  She had proved that right was greater than might,
and that in the cause of freedom the weaker might stand against the
stronger and prevail.



[1] Except where otherwise noted, Chapter IX is taken or adapted from
the _History of Herodotus_.

[2] See p. 385.

[3] See p. 227.

[4] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

[5] Thucydides, I.

[6] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

[7] Plutarch: _Life of Aristeides_.

[8] Plutarch: _Life of Aristeides_.

[9] From the translation in _Greek History for Young Readers_ by
Alice Zimmern.

[10] Aeschylus: The Persians, translated by A. S. Way.




{171}

CHAPTER X

THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE


I. THE FORTIFICATIONS OF ATHENS

The Persian had been defeated, and Greece was free.  The Athenians
had suffered more than any other state, for they had been forced to
leave their city to be occupied by the enemy, and twice it had been
burnt to the ground.  Now, however, they were free to return.  The
city was utterly destroyed, but a great hope for the future filled
their hearts when they found that the sacred olive tree on the
Acropolis, which had been burnt by the Persians, was not dead after
all, but had sent up fresh green shoots.  Athena had not deserted
them.

Themistocles was now the acknowledged leader of Athens, and the hero
of all Greece.


    At the next Olympic Games, when he entered the course, the
    spectators took no further heed of those who were contesting for
    the prizes, but spent the whole day in looking at him, showing
    him to the strangers, admiring him, and applauding him by
    clapping their hands, and other expressions of joy, so that he
    himself, much {172} gratified, confessed to his friends that he
    then reaped the fruit of all his labours for the Greeks.[1]


He was by nature a great lover of honours and glory, and he liked to
appear superior to other people.  After the battle of Salamis when
numbers of the Persian dead were washed ashore, "he perceived
bracelets and necklaces of gold about them, yet passed on, only
showing them to a friend that followed him, saying, 'Take you these
things, for you are not Themistocles.'"[2]

It was this man who had given Athens her navy by means of which she
had defeated the Barbarian, and he now realized that if she was to
keep her independence, the city must be well fortified.  The
Athenians were more than willing to follow his advice, and everyone
in the city, men, women and even children worked hard to rebuild the
walls.  Now the Spartans were becoming more and more jealous of the
increasing power of the Athenians, and when they heard of the new
walls that were rising all round Athens, they sent envoys there to
tell the Athenians that they held any such fortification of their
city unnecessary.  They thought it wiser that there should be no
strongly-walled city in Attica, for should an enemy ever capture it,
the citadel could be used as a base from which the enemy would go out
and conquer other places.  If war should come again, and the
Athenians should feel insecure in their city, Sparta would gladly
welcome them in the {173} Peloponnesus.  Themistocles suggested that
he should go to Sparta and talk everything over with the Spartan
leaders, and he set out accordingly.  He left instructions that
during his absence the work on the walls should go on with all
possible speed and that messengers were to be sent to tell him when
the work was finished.  But the Spartans were not satisfied with the
excuses and explanations given them by Themistocles, so he suggested
that they should send messengers to Athens to find out the truth for
themselves.  They had hardly started when the Athenian messengers
arrived with the news that the walls were built.  Themistocles then
told the whole truth to the Spartans, telling them that Athens was in
every way the equal of Sparta and would take no orders from her as to
what she should do or not do in her own land.  The Spartans were
angry, but they did not show it at that time, and Themistocles
returned home to Athens.

Themistocles next set to work to fortify the harbour of the Peiraeus.
Athens is a few miles inland from the sea, and the Peiraeus is her
harbour.  It is a peninsula with a deep bay on one side, in which
ships can lie safely at anchor.  A strong wall was built all round
this peninsula, and the narrow entrance to the harbour was made
secure by chains which could easily be drawn across in such a way as
to prevent, whenever necessary, the entrance of any ships.  The city
and the harbour were then connected by Long Walls, which practically
formed a fortified road down to the sea.  This gave Athens all the
advantages of a seaport, and an enemy would {174} find it as
difficult to take Athens as it had been to take Miletus.

The Persians had been defeated in Greece, but the Ionian Greeks in
Asia Minor were still subject to the Great King.  Now that the war
was over, these Greeks appealed to the states on the mainland to help
them.  Athens took a special interest in these Ionian colonies as
they had been settled by men of close kinship to the Athenians.  So
the


    Hellenes deliberated about removing the inhabitants of Ionia, and
    considered where they ought to settle them in those parts of
    Hellas of which they had command, leaving Ionia to the
    Barbarians: for it was evident to them that it was impossible on
    the one hand for them to be always stationed as guards to protect
    the Ionians, and, on the other hand, if they were not stationed
    to protect them, they had no hope that the Ionians would escape
    from the Persians.  Therefore it seemed good to these of the
    Peloponnesians who were in authority that they should remove the
    inhabitants of the trading ports which belonged to those peoples
    of Hellas who had taken the side of the Medes, and give that land
    to the Ionians to dwell in; but the Athenians did not think it
    good that the inhabitants of Ionia should be removed at all, nor
    that the Peloponnesians should consult about Athenian colonies;
    and as these vehemently resisted the proposal, the Peloponnesians
    gave way.[3]


The Spartans not only gave way, but when an Athenian fleet set sail
for the Hellespont, the Spartans sent twenty ships with Pausanias,
the general who had commanded at Plataea, to join the {175}
expedition.  The combined fleets took Sestos and then in the
following year Byzantium.  Pausanias was left in command at
Byzantium, and soon after a strange change was observed in him.  His
manner became overbearing and proud, and he gave up his Spartan
habits of simple living, and adopted Persian ways, even dressing as a
Persian.  All this was so suspicious that he was recalled to Sparta,
but as nothing was proved against him, he returned to Byzantium.
Here he entered into correspondence with Xerxes and offered, in
return for gold and the Great King's daughter as his bride, to betray
Greece to the Persians.  Though this was not known in Sparta till
later, his conduct became sufficiently suspicious for the Spartans to
recall him a second time, but at first they could find no definite
proofs of his treachery.  At last one of his slaves gave evidence
against him.  For some time Pausanias had been sending messengers to
Asia Minor, and this particular slave had noticed that none of these
messengers ever returned.  When in time it became his turn to be
sent, instead of bearing the message to the East, he took it to one
of the Ephors, who opened it and found in it proofs of treachery and
betrayal of Greece to the Barbarian, with instructions to kill the
slave who brought the message.  The news that his messenger had been
intercepted reached Pausanias, who immediately fled from his house
and took refuge in a chamber adjoining the shrine in one of the
temples.  Here he was secure, but the Ephors, in order to prevent his
escape, gave orders that the doorway should be blocked up, and,
imprisoned in the little chamber, {176} Pausanias slowly starved to
death.  He was only taken out when he was just at the point of death,
in order that the body of a traitor might not profane the temple.

Whilst these things had been taking place in Sparta, Themistocles had
been at the head of affairs in Athens.  He had many enemies amongst
the Athenians, and they accused him of many wrong acts.  These were
never definitely proved against him, and the records of the end of
his career are so scanty that it is difficult to know how much truth
there was in the accusations, but there were undoubtedly a number of
suspicious facts of which his enemies made use.  Amongst other things
he was accused of taking bribes.  He denied it, yet when he left
Athens, he possessed a strangely large fortune, the sources of which
were never explained.  Themistocles had a very biting tongue, and
when his enemies attacked him, he would remind them, much oftener
than was necessary, of the great services he had performed for Greece
and for Athens in particular, and this arrogant boasting made him
hated by many people who might otherwise have been his friends.  A
last serious accusation brought against him was that he was in
communication with the Persians and was about to play the traitor.
There was no proof of this, but Themistocles believed in the policy
of making peace with the Persians.  There was no fear that they would
again attack the Greeks, and Themistocles saw that wealth and
prosperity would most surely come to Athens through her trade, and so
he advocated peaceful relations with {177} the great empire of the
East, in order that Athenian merchants might go safely in and out of
her trading ports, and so add to the wealth and importance of Athens.
But this was a very unpopular policy to hold in Athens, and feeling
grew more and more bitter against Themistocles, until at last he was
ostracized.  He left Athens and wandered from place to place.  No
city would give him a welcome, partly because he was feared, and
partly because Athens was now a powerful state, and no one wanted to
offend her by giving shelter to one of her exiles.  Sometimes he was
forced to flee for his life, and once the only way in which he could
safely be sent out of a city was to hide him in a litter which was
placed in a closed carriage in the manner in which ladies usually
travelled, and so "he was carried on his journey, and those who met
or spoke with the driver upon the road were told that he was
conveying a young Greek woman out of Ionia to a nobleman at court."[4]

After this and similar adventures, homeless, a wanderer from city to
city, Themistocles the man who had saved Greece, who had laid the
foundations of the greatness of Athens, who had been the bitterest
and most relentless enemy of the Persians, this man came to Susa, and
prostrating himself before Artaxerxes, who had succeeded Xerxes as
King, he said to him:


    "O King, I am Themistocles the Athenian, driven into banishment
    by the Greeks.  The evils that I have done {178} to the Persians
    are numerous, but I come with a mind suited to my present
    calamities; prepared alike for favours or for anger.  If you save
    me, you will save your suppliant; if otherwise, you will destroy
    an enemy of the Greeks."[5]


The King rejoiced greatly over the arrival of Themistocles, and he
"was so well pleased, that in the night, in the middle of his sleep,
he cried out for joy three times, 'I have Themistocles the
Athenian.'"[6]  The courtiers around the King were less pleased, and
they spoke of Themistocles as "a subtle Greek serpent."

At the end of a year Themistocles was able to speak the Persian
language quite easily and he became very intimate with the King, who
honoured him above all strangers who came to the court.

There are no records to tell us of all the many things that must have
passed through the heart and mind of Themistocles, exiled from Greece
and living with the Persian, but tradition has handed down to us the
hope that at the end his ancient love and loyalty to Athens
triumphed, for it is said that the Great King summoned him to help
the Persians in an expedition against Greece, but that Themistocles,
rather than sink to such a depth of shame, drank poison, and so put
an end to his own life.  It was a tragic end to a great man, who had
done great deeds for his country.  But his character was not strong
{179} enough to stand the strain of the continued accusations,
insults and injustices of his enemies, and in the hour of testing he
failed and turned his back upon his country.  Though almost certainly
innocent of the worst of that of which he was accused while still in
Athens, his later actions place him, if not with those who became
actual traitors to their country, at least with those whose loyalty
and honour have been indelibly stained.

This flaw in the character of Themistocles was one that was very
common in Greece.  The Greeks were not a grateful people.  They, and
the Athenians in particular, were always afraid that too much power
in the hands of one man would lead them back to a Tyranny, and so
they frequently failed to recognize or reward in a way that was
fitting or lasting those who had done great deeds for them.  The
Greek patriot loved his state passionately, yet it was a love that
not uncommonly turned to hate, if it was met by ingratitude, and the
saddest pages in Greek history are those on which are recorded the
names of Greek traitors.

Athens could never have become the great state she did, but for the
work of Themistocles, and in spite of all that he did in the closing
years of his life, one would like to believe that the story preserved
by Plutarch is true.  He tells us that long years after the death of
Themistocles, there was a tomb near the haven of Peiraeus, where the
sea is always calm, which was reputed to be that of the great
Athenian statesman, and that it was said of it:

{180}

  Thy tomb is fairly placed upon the strand,
  Where merchants still shall greet it with the land;
  Still in and out 'twill see them come and go,
  And watch the galleys as they race below.[7]


Was it, perhaps, possible that the Athenians of a later generation,
recognizing what Themistocles had done for Athens, forgave him, and
brought his body home to rest near the great harbour which he himself
had made?



II. THE CONFEDERACY OF DELOS

The recall of Pausanias from Byzantium left the Spartans in Asia
Minor with no commander.  Sparta had never been very much in earnest
about freeing the Ionians, and the Ionians, very naturally, felt more
confidence in a sea-power than in one whose strength lay chiefly in
her army, and so they turned to Athens for leadership.

Themistocles was in exile, and his old rival Aristeides was now the
most powerful leader in Athens.  He believed that it was the duty of
the Athenians to do all in their power to free their kinsmen in the
Ionian cities from the Persian rule, and to this end, he and the
Ionian leaders formed a league, known as the Confederacy or League of
Delos.  It took its name from the island of Delos where the meetings
were held, and where the treasury of the League was kept.  Delos was
chosen because it could easily be reached by all the members of the
League, and also because it was a place specially honoured by Apollo,
{181} for legend said he had been born there, and before Delphi had
become so important, his chief sanctuary had been in his island
birthplace.

The object of the League was the freeing of all Hellenes in Asia
Minor and the islands of the Aegean from the Persians, and, having
secured their liberty to help them maintain their independence.  For
this purpose money and ships were needed.  "By the good will of the
allies, the Athenians obtained the leadership.  They immediately
fixed which of the cities should supply money and which of them ships
for the war against the Barbarians,"[8] and as they were


    desirous to be rated city by city in their due proportion, they
    gave Aristeides command to survey the countries and to assess
    everyone according to their ability and what they were worth; and
    he laid the tax not only without corruption and injustice but to
    the satisfaction and convenience of all.  Aristeides, moreover,
    made all the people of Greece swear to keep the league, and
    himself took the oath in the name of the Athenians, flinging
    wedges of red-hot iron into the sea, after curses against such as
    should break their vow.[9]


The contributions were collected every spring by ten specially
appointed men, called Hellenic Stewards, who brought the money to
Delos where it was placed in the treasury of the League.  The League
began its work at once, and one by one the Greek cities in Asia Minor
and the islands in the Aegean were set free, until at length not one
was left under the rule of Persia.  As each city became independent,
{182} it joined the League, which grew in strength and importance as
its numbers increased.  Athens was its acknowledged leader; not only
did she determine the amount each member should contribute, but the
Hellenic Stewards were all Athenians, and affairs of the League were
governed by Athenian law.  Slowly the relationship of Athens to the
other members of the League changed.  At first the states had
regarded themselves as allies of each other and of Athens, but as the
power of Athens grew, she began to look upon these Greek states less
as allies than as subjects who were bound to follow her lead and do
her bidding.  At length this relationship was so well-recognized that
in some states Athens exacted this oath of allegiance from those who
enjoyed her protection as members of the Delian League:


    I will not revolt from the people of the Athenians in any way or
    shape, in word or deed, or be an accomplice in revolt.  If any
    one revolts I will inform the Athenians.  I will pay the
    Athenians the tribute, and I will be a faithful and true ally to
    the utmost of my power.  I will help and assist the Athenian
    people if anyone injures them; and I will obey their commands.[10]


In name, Athens together with all the island states in the Aegean and
the Ionian cities in Asia Minor, were allies and independent.  Their
envoys still met at Delos, supposedly to take counsel with each
other, but in fact they were subject to Athens and obeyed her
commands.  The League had been formed in 477 B.C. and for
twenty-three years Delos was its {183} headquarters.  Then it was
suggested that the treasury should be moved to Athens, and that the
meetings should in future be held there.  No longer was Athens merely
the leading state amongst her allies.  The removal of the treasury
from Delos to Athens made her in name as well as in fact not simply
the leading state of a Confederation, but the Athenian Empire.



III. THE ATHENIAN EMPIRE UNDER PERICLES

Athens was now an Empire and was recognized as such.  The island
states in the Aegean as well as the Ionian cities on the mainland of
Asia Minor were bound to her by ties of allegiance.  The heart of the
Empire was Athens, and settlers from many different places were
welcomed there, if they brought with them something that contributed
to the welfare of the city: the sculptor, the worker in gold, silver
or other metals, the potter, the dyer, the leather-worker, and the
merchant who brought costly wares from distant lands, all these and
many more were welcomed.

[Illustration: PERICLES.  British Museum.]


Themistocles had been exiled, Aristeides was dead, and a statesman
named Pericles now took the leading part in Athenian affairs.  His
boyhood had been spent during some of the most thrilling years of
Athenian history.  As a child he had become a hero-worshipper of the
men who had fought at Marathon; he must have been amongst the older
children who were forced to flee from Athens on the approach of
Xerxes; and though not old enough to {184} fight, he was old enough
to understand how much hung upon the outcome of the battle of
Salamis, and he probably spent that great day in sound, if not also
in sight, of the conflict between the two hostile fleets.  His father
was the commander of the fleet which in the following year defeated
the Persian on the same day on which was fought the battle of Plataea
and one can imagine the youth, returning to his beloved Athens,
glorying in the deeds of his father and his countrymen, and resolved
to take his part in making Athens a great and glorious city.

Pericles belonged to a noble family, and he had been educated by some
of the great philosophers of his day.  Like Thales of Miletus, these
men believed that nature was governed by laws that had nothing to do
with the good-will or anger of the gods, and one of them, though
still believing in the existence of many gods, held the belief that
the world had been created by one Mind alone, and he taught Pericles
to share this belief.  This helped to free the mind of Pericles from
superstition, and on several occasions he tried to free others from
the fears which superstition brings.  He was once on board his ship
when an eclipse of the sun took place.  The darkness filled everyone
with terror, and it was looked upon as a sign of the wrath of the
gods.


    Pericles, therefore, perceiving the steersman seized with fear
    and at a loss what to do, took his cloak and held it up before
    the man's face, and, screening him with it so that he could not
    see, asked him whether he imagined there was great hurt, or the
    sign of any great hurt in this, {185} and he answering no,
    "What," said he, "does that differ from this, only that which has
    caused that darkness there, is something greater than a
    cloak."[11]


Although by birth belonging to the nobles, Pericles took the side of
the people in Athens, partly, at first, because he did not want to do
anything that might make it even seem that he was aiming at the sole
power of a Tyrant.  He soon became the acknowledged leader, and he
then


    entered on quite a new course and management of his time.  For he
    was never seen to walk in any street but that which led to the
    market-place and the council hall, and he avoided invitations of
    friends to supper, and all friendly visiting and intercourse
    whatever.  He also presented himself at intervals only, not
    coming at all times into the Assembly, but reserving himself for
    great occasions.[12]


In many ways Pericles showed himself superior to the men around him,
and because of this superiority and for his great power in public
affairs he was given the surname of the Olympian.  Like Zeus, he was
said to speak with


    thundering and lightning, and to wield a dreadful thunderbolt in
    his tongue.  Pericles, however, was very careful what and how he
    was to speak, insomuch that whenever he was to speak in the
    Assembly, he prayed the gods that no one word might unawares slip
    from him unsuitable to the matter and the occasion.[13]

    {186}

    Under the leadership of Pericles, Athens rose to be a great
    state.  The Age of Pericles was a short one, lasting only for
    about fifty years in the last part of the fifth century B.C., but
    it was a period which was great not only in material prosperity,
    but also in every form of intellectual and artistic beauty.  The
    work of Pericles


    which gave most pleasure and ornament to the city of Athens, and
    the greatest admiration and even astonishment to all strangers,
    and that which is now Greece's only evidence that the power she
    boasted of and her ancient wealth are no romance or idle story,
    was his construction of the public and sacred buildings.[14]


The story of these buildings will be told in its own place; for more
than two thousand years they have testified to the greatness of the
people who built them.

By the laws Pericles made it became possible for every free-born
Athenian citizen, no matter how poor he was, to take an active part
in the government of the State, thus completing the work of the
earlier lawgivers and making Athens a democracy, a state ruled by the
many.

It was the custom in Athens, that the bodies of Athenians who had
been slain in battle should be brought home, and buried in special
tombs which were situated in a very beautiful spot outside the walls.
Only after the battle of Marathon were the dead, in recognition of
their great valour against the Barbarian, buried on the field.  All
others were {187} brought home and given a public funeral.  There was
always buried with them an empty coffin, as a symbol of all those
whose bodies were missing and could not be recovered after the
battle.  It was believed that this wish to do honour to the dead and
to give them fitting burial would ensure their happiness in the life
after death, which every Greek believed to be imperilled if there was
lack of proper burial.  At the close of the funeral ceremonies, some
great orator was always asked to deliver a suitable oration.  On one
such occasion, Pericles was the orator, and in the great Funeral
Speech he made, he set forth to the Athenians what he considered
Athens stood for in the world.  There are no better words in which to
describe the greatness of Athens at this time and the ideals at which
she aimed, so listen to the words of Pericles, describing the city he
loved:


    Our form of government does not enter into rivalry with the
    institutions of others.  We do not copy our neighbours, but are
    an example to them.  It is true that we are called a democracy,
    for the administration is in the hands of the many and not of the
    few.  But while the law secures equal justice to all alike in
    their private disputes, the claim of excellence is also
    recognized; and when a citizen is in any way distinguished, he is
    preferred to the public service, not as a matter of privilege,
    but as the reward of merit.  Neither is poverty a bar, but a man
    may benefit his country whatever the obscurity of his
    condition....  A spirit of reverence pervades our public acts; we
    are prevented from doing wrong by respect for authority and for
    the laws, having {188} an especial regard to those which are
    ordained for the protection of the injured as well as to those
    unwritten laws which bring upon the transgressor of them the
    reprobation of the general sentiment.

    And we have not forgotten to provide for our weary spirits many
    relaxations from toil; we have regular games and sacrifices
    throughout the year; at home the style of our life is refined;
    and the delight which we daily feel in all these things helps to
    banish melancholy.  Because of the greatness of our city the
    fruits of the whole earth flow in upon us; so that we may enjoy
    the goods of other countries as freely as of our own....  We are
    lovers of the beautiful, yet simple in our tastes, and we
    cultivate the mind without loss of manliness.  Wealth we employ,
    not for talk and ostentation, but when there is a real use for
    it.  To avow poverty with us is no disgrace; the true disgrace is
    in doing nothing to avoid it.  An Athenian citizen does not
    neglect the state because he takes care of his own household; and
    even those of us who are engaged in business have a very fair
    idea of politics.  We alone regard a man who takes no interest in
    public affairs, not as a harmless, but as a useless character;
    and if few of us are originators, we are all sound judges of a
    policy....  In doing good, again, we are unlike others; we make
    our friends by conferring, not by receiving favours....  To sum
    up, I say that Athens is the school of Hellas ... for in the hour
    of trial Athens alone among her contemporaries is superior to the
    report of her....  We have compelled every land and every sea to
    open a path for our valour, and have everywhere planted eternal
    memorials of our friendship and of our enmity.  Such is the city
    for whose sake these men nobly fought and died; they could not
    bear the thought that she might be taken from them; and every one
    of us who survives should gladly toil on her {189} behalf....
    Day by day fix your eyes on the greatness of Athens, until you
    become filled with the love of her; and when you are impressed by
    the spectacle of her glory, reflect that this empire has been
    acquired by men who knew their duty and had the courage to do
    it....

    And now, when you have duly lamented, everyone his own dead, you
    may depart.[15]



    [1] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

    [2] Ibid.

    [3] Herodotus, IX.

    [4] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

    [5] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

    [6] Ibid.

    [7] Plutarch: _Life of Themistocles_.

    [8] Thucydides, I.

    [9] Plutarch: _Life of Aristeides_.

    [10] From W. Warde Fowler: _City-State of the Greeks and Romans_.

    [11] Plutarch: _Life of Pericles_.

    [12] Ibid.

    [13] Ibid.

    [14] Plutarch: _Life of Pericles_.

    [15] Thucydides, II.




    {190}

    CHAPTER XI

    LIFE IN ANCIENT ATHENS IN THE TIME OF PERICLES


    I. A WALK IN ANCIENT ATHENS

    Almost in the centre of Attica lies a plain surrounded in the
    distance by hills: towards the East, Mount Hymettus, the home of
    goats, purple with thyme and filled with the murmur of bees; and
    to the North, Mount Pentelicus, famous for its shining white
    marble, that gleamed a rosy-red when the sun went down.  Rising
    straight out of the plain is a great oval-shaped rock, the famous
    Acropolis of Athens, once its citadel and fortress, but
    transformed by Pericles into a great shrine for Athena.  From
    this rock the land sloped gently to the sea.  The plain was
    watered by the Cephisus, the only stream in Attica which did not
    run dry in the summer, and along its banks were olive groves,
    adding their touch of dark grey-green to the landscape.  In the
    centre of this plain, at the foot of the Acropolis, was Athens.

    [Illustration: ATHENS, WITH THE ACROPOLIS.]

    Roads from all directions led to Athens, but the Greeks, unlike
    the Romans, were not great road-makers, and except for those used
    for processions {191} on festivals, such as the Sacred Way that
    led to Eleusis, the roads in Attica were not in good repair, and
    foot-passengers when they went on a journey generally preferred
    the shorter paths over the hills.  In the early morning, the
    roads outside the city were thronged with people coming in from
    the country on various kinds of business.  Chief of these were
    the farmers, bringing their fruit and vegetables and other
    produce to sell in the market, but merchants from distant lands
    were also to be seen bringing their wares along the road from the
    Peiraeus.  The city was entered by gates in the great wall which
    had been built by Themistocles after the Persian Wars, and from
    the gates, the streets all led to the Market Place, or Agora, as
    it was called by the Greeks.  The streets were narrow, crooked
    and dark, and were not paved, and the houses on each side
    presented a very dull appearance, for the windows rarely faced
    the street.  The streets were dirty, too, for all kinds of refuse
    were thrown into them.  This absence of light and air did not
    make for health, and so very often pictures of Apollo, the
    Bringer of Health, were painted on the walls.  The Athenians
    spent their wealth on their great public buildings, and there was
    very little to distinguish one private house from another.
    Demosthenes, writing at a later time, said of the Athenians of
    the age of Pericles:


    The public buildings they constructed for us; the number and
    beauty of the temples, and of the offerings they contained, are
    such that their successors can never {192} surpass them; but in
    private life they practised so great a moderation, that even if
    any of you knew which was the house of Aristeides or Miltiades or
    any of the famous men of old, you would find it no more
    pretentious than those of its neighbours.


The water in Athens came from wells and springs and fountains, many
of which were at the street corners, and it was the task of the slave
maidens to draw the water from the fountain and to carry it home in
vessels which they carried on their heads.

It is evident that Athens was a city very different from a
well-equipped modern city, and that it lacked a great deal of what we
consider necessary.  But the Athenian of the fifth century B.C. had
extraordinarily little use for _things_, and he laid no stress on
comfort.  He was content to have houses without drains, beds without
sheets or springs, and rooms as cold or as hot as the open air.  He
could tell the time without a clock, cross the sea without a compass,
fasten his clothes (or rather his two pieces of cloth) with two pins
instead of rows of buttons, and wear sandals without stockings or
even go barefoot.  He warmed himself over a pot of ashes, judged
law-suits in the open air on a cold winter's morning, studied poetry
without books, learned geography without maps, and politics without a
newspaper.  The Athenians were civilized without being
comfortable.[1]  Of course much of this simple life was possible
because of the climate, and modern {193} standards of cleanliness
need in no way conflict with a simple life; nevertheless it is the
glory of the Athenians that they not only believed but practised the
belief, that the things of the mind and spirit are greater than those
of the body.

The daily life of Athens centred in the Agora.  If the streets
approaching it were mean and dirty, the Agora itself, the centre of
public life, was wide and spacious and surrounded by dignified and
beautiful buildings.  In shape it was a great open square, two sides
of which were taken up with public buildings and temples.  On the
remaining sides were the Stoas or Porches.  These consisted of a roof
supported by a row of columns in front and a wall at the back.  Each
stoa was a covered walk, protected from the glare of the sun, the
biting of the cold wind, and from the rain, and whatever the weather
might be, the Athenian could always find a pleasant sheltered place
where he could walk and talk with his friends.  One of these Porches
was known as the King's Porch.  It was used as one of the law-courts,
and on the wall at the back were inscribed the laws of Solon, and it
was here that every archon had to take his oath of office.  The most
frequented of the stoas was the _Painted Porch_, so called because
its wall was decorated with frescoes, one of which was a great
painting of the battle of Marathon.

The centre of the Agora was a great open space, part of it free for
the public to walk in, and part of it full of booths and stalls where
was sold everything needed by the Athenians.

{194}

There were three classes of people in Athens: the citizens, who were
all free-born Athenians; the foreign residents who were called
metics; and the slaves.  In outward appearance there was often very
little difference between them, but only the citizens might vote, and
they alone had any privileges.  The metics were generally well-to-do;
they were merchants and bankers and helped very largely to create the
wealth which made Athens great.

The morning life of Athens centred in the Agora, but when the
afternoon came, this was gradually deserted, and the Athenians who
had gathered there earlier in the day went along the roads that led
out of the city to the different Gymnasia.  These were originally
places devoted to the games practised by all Athenians, but they
gradually became used more as parks, where the young men played games
and the older men watched and talked.  The Academy was the greatest
of the gymnasia, and philosophers used to frequent it, and with their
pupils discuss all the many things in which the keen and adventurous
minds of the Athenians were interested.  Plato, one of the greatest
of the philosophers, was a well-known figure at the Academy.

Rising above the city, watching over it and guarding it, was the
Acropolis, crowned by temples and statues.  A great statue of Athena
looked down upon the city at her feet, at the busy Agora and the
public buildings in which the government of the state was carried on,
at the narrow streets lined with the houses of the citizens, and,
beyond the {195} walls, at the pleasant roads leading, on one side,
out to the gymnasia and the country beyond, and, on the other, down
to the harbour busy with the trade of Athens and where the galleys
went in and out on their voyages all over the Mediterranean world.



II. ATHENIAN DRESS

A visitor to the Agora in the morning would have found Athenians of
all kinds going about their daily business and he would have had
opportunity to see how they dressed.  The morning crowd in the Agora
consisted almost entirely of men; to see Athenian women a stranger
would have to be invited to their houses, a rare privilege but seldom
accorded, or to have visited Athens during a festival, when women
were allowed to take part in the great processions which went up to
the shrine of Athena on the Acropolis.  But men of all classes could
be seen every day in the Agora: the working-man going to his work,
the countryman selling the produce of his farm, slaves doing the
daily marketing for the household, and men of leisure walking about
and talking to their friends.

The chief garment worn by all these men was the _chiton_ or tunic.
It was made by taking an oblong piece of cloth, cutting it the
required length and then folding it round the body, so that it hung
from the neck to the knees.  It was fastened at the neck with a pin,
sometimes beautifully wrought in gold, in such a way that arm-holes
were made, and one {196} side was always left open.  A girdle kept
the folds of the chiton in place, and it was generally tight enough
to disguise the fact that one side was open.  A man's chiton seldom
came below his knees, but the wearer could always regulate the
length, and workmen and all those engaged in active occupations were
generally _well-girded_, that is, they pulled up the chiton, so that
it was short, with part of it hanging over the girdle.  Older men
usually allowed the chiton to hang to its full length.

In the house, the chiton was the only garment required, and workmen
and all young men engaged in active pursuits seldom wore anything
else out of doors, but out of the house, the older men generally
added a mantle known as the _himation_.  This was another oblong
piece of cloth, but larger than that used for the chiton, which was
thrown over the left shoulder, brought round under the right arm to
the front of the body, and then thrown again over the left shoulder.
The himation was not, as a rule, pinned and so it had to be very
carefully adjusted in order that its folds might hang well.  It was a
very difficult thing to put on a himation gracefully, and it was
often the work of a special slave to arrange it before his master
went out of doors.  The folds had to hang well, and it had to be of
the right length, for if it was too short, the Athenian thought the
wearer looked like a rustic come to the city for the first time, and
to wear it too long was a sign of ostentation and needless display.

The only other garment sometimes worn by men was the _chlamys_, a
short cloak worn by the {197} young men.  It was circular, gathered
round the neck and fastened by a pin or clasp, and hung over the back
and left shoulder reaching to the waist.  The chlamys was generally
of a bright colour; the chiton and himation were more often white,
though sometimes colours were used, but beautifully designed borders
were frequently embroidered in colours on both the chiton and
himation, and an Athenian crowd presented a bright and gay scene.

Athenian men seldom wore anything on their heads, unless they were
travelling, when they wore a close-fitting cap, either with or
without a brim, but they generally wore sandals on their feet, though
this was not considered absolutely necessary.

The dress of the Athenian women consisted, like that of the men, of a
chiton and himation, but the woman's chiton was longer; it reached to
her feet and was fuller, and it often had short sleeves.  No Athenian
woman could ever appear out of doors without her himation, and this
was often so arranged that it was drawn over her head, forming a
hood.  This was generally the only form of head covering worn by
Athenian women, though if they went out in the sun they sometimes
took parasols.

Athenian women probably used more colours in their dress than the
men; a particularly beautiful saffron-yellow was a favourite colour,
especially for their bridal dresses, and on such occasions their
dress was enriched by gold ornaments, necklaces, bracelets and rings.
Ornaments of various kinds were freely used by the Athenian women in
their dress, but the Greeks disliked anything that had no {198}
purpose but show, and their jewels were so arranged as to enrich
their appearance without taking away from its simple dignity and
beauty.



III. THE ATHENIAN HOUSE

"I do not spend my days indoors," said an Athenian once, "my wife is
quite capable of managing our domestic affairs without my aid."[2]
This probably expressed the feeling of most Athenian men, for they
gave very little time to their houses.  These were the places where
the women of the family spent nearly all their hours, but where the
men did little more than sleep and have their meals.  In the summer
time an Athenian house was probably a pleasant place, though we
should have found it lacking in nearly everything that we consider
necessary, but in the winter it would have been uncomfortably chilly
and draughty.

It has already been noticed that an Athenian house usually presented
a blank wall to the street, for it was built round a court on to
which all the rooms opened.  The houses were generally of one story
only, though a few occasionally had more, and the rooms drew all
their light and air from the court.  Socrates once said that a
perfect house should be one that was cool in summer and warm in
winter, and of such a convenient size that the owner could keep all
his possessions in it with ease and security.

The front door was always kept carefully shut and {199} bolted, but a
knocker, often in the form of a ring in a lion's mouth, announced the
visitor, who was admitted by the porter, a slave who sat in a small
room just inside the door.  The door opened into a courtyard, which
in a good-sized house would be fairly large, but badly paved.  This
was the men's court.  A row of columns all round the sides supported
a roof which made a kind of verandah, from which small rooms opened.
These rooms do not seem to have had any light or air except that
which entered from the court, and they must have been dark and
uncomfortable.  They were used only by the grown sons of the family
and by the male slaves.

In the middle of the court stood an altar to Zeus the Protector of
the Home, on which fragrant incense always burned, and fresh garlands
of flowers and leaves would be placed on it every day.

Leading out of the men's court was the dining-hall.  There would be
no table, for the guest did not go to the table, but the table, a low
one, was brought to him as he sat or reclined on a beautifully carved
couch.  The most sacred spot in the house was in this room, the altar
of Hestia, on which burned the sacred fire of the family hearth.
There might be a row of large vases against one wall, and if one of
them bore the inscription, "I am from the Games at Athens," the
family would take care to preserve it as one of their greatest
treasures, for the words meant that the vase had been a prize won by
some member of the family in the Athenian Games.

A door opposite that which led from the men's {200} court into the
dining room, opened into another court, that of the women.  This was
similar to the men's court, but more often planted with flowers and
shrubs.  The women's rooms, nearly as small and dark and
uncomfortable as those of the men, opened from the women's court, and
the kitchen was probably at the back of it.  On one side of this
court there was a large chamber, the best furnished in the house,
where the master and mistress slept.

All the furniture in these rooms was simple, but of beautiful design.
The chief things used were couches, footstools, low chairs and tables
and chests.  The latter took the place of closets and cupboards.
There were lamps and bronze candelabra, and large numbers of cases
used by the Athenians as ordinary water-jugs, wine jars and drinking
cups, all of the most graceful shapes and forms and beautifully
painted.

The life of the Athenian house centred in the women's court, though
during the daytime when the men of the house were absent, the women
used the men's court almost as much as their own.  The moment,
however, they heard the sound of the knocker on the front door, they
fled to their own part of the house, lest they should be caught
unawares by a male visitor.

Such was probably the house of a well-to-do Athenian, a very much
more comfortable and well-furnished house than that of the Spartan,
yet lacking in almost everything that we associate with the idea of
comfort.  But the Athenian succeeded in being civilized without being
comfortable; his {201} well-being was in no way dependent on
_things_, and believing that his wealth was something to be used for
the good of the whole community, he spent it on the temples and
public buildings of the city rather than on his own private dwelling.
It may be true that the little use the Athenian made of his own house
made him less interested in it than in the other buildings of the
city, but whether he carried it to an extreme or not, it was his
public-spirited point of view that gave him that greater interest in
the public welfare than in his own private affairs.



IV. ATHENIAN TRADE

The earlier Greeks believed that a state should be self-supporting,
that the farmers should produce enough food, and the craftsmen
everything needed in daily life.  But from the time of Solon onwards
this became increasingly difficult in Athens, for owing to the
arrival of settlers who came from many different places, attracted by
the possibilities of work in the growing state, the population
increased, and it became impossible to produce enough food.  This had
a very important influence on Athens, for instead of being
self-sufficing and secure within her own walls, she became dependent
for her life on the food supplies, and especially on the corn, that
came to her from Egypt and the Black Sea colonies, and in the time of
war it was absolutely necessary that the routes to these places
should be kept open.  Very strict laws were passed to regulate the
corn trade and to make sure that enough would always {202} be brought
to Athens.  No Athenian merchant might take corn to any other harbour
than the Peiraeus, and none might leave Egypt or the Black Sea ports
unless he had a certain amount of corn on board his ship.

The fact that the Athenian merchant had to go to distant places for
corn increased his trade in other articles.  He was at home on the
sea, and his many-oared ship passed swiftly over the waters of the
Aegean, stopping at many places: at the ports of Ionian colonies,
where he found his kinsfolk, eager to hear the latest news from the
mainland and especially from Athens; at the ports of the Barbarians,
where he rejoiced that he was a Greek and did not dwell amongst these
strangers.  The Athenian merchant sailed in his own ship, and beyond
his final destination, generally had no definite route in mind.  He
was guided by the favourable winds, or by rumours of suitable trading
ports where he would find good opportunities for exchanging his
goods.  He left Athens with oil, honey from Hymettus, and the
far-famed Athenian pottery, the chief exports, and he exchanged these
for the corn and fish of the Black Sea ports, the wool of Miletus,
the perfumes and spices of Syria, the linen and papyrus and the
all-important corn of Egypt, the wine of Chios, the cypress wood of
Crete, the dates of Phoenicia, the rugs and cushions of Carthage;
while in such ports as Carthage and Miletus he found articles which
had reached these places by caravans from still more distant lands.
In Carthage he obtained ivory and ebony from Africa, {203} and in
Miletus richly woven carpets and rugs from Babylon.

All this trade brought wealth to Athens, and it taught the quick
Athenian mind, always alert and interested in any new thing, "new
ways of enjoying life."



V. ATHENIAN POTTERY

Most of the industries carried on in any large city were to be found
in Athens, but the industry for which she was best known throughout
the Mediterranean world was that of the potter, and Athenian vases
were exported in very large quantities.  But these vases were not
mere ornaments; each had its own particular use as a household
utensil, an offering to a god, or as an offering at a tomb.

Vases for different purposes were made of different shapes; each was
beautiful in form, but with its beauty it combined usefulness.  The
handles on the water jars are placed just where they are most needed,
the oil pours out of the narrow neck of the oil jug drop by drop so
that the quantity could be easily regulated, and the drinking cup has
a slight curve to the rim, so that one can drink out of it quite
easily without spilling the liquid.

There are certain well known forms of these vases: the Amphora is a
large two-handled vase which was used for storing oil and other
liquids; the Hydria has three handles and was used for carrying
water; the Krater is a large vase in which wine and water were mixed;
the Lekythos is a jug {204} with a narrow neck used for pouring out
oil slowly in small quantities; and the Kylix is a wide and shallow
drinking cup.  A large amphora, often full of oil, was given as a
prize for some of the athletic contests at the Panathenaic games held
in Athens.  Such an amphora can always be recognized, as it bears on
one side the figure of Athena with the inscription: "I am from the
Games at Athens," and on the other a painting depicting the contest
for which the vase was a prize.

The quarter in Athens given up to the potters was known as the
Cerameicus, and here there were a number of workshops owned by
different vase-makers.  At the head of each establishment was the
master; but he was a craftsman as well as manager and was able to do
everything connected with the industry: he could not only make the
vase, but also design and paint it.  His workmen, however, did most
of the turning, shaping and polishing of the vases.  When the vase
had been made, it was given to the artist who painted the design on
it, after which it had to be dried, baked and glazed.  The black
glaze that was used in Athens was one of the great discoveries of the
ancient potters' art.  Time never spoiled it, and it seems as fresh
today as when it was first put on the vases.  In some cases it has
peeled off in small flakes, but that only happens when the clay
beneath is damp; otherwise it remains unchanged.

[Illustration: GREEK VASES.  Courtesy of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art.]

The earlier vases were painted in black on the red background of the
clay; later, the artist sketched his design on the red clay and gave
the vase back to {205} the workman, who painted in the background in
black and then returned it to the artist, who retouched his design
and in some cases added here and there a touch of colour.

Besides the rooms for the workmen and artists, and the court where
the ovens were placed, a potter's workshop required storerooms where
the finished vases were kept, and a room where the master received
his customers and sold his pottery.

The subjects of the paintings on the vases were always carefully
chosen and were suited to the use to which the vase was to be put.
The large vases had graver and more serious subjects, the kylix had
more animated scenes.  This cup was used at banquets and on festive
occasions, and so the artists painted gay and merry scenes on it, and
as they tried to attract buyers by the novelty of their designs, the
kylix paintings show a great deal of originality.  The subjects were
taken from mythology, or showed battle scenes, or subjects connected
with daily life.  If all our other sources of knowledge of life in
Athens were suddenly lost to us, the vases would still be a rich mine
of information, as in one way or another they represent all the
varied experiences of human life.

In all their art the Greeks were chiefly interested in representing
the human form.  They themselves did not realize that in doing this
they were taking a step onward in man's great adventure of learning
how to live, but in all the many ways in which they represented man,
they showed him going forth into the outside world of nature,
conscious that he had {206} the power to make of it a world in which
he felt at home.  Part of the greatness of the Greeks came from the
fact that they did this unconsciously.  The craftsmen and
vase-painters themselves were in no way regarded as the equals of the
great sculptors.  The Athenians regarded them as quite lowly workers,
but they were artists nevertheless, proved so by the fact that though
there was often copying of a general design, the artist never copied
mechanically, but put into his work something that was his own.  In
all the great quantity of Greek vases in the world today no two have
been found exactly alike, and so the craftsmen, though they were
unconscious of how later ages would regard their work, knew the
satisfaction that comes from creating beauty in any form, and they
said of their work that "there is no sweeter solace in life for human
ills than craftsmanship; for the mind, absorbed in its study, sails
past all troubles and forgets them."[3]



[1] A. E. Zimmern: _The Greek Commonwealth_.

[2] Xenophon: _The Economist_.

[3] Amphis: quoted by G. M. A. Richter in _The Craft of Athenian
Pottery_.




{207}

CHAPTER XII

A DAY WITH AN ATHENIAN


I. THE ATHENIAN GENTLEMAN

The day began early in Athens, and as soon as the sun was up everyone
was stirring: the workman was off to his work, the schoolboy to
school, and every booth and stall in the Agora was laden with
articles to attract the buyers who were expected in the market.

Before leaving his house, the Athenian gentleman had his breakfast, a
little bread soaked in wine, after which one of his house-slaves saw
that his himation hung in graceful folds, and then, accompanied by
one or more slaves carrying baskets, he set forth for the Agora.
Here the morning marketing was done, but unless he was giving a very
important banquet in the evening, the gentleman did not himself
attend to the household marketing; his slaves did that for him and
took the purchases home.  Their master, in the meantime, would walk
up and down the Agora, or take a turn or two in one of the Porches,
where he would meet some of his friends, or go to the barber's shop,
where he would be sure to hear {208} the latest news of the day:
Pericles had proposed to build another temple, and there was much
discussion as to whether the state could afford it; the Spartan army
was said to be stronger than ever, and Sparta had always been jealous
of Athens; was she secretly getting ready for a war, and if so should
not Athens be prepared, or were those right who believed that the
greatness of Greece lay in a policy of peace with Sparta?  Perhaps
the Olympic Games were being held and the news had just come and
spread like wildfire through the city, that the Athenians had covered
themselves with glory, especially in the chariot race, and that the
victors were even then on their way home, so all must be in readiness
to receive them.  Or was it known that a galley had just returned
from a trading voyage on the Aegean, and that the sailors were
reporting that there was a good deal of discontent in some of the
islands, and that threats were being made of withholding some of the
tribute money unless the islanders were allowed greater independence?
These and many more burning questions of the day were made known and
discussed without the use of newspapers.

But the Athenian gentleman did not spend all his morning in talk.  If
he were wealthy, he would have definite duties required of him by the
State: he had to fit out and keep in good order one or more triremes
for the navy, and there would be interviews with the captain as to
the number of men he required and how much they should be paid; there
were estimates for repairs to be gone over, and {209} designs for a
new and splendid figure-head on the prow of the ship to be approved.
Or perhaps it was his turn to provide for one of the choruses in the
coming dramatic festival, and he must see to it that this chorus was
well-trained and that no expense was spared in making it better than
any of the others, so that he might win the prize.

Then there were other duties towards the State that were demanded of
every free-born citizen.  He must sit on the jury and judge law-suits
whenever he was called upon to do so, and as the Athenians were very
fond of such suits the demand came very often.  Aristophanes, a
dramatist who wrote a number of plays in which he made fun of a great
many of the Athenian characteristics, said of the juryman:

  He is a law-court lover, no man like him.
  Judging is what he dotes on, and he weeps
  Unless he sits on the front bench of all.[1]


In some way or other every Athenian citizen took part in the actual
government of the state, and in the time of Pericles about nine
thousand men held, during the year, some kind of state position.
These officials were chosen by the people and were seldom re-elected,
so that not only was everybody in turn responsible for certain
functions, but everyone was capable of intelligently discussing the
affairs of the state, and this was done at great length every day
whenever Athenian citizens met together.

{210}

About once every ten days, the Agora was deserted in the morning, and
every free-born Athenian citizen over thirty years of age, both rich
and poor, was expected to go to the Pnyx, the meeting place of the
Assembly.  In times of war, or when some very important question in
which everyone was interested had to be settled, no one stayed away,
and there would be great hurrying in the early morning in order to
get a good place.

The Pnyx was a great open-air place of assembly, west of the
Acropolis and not far from the city wall.  In shape it was a sloping
semi-circle, part of which was supported by a wall.  There were no
seats, and the citizens had to make themselves as comfortable as they
could on the bare ground.  Facing the slope was a rock cut in the
form of a platform and mounted by steps on each side.  This was
called the Bema, and here the orators stood when they addressed the
Assembly.  In front of the Bema was the altar on which was offered
the sacrifice that always opened the Assembly, and behind it on a
rock were seats for the state officials who had charge of the meeting.

There were doubtless many days when the business in hand was not very
interesting, but there were times when excitement ran high and no one
was absent.  It is not difficult to imagine the scene.  Not far off
rose the rock of the Acropolis, symbol of the strength and glory of
Athens and of the guardianship of Athena; in the dim distance was the
sea, the great bond of union between Athens and the islands of the
Aegean and the East, and a symbol {211} of the protecting power of
Poseidon; overhead stretched the blue Greek sky; and there below in
the Pnyx was the densely packed crowd of Athenians, deliberating on
matters on which hung their very life or death.  It was there that
the decision was made to march to Marathon and to face the unnumbered
Persian foe; that Themistocles pleaded passionately for a navy; that
the messengers from Delphi brought back the answer about the "wooden
walls"; that Aristeides persuaded the Athenians to free the Ionians
from their Persian masters and to form the Delian League which led
Athens to become an Empire; and it was there, too, that Pericles in
stately and measured tones urged the Athenians to beautify their city
as no other city in the world had ever been beautified before.

These and similar occupations took up the morning of the Athenian
gentleman.  After a light meal in the middle of the day, he would go
to the Academy or one of the other gymnasia, where he would spend the
cool of the day in exercising himself, or in watching the youths at
their games; in walking in the pleasant groves talking over the
events of the day with his friends; or in discussing with some
philosopher all kinds of questions concerning new interpretations of
old beliefs and new ideas about man, whence he comes and whither he
goes.  Some of these were questions which were discussed for the
first time in the history of the world, and never before and but
seldom since has there been such an eager desire to know the truth
about all things, as there was in this Athens of the fifth century
B.C.

{212}

But as the evening drew on and it grew dusk, the Athenians left the
gymnasia and returned to the city.  All day long they had been in
company, and in the evening the most was made of every opportunity to
meet again, for they held that "to eat your dinner alone was not
dining but feeding," so it was very likely that the day would end by
a banquet.  If that were so, the guests would all have been invited
in the morning, either by the host himself when he met them, or by a
message carried by a slave.  Preparations were usually made for more
than the invited number of guests, as it was a common custom for
guests to bring some additional friends of their own, and uninvited
guests would often come without any special bidding.  Since leaving
the gymnasia, all the guests would have been at their homes.  There
they would have bathed and clad themselves in fresh chitons and
mantles, and slaves would accompany them to the house of their host.

At a banquet the guests reclined on couches, and the food was brought
to them on low tables.  The evening meal was the chief meal of the
day in Athens.  It began with fish or meat and vegetables, and when
this course was over, the tables were removed, water was poured over
the hands of the guests, and garlands were often passed round.  Then
came the second course of fruits, confectionery and various kinds of
sweetmeats, after which the tables were again removed, and replaced
by smaller ones on which stood beautifully shaped drinking cups.  The
guests were given more garlands and wreaths, and {213} the slaves
brought in the large kraters, in which the wine and water were mixed,
and the after-dinner entertainment of the evening began.

This entertainment was called the Symposium, and it began with the
pouring out of three libations: to the Olympian gods, to the Heroes,
and to Zeus.  Then the health of the hosts and of his guests was
drunk; after which began the entertainment.  This consisted of
conversation, singing, listening to music, watching dancers, in
playing games, telling stories or passing round jests.  Just what was
done at the Symposium depended on the kind of guests present.  "When
the company are real gentlemen and men of education," said Plato, you
will see no flute-girls, nor dancing girls, nor harp girls; they will
have no nonsense or games, but will be content with one another's
conversation."  More often, however, the guests were less serious.
They enjoyed the music of the flute and other instruments, they
played games, and watched dancing, they "chatted and talked pleasant
nonsense to one another."

When the party came to an end, a libation was offered to Hermes, the
slaves were called, who attended their masters home, lighting their
way with torches or lamps.  The older men would go sedately home, the
younger would keep up their merriment and go noisily and boisterously
through the streets until, having knocked at the doors of their
houses, the sleepy porter would wake up and let them in, and silence
would at length reign in the streets of the city.


{214}

II. THE ATHENIAN LADY

What, in the meantime, was the Athenian lady doing?  She was at home,
managing all the household affairs and bringing up the children.  She
educated her sons until they were seven years old, when they went to
school, and her daughters until they were about fifteen, when they
were considered old enough to be married.

The Greek writer Xenophon wrote an account of what were considered
the duties of an ideal Athenian wife.  He imagines the husband of a
young bride telling her what he expected of her, and in what way he
hoped the household affairs would be managed.


    You will need to stay indoors, despatching to their toils
    without, such of your domestics whose work lies there.  Over
    those whose appointed tasks are indoors it will be your duty to
    preside, yours to receive the stuffs brought in, yours to
    apportion part for daily use, and to make provision for the rest,
    to guard and garner it so that the outgoings destined for a year
    may not be expended in a month.  It will be your duty when the
    wools are brought in to see that clothing is made for those who
    have need.  Your duty also to see that the dried corn is made fit
    and serviceable for food.  Then, too, if any of the household
    fall sick, it will be your care to tend them to the recovery of
    their health.

    But there are other cares and occupations which are yours by
    right.  This, for instance, to take some maiden who knows nothing
    of carding wool, and to make her skilful in the art, doubling her
    usefulness; or to receive another quite ignorant of housekeeping
    or of service, {215} and to render her skilful, loyal,
    serviceable, till she is worth her weight in gold.  But the
    greatest joy of all will be to prove yourself my better; to make
    me your faithful follower; knowing no dread lest as the years
    advance you should decline in honour in your household, but
    rather trusting that though your hair turn gray, yet in
    proportion as you come to be a better helpmate to myself and to
    the children, a better guardian of our home, so will your honour
    increase throughout the household as mistress, wife and mother,
    daily more dearly prized.[2]


Some further good advice was then given, and the husband concluded by
recommending exercise as the best means of preserving both health and
beauty.  He said:


    I counsel you to oversee the baking woman as she makes the bread,
    to stand beside the housekeeper as she measures out her stores;
    to go on tours of inspection to see if all things are in order as
    they should be.  For, as it seems to me, this will be at once
    walking exercise and supervision.  And as an excellent gymnastic,
    I urge you to knead the dough, and roll the paste; to shake the
    coverlets and make the beds; and if you train yourself in
    exercise of this sort you will enjoy your food, grow vigorous in
    health, and your complexion will in very truth be lovelier.[3]


Added to all these occupations was the education of the children.
The Athenian lady had nurses for them, Spartan slave-women, if they
were to be had, for their discipline was sterner than that of other
Greeks, and the Spartan nurses had the {216} reputation of being able
to keep their young charges in particularly good order.  All kinds of
toys were provided for the children, hoops and balls, spinning-tops
and go-carts, dolls and toy animals.  The Athenian mother learnt to
be a good story-teller, for it was in these early days that the
children wanted stories told them, and many a tale would she relate
of the gods and heroes of old, of the nymphs and spirits of the
forests and mountains, of the sea and of the air.  And when night
came and the children must go to bed, then she would sing them to
sleep with a slumber song:

  Sleep children mine, a light luxurious sleep,
  Brother with brother: sleep, my boys, my life:
  Blest in your slumber, in your waking blest.[4]


The girls had to be trained to all the duties of an Athenian wife,
and there was much to learn in the short years of their girlhood.  It
was a domestic training that they were given; of other things they
learned as much or as little as their mother knew herself and was
able to teach them, probably not more than a little reading and
writing.  A girl was not encouraged to take up any kind of
intellectual pursuits, and during her life before her marriage she
was generally "most carefully trained to see and hear as little as
possible, and to ask the fewest questions."[5]

{217}

But it was not all work for the maiden, and many a time did she sit
in the swing in the courtyard and idle away a warm afternoon gently
swinging to and fro, and many a merry game of ball did she have with
her companions.  It was she who made the fresh garlands and wreaths
for the altars or the house, and who, when the moon was full, laid
offerings on the tomb of her grandparents, and, most glorious of all
her girlhood privileges, it was she who helped to weave the robe
taken to the temple of Athena at the time of the great Panathenaic
festival and who bore baskets of offerings to the goddess in the
great procession.

When the Athenian maiden married, all this life came to an end, and
she took upon her young shoulders the training of her own household,
even as she had seen her mother do.  Her marriage had usually been
arranged for her, and she often knew but little of her future
husband.  Before the marriage day, she offered all her girlhood
treasures to Artemis, the goddess who had watched over her childhood.


    Her tambourines and pretty ball, and the net that confined her
    hair, and her dolls and dolls' dresses, Timareta dedicates before
    her marriage to Artemis, a maiden to a maiden as is fit; do thou,
    daughter of Leto, laying thine hand over the girl Timareta,
    preserve her purely in her purity.[6]


When these symbols of her youth had passed from her keeping into that
of the goddess, the {218} maiden was dressed in beautiful raiment,
crowned with a wreath and covered with the bridal veil for the
marriage ceremony.  This took place in the evening on a day when the
moon was full, and when she was ready, the bride was led by her
attendant maidens to the court where the bridegroom and her parents
and the invited guests awaited her.  The marriage took place in the
court, a sacrifice was offered and a libation poured out to the gods,
and then the marriage feast followed, at which cakes of sesame were
always eaten.  This was the only occasion on which women were allowed
to be present at a feast, but through it all the bride remained
closely veiled.  When the feast was over, the bridal chariot was
driven up to the door, and the bride took her seat in it beside her
husband, her mother walked behind it bearing the marriage torch with
which the fire on the hearth of her new home would be lighted, the
guests surrounded it and with flute-playing and singing escorted the
bride to her new home.

If the bridegroom lived in a distant place, the bridal procession
broke up at the gates of the city, but if he lived in Athens, he and
his bride were escorted to the door of his house, where they were met
by his mother, and then, to the music of a marriage song, the bride
was led into her new home.

Did the Athenian lady have no amusements or recreations?  Did she
leave all that was gay behind her when she became a wife?  The
Athenian lady seldom left the house, and never unless attended by a
female slave.  She had practically no society {219} but that of her
slaves.  The peasant woman in the fields and the few women who sold
in the market had the society of their friends, but such
companionship was denied to the well-born lady.  She saw no men,
except those of her own family.  If her husband dined at home alone,
she shared his meal, but if he had guests she was unseen.  From time
to time she took part in the great religious festivals and
processions, and occasionally she was permitted to be present in the
theatre when a tragedy was performed, but she was never permitted to
see a comedy for the wit and humour were often coarse and were
considered unfitting for her ears.

In many ways it was a strange life that the Athenian lady lived, one
that seems as if it were in contradiction to all that the Athenians
held of the highest importance, for the


    Athenian lady lived in the house among a people that lived out of
    doors.  Among a people who gave great importance to physical
    training she was advised to take her exercise in bedmaking.  At a
    time when the human spirit was at its freest she was enclosed on
    all sides.  Art and thought and letters were reaching the highest
    development they were ever to know, but for her they hardly
    existed.


But whatever was the actual life of the Athenian lady, the Athenian
ideal of womanhood was very high.  In the wondrous temple that stood
high above the city, looking down upon it and guarding it, was the
figure that symbolized to the Athenians all that was good and
beautiful and true, and it was {220} the figure of a woman.  It was
always the figure of a woman that represented Victory, and nearly all
the great Greek dramas deal with the fate of a woman, who was
generally the wife or daughter of a King.  The Sacred Mysteries of
Eleusis, mysteries of such deep meaning that it was said that
"partakers in them had better hopes concerning death and all
eternity," centred round the story of the love and sorrow of a woman.
A race that could produce such great figures as these must have
thought nobly of womanhood.[7]

And so, in spite of her subordinate position in the background, the
Athenian woman was of real influence in Athens.  She reigned supreme
in the household, and as her sons grew up, they recognized in her
those qualities which every Greek and especially the Athenian, was
taught to value so highly: that quiet courage which by its very
steadfastness overcomes all the little anxieties and annoyances of
daily life; and that self-control and self-mastery which, putting
self in the background, sets free the individual for service to
others.  The Athenian ideal of service was that the man should give
it wholly to the state, and the woman wholly to her home, but narrow
as was her horizon, limited as were her opportunities, the Athenian
woman exercised an influence in Athens, that helped to strengthen and
preserve some of the noblest Athenian qualities.



[1] Aristophanes: _The Wasps_, translated by B. B. Rogers.  (By
permission of Messrs. G. Bell and Sons.)

[2] Xenophon: _The Economist_.

[3] Ibid.

[4] Theocritus: From _Idyll_, XXIV, translated by S. C. Calverley.
(By permission of Messrs. G. Bell and Sons.)

[5] Xenophon: _The Economist_.

[6] Author Unknown: From _Select Epigrams from the Greek Anthology_,
translated by J. W. Mackail.

[7] See Emily James Putnam: _The Lady_.




{221}

CHAPTER XIII

THE ATHENIAN SCHOOLBOY

The chief aim of Athenian education was the building of character.
The Athenians were more concerned that their sons should grow up to
be good citizens, loving what was beautiful and hating all that was
ugly, than that they should know any great number of facts.  The
object of any education is to teach a child how to live, and a system
of education is good or bad according as it fulfils this aim.  As
different states and countries, at different periods, have had
different ideals as to what is meant by _living_, so they will all
have had different kinds of education, each thought out in such a way
as best to train the child for that conception of life believed in by
his state or country.  For example, the Spartan conception of life
was that every citizen should be a good soldier, able to defend his
country and to go out and fight her wars.  Whether the Spartan ideal
was a good one or not, may be questioned, but it cannot be denied
that Spartan education was an excellent preparation for such a life.

The Athenians had a much wider ideal than the {222} Spartans.  They,
too, believed in the training of the body, and in making patriotic
citizens who would count it a glory to die in defence of their city,
but they also believed that it was a glory to live for their city,
and to this end they trained the mind and the imagination as well as
the body.  To an Athenian a good man was a good citizen, one who,
being physically perfect, would be able to defend his city in time of
war, who, being able to think, would be capable of governing, and
loving all that was beautiful would set high standards of taste in
art, in letters, and in conduct.  Praxiteles gave outward form to
this ideal in his statue of Hermes, and though the Athenian ideal was
not complete, Athenian education produced a warrior like Miltiades,
statesmen like Themistocles and Pericles, a poet like Sophocles,
artists like Pheidias and Praxiteles, philosophers like Socrates and
Plato, and a historian like Thucydides.

[Illustration: THE FLUTE LESSON, THE WRITING LESSON.  (ABOVE A
WRITING-ROLL, A FOLDED TABLET, A RULING SQUARE, ETC.) From the Kylix
of Douris, now at Berlin (No. 2285).  Monumenti dell' Institute, ix.
Plate 54.]

The Athenians believed that training which aimed only at
money-making, or bodily strength, or mere cleverness apart from
intelligence, was mean and vulgar and did not deserve to be called
education.  True education, they held, made a child long to be a good
citizen and taught him both how to rule and to obey.  It must not be
supposed that the Athenians despised wealth or the power of wealth.
Only a wealthy state could have built the Parthenon or celebrated the
great Panathenaic Festival, but the Athenians despised mere
money-making, and they believed that a man's success was not to be
measured by the amount of money he had made, {223} but by the use to
which he put it, and they believed that an education which taught a
boy to be industrious and thrifty, to despise self-indulgence and
luxury, to think straight and see clearly, would make him a better
citizen than one which aimed only at making him a successful man of
business.  So they aimed at giving every boy a good education.


    First among things, [said one of their teachers], I reckon human
    education.  For if you begin anything whatever in the right way,
    the end will probably be right also.  The nature of the harvest
    depends upon the seeds you sow.  If you plant good education in a
    young body, it bears leaves and fruit the whole life long, and no
    rain or drought can destroy it.[1]


The Athenian boy went to school when he was seven years old.  At this
age he was placed in the charge of a pedagogue, a trusted slave who
accompanied him when he went to school, carried his books for him,
and helped him, when necessary, with his lessons.  The pedagogue was
also expected to keep him in good order, to teach him good manners,
to answer all his many questions, and to punish him whenever he
thought fit, which was probably very often.

Schools opened early, so early that Solon made a law forbidding
schoolmasters to open their schools before sunrise and requiring them
to be closed before sunset, so that the boys should not have to walk
about the dark and empty streets.  The Athenian {224} boy, then, had
to be early astir.  "He gets up at dawn, washes the sleep from his
eyes, and puts on his cloak.  Then he goes out from his father's
house with his eyes fixed upon the ground, not looking at anyone who
meets him."  (A modest and unassuming appearance in public was
required of every boy.)  "Behind him follow attendants and
pedagogues, bearing in their hands the implements of virtue,
writing-tablets or books containing the great deeds of old, or, if he
is going to a music-school, his well-tuned lyre."[2]

Arrived at the school, the pedagogue remained in an ante-room, where
he waited with all the other pedagogues until morning school was
over.  The boy entered a larger room beyond, where he settled down to
his lessons.  The boys sat on low benches with their writing-tablets
on their knees, and the master sat on a higher chair in front of
them.  Lyres and other musical instruments, a book-roll or two, or
perhaps some drinking-cups hung on the walls.

Athenian boys were taught three main subjects: letters, music and
gymnastics.  The first thing connected with letters was to be able to
read and write.  The first writing lessons were given on wooden
tablets covered with wax, and for a pen a stylus with a sharp metal
point was used.  With this stylus the letters were scratched on the
wax.  When a boy had learnt to write better, he was allowed to write
on papyrus with a reed dipped in a kind of sticky substance which
took the place of ink.

{225}


    When the boy has learned his letters [we are told], and is
    beginning to understand what is written, as before he understood
    only what was spoken, they put into his hands the works of great
    poets, which he reads sitting on a bench at school; in these are
    contained many admonitions, and many tales, and praises of
    ancient famous men, which he is required to learn by heart, in
    order that he may imitate them and desire to become like them.[3]


Athenian boys had no books for children--they began by reading great
poetry and literature.  Much of the literature they learnt by heart,
standing in front of the master who recited it to them, and they
learnt it by repeating it after him line by line.  In this way they
mastered passages from the Iliad and the Odyssey, and though it must
have been unusual, it was not an unknown feat for a boy to be able to
recite the whole of those poems by heart.  "My father," said one man
speaking of his school days, "in his pains to make me a good man,
compelled me to learn the whole of Homer's poems, and even now I can
repeat the Iliad and the Odyssey by heart."[4]  Reciting poetry in an
Athenian school was by no means a dull affair, for the boys acted as
they recited.  The art of reciting poetry was held in high esteem not
only in Athens, but all over Greece, and in all places where the
Greek tongue was spoken and where Greek ideals prevailed.  During the
disastrous war that Athens waged against Sparta at the end of the
fifth century B.C. an Athenian {226} expedition was sent to Sicily.
After a terrible fight in the harbour of Syracuse, the Athenians were
utterly defeated, and all those who survived the battle were taken as
prisoners and confined in the stone quarries near the city.[5]  They
were exposed to the sun and the rain and almost starved to death.
But any man who could recite a chorus or one of the scenes from a
play of Euripides, the great Athenian poet, was given his freedom and
allowed to return home.

A certain amount of arithmetic was also taught, for it was considered
a good training for the mind.


    "No branch of education is considered so valuable a preparation
    for household management and politics, and all arts and crafts,
    sciences and professions, as arithmetic; best of all by some
    divine art, it arouses the dull and sleepy brain, and makes it
    studious, mindful and sharp,"


and it was said of arithmetic that "those who are born with a talent
for it are quick at all learning, while even those who are slow at
it, have their general intelligence much increased by studying
it."[6]  But Athenian children, like others, sometimes found it
difficult to learn, and "I am pretty sure," said an Athenian, "that
you will not easily find many sciences that give the learner and
student so much trouble and toil as arithmetic."[7]

[Illustration: THE LYRE LESSON, AND THE POETRY LESSON.  (ABOVE IS AN
ORNAMENTAL MANUSCRIPT BASKET.) From a Kylix by Douris, now in Berlin
(No. 2285).  Monumenti dell' Instituto, ix.  Plate 54.]

Part of the day was given to the study of letters, {227} and then the
boys went to the music school, where they learnt to play the lyre and
to sing.  A song accompanied by the music of the lyre was a favourite
part of the entertainment after a banquet, and every Athenian
gentleman was expected to be able to sing and play whenever he was
called upon.  So much was it the mark of a gentleman, that "He who
doesn't know the way to play the lyre" became a proverbial expression
for an uneducated person.

Very little is known about Greek music, but it was considered very
necessary that the music taught should be of an ennobling and
inspiring kind.  The Lydian melodies were held to be altogether too
soft and sentimental, and the Athenians preferred those known as
Dorian, because they were simpler and sterner and of a kind to
inspire men to noble and manly deeds.  Aristotle who wrote so much
about the ideal state, wrote also about the education an ideal state
should give to its children.  He held that "music is neither a
necessary nor a useful accomplishment in the sense in which letters
are useful, but it provides a noble and worthy means of occupying
leisure time," and Aristotle, like all Athenians, believed that it
was the part of a good education to teach not only how to work well,
but also how to use leisure well.  The Athenians thought music was a
good medicine for all ills.  One philosopher, when his temper had
been ruffled and he felt irritated and tired, used to take up his
harp and play, saying, "I am calming myself."

In the afternoon the boys were taken by their pedagogues to the
palaestra or wrestling-school, {228} where they learned gymnastics.
It was as important that the boy should have a well-trained, graceful
body, as that he should have a clear and well-furnished mind, and so
he spent a good part of each day running, jumping, wrestling, and
throwing the discus under a special master.

According to Plato, this education turned the Athenian boy from being
"the most unmanageable of animals" into "the most amiable and divine
of living beings."  This change had not taken place without many a
punishment of the boy, and it was a proverb that "he that is not
flogged cannot be taught."  Not long ago an old Greek papyrus was
discovered which gives a vivid account of the discipline that was
thought necessary by both parents and teachers, for the schoolboy who
preferred, as he probably often did, to play games instead of
learning his lessons.  A mother brought her truant boy, Cottalus, to
his schoolmaster, Lampriscus, to receive a flogging for his misdeeds,
and she said:

_Mother_.

  Flog him Lampriscus,
  Across the shoulders, till his wicked soul
  Is all but out of him.  He's spent my all
  In playing odd and even; knuckle bones
  Are nothing to him.  Why, he hardly knows
  The door of the Letter School.  And yet the thirtieth
  Comes round and I must pay--tears no excuse.
  His writing tablet which I take the trouble
{229}
  To wax anew each month lies unregarded
  In the corner.  If by chance he deigns to touch it
  He scowls like Hades, then puts nothing right
  But smears it out and out.  He doesn't know
  A letter till you scream it twenty times.
  * * * *
          Yet he knows
  The seventh and the twentieth of the month,
  Whole holidays, as if he reads the stars,
  He lies awake o' nights dreaming of them.
    But, so may yonder Muses prosper you,
  Give him in stripes no less than--

_Lampriscus_ (briskly).

  Right you are.
  Here, boys, hoist him
  Upon your backs.  I like your goings on,
  My boy!  I'll teach you manners!  Where's my strap,
  With the stinging cow's tail?

_Cottalus_ (_in terror_).

  By the Muses, Sir,--Not with the stinger.

_Lampriscus_.

  Then you shouldn't be so naughty.

_Cott._

  O how many will you give me?

_Lamp._

  Your mother fixes that.

_Cott._

  How many, mother?

_Mother._

  As many as your wicked hide can bear

  (_They proceed with the flogging_).

_Cott._

  Stop!--That's enough!  Stop!

_Lamp._

  You should stop your ways.

_Cott._

  I'll never do it more, I promise you.

_Lamp._

  Don't talk so much, or else I'll bring a gag.

_Cott._

  I won't talk,--only do not kill me,--please.

{230}

_Lamp._ (_at length relenting_).

  Let him down, boys.

_Mother._

  No, leather him till sunset.

_Lamp._

  Why, he's as mottled as a water snake.

_Mother._

  Well, when he's done his reading, good or bad,
  Give him a trifle more, say twenty strokes.[8]


Children were not always well behaved in other ways, it seems, and
complaints were made by their parents that the children contradicted
them and did not always rise when their elders came into the room,
that they chattered too much before company, crossed their legs when
they sat down, and completely tyrannized over their pedagogues.

But in spite of all his misdemeanours and punishments, in letters,
music and gymnastics, the Athenian boy was educated until he was
eighteen years old.  The stories of the ancient heroes who had fought
at Troy, and those of more recent times who had defeated the Persians
filled him with enthusiasm for his race and a love of freedom for his
city.  Having to learn many things without the aid of books, his mind
grew quick, alert and observant, and his music and gymnastics taught
him the beauty of self-control and dignified restraint.

[Illustration: MUSIC SCHOOL SCENES.  From a Hydria in the British
Museum.  (E 171.)]

At eighteen, the Athenian youth left school.  The state did not give
him the full rights of a citizen until a few years later, and until
then he was required to perform certain military duties, but he was
no longer a boy, and he was considered old enough to understand the
meaning of citizenship, {231} and to know what were its duties and
privileges.  So it was then, at the time of leaving his boyhood
behind, and entering upon the richer and fuller life before him, that
the youth took the oath of the Ephebi or young men.  He was given the
shield and spear of the warrior, and then in the temple, before Zeus,
the Lord of Heaven, and in the presence of the highest Athenian
magistrates, he swore:


    "Never to disgrace his holy arms, never to forsake his comrade in
    the ranks, but to fight for the holy temples, alone or with
    others: to leave his country, not in a worse, but in a better
    state than he found it; to obey the magistrates and the laws, and
    defend them against attack; finally to hold in honour the
    religion of his country."



[1] From _The Schools of Hellas_, by Kenneth J. Freeman.

[2] Lucian, translated by Kenneth J. Freeman, in _The Schools of
Hellas_.

[3] Plato: _Protagoras_, translated by Jowett.

[4] Xenophon: _Banquet_.

[5] See p. 312.

[6] Plato: _Laws_.

[7] Plato: _Republic_, translated by Davies and Vaughan.

[8] Herodas: _Mime_, III, translated by Kenneth J. Freeman in _The
Schools of Hellas_.




{232}

CHAPTER XIV

THE GREEK THEATRE

The Greek drama began as a religious observance in honour of
Dionysus.  To the Greeks this god personified both the spring and the
vintage, the latter a very important time of year in a vine-growing
country, and he was a symbol to them of that power there is in man of
rising out of himself, of being impelled onwards by a joy within him
that he cannot explain, but which makes him go forward, walking, as
it were, on the wings of the wind, of the spirit that fills him with
a deep sense of worship.  We call this power _enthusiasm_, a Greek
word which simply means _the god within us_.

From very early times, stories of his life were recited at the
religious festivals held in honour of Dionysus, and then stories of
the other gods and of the ancient heroes were told as well.  It was
from these beginnings that the drama came.  Originally, the story was
told in the form of a song, chanted at first by everyone taking part
in the festival, and later by a chorus of about fifty performers, and
at intervals in the song the leader would recite part of the story by
himself.  By degrees the recitation {233} became of greater
importance than the song; it grew longer, and after a time two people
took part in it and then three; at the same time the chorus became
smaller and of less importance in the action of the drama, until at
last it could consist of only fifteen performers.

A Greek drama was in many ways much simpler than a modern drama.
There were fewer characters, and usually only three speaking actors
were allowed on the stage at once.  There was only one story told and
there was nothing to take the attention of the audience away from
this.  The Chorus, though it no longer told the story, was very
important, for it set the atmosphere of the play, and lyrics of
haunting loveliness hinted at the tragedy that could not be averted,
because of terrible deeds done in the past, or if, indeed, there
might be any help, the imagination was carried forward on wings of
hope.  The Chorus also served another purpose.  In a modern drama,
when the tragedy of a situation becomes almost too great for the
audience to bear, relief is often found in some comic, or partly
comic, episode which is introduced to slacken the tension.
Shakespeare does this constantly.  But comic episodes were felt to be
out of place in a Greek drama, and therefore when a tragic scene had
taken place, the Chorus followed it by a song of purest poetry.  In
one play of Euripides, a terrible scene of tragedy was followed by a
song in which the Chorus prayed for escape from such sorrows on the
wings of a bird to a land where all was peace and beauty.  They sang:

{234}

  Could I take me to some cavern for mine hiding,
    In the hill-tops where the Sun scarce hath trod;
  Or a cloud make the home of mine abiding,
    As a bird among the bird-droves of God.

And the song goes on to carry the imagination to a spot

  Where a voice of living waters never ceaseth
    In God's quiet garden by the sea,
  And Earth, the ancient life-giver, increaseth
    Joy among the meadows, like a tree.[1]


In the great Greek dramas, the Chorus is a constant reminder that,
though they cannot understand or explain them, there are other powers
in the world than the wild passions of men.

The great dramatic festival in Athens was held in the spring in the
theatre of Dionysus, to the south-east of the Acropolis.  The theatre
in Athens never became an everyday amusement, as it is today, but was
always directly connected with the worship of Dionysus, and the
performances were always preceded by a sacrifice.  The festival was
only held once a year, and whilst it lasted the whole city kept
holiday.  Originally, admission to the theatre was free, but the
crowds became so great and there was such confusion and sometimes
fighting in the rush for good seats, that the state decided to charge
an admission fee and tickets had to be bought beforehand.  But even
then there were no reserved seats, except for certain officials who
sat in the front row.  In the time of Pericles, complaints were made
that the {235} poorer citizens could not afford to buy tickets, and
so important was the drama then considered, that it was ordered that
tickets should be given free to all who applied for them.

[Illustration: THEATRE AT EPIDAURUS]

An Athenian audience was very critical, and shouts and applause, or
groans and hisses showed its approval or disapproval of the play
being acted.  Several plays were given in one day, and a prize was
awarded to the best, so the audience was obliged to start at dawn and
would probably remain in the theatre until sunset.  Let us go with an
Athenian audience and see a play which was first performed in the
latter half of the fifth century B.C.

The theatre is a great semi-circle on the slope of the Acropolis,
with rows of stone seats on which about eighteen thousand spectators
can sit.  The front row consists of marble chairs, the only seats in
the theatre which have backs, and these are reserved for the priests
of Dionysus and the chief magistrates.  Beyond the front row, is a
circular space called the orchestra, where the Chorus sings, and in
the centre of which stands the altar of Dionysus.  Behind the
orchestra, is the stage on which the actors will act, at the back of
which is a building painted to look like the front of a temple or a
palace, to which the actors retire when they are not wanted on the
stage or have to change their costumes.  That is the whole theatre
and all its stage scenery.  Overhead is the deep blue sky, the
Acropolis rises up behind, and the olive-laden hills are seen in the
distance.  Much will have to be left to the imagination, but the very
simplicity {236} of the outward surroundings will make the audience
give all their attention to the play and the acting.

When the play begins, there will only be three actors on the stage at
once.  They will wear very elaborate costumes, and a strange-looking
wooden sole called a cothurnus or buskin, about six inches high, on
their shoes, to make them look taller and more impressive, and over
their faces a curious mask with a wide mouth, so that everyone in
that vast audience will hear them.  There will be no curtain and the
play is not divided into different acts.  When there is a pause in
the action, the Chorus will fill up the time with their song.  If it
is tragedy, we shall not see the final catastrophe on the stage, but
a messenger will appear who will give us an account of what has
happened.  All this is very different from the way in which a modern
play is given, but some of the greatest dramas the world possesses
were written by Athenian dramatists and acted on this Athenian stage
more than two thousand years ago.

On this occasion the play we are to see is "Iphigenia in Tauris,"
written by Euripides, one of the greatest of the Athenian dramatists.

The legends and traditions from which most of the Greek plays took
their plots were, of course, well known to the Athenians.  They were
stories commemorating some great event, or explaining some religious
observance, but naturally these legends were differently treated by
different dramatists, each of whom brought out a different side of
the story to enforce some particular lesson which {237} he wished to
bring home to the people, and this is especially true of the legends
like that of Iphigenia connected with the Fall of Troy.

In the opening speech of this play, Iphigenia very briefly tells her
story up to the moment when the play begins.  Just as the Greeks had
been ready to sail for Troy, they were wind-bound at Aulis.  The wise
men were consulted as to the meaning of this, and how the gods who
must in some way have been offended, might be appeased, so that fair
winds might send them on their way.  Calchas, the seer, told them
that Artemis demanded the sacrifice of Iphigenia, daughter of
Agamemnon, King of Argos, the great leader of the host, and her
father sent for her accordingly.  The maiden was at home with her
mother, and the messenger who was sent to Argos to bring her was
charged to say that her father desired to wed her to the hero
Achilles.  She came and the sacrifice was offered, but at the supreme
moment, Artemis carried Iphigenia away and placed her in the land of
the Tauri, a wild and barbarous tribe, as their priestess.  These
Tauri had an image of Artemis in a temple, to which they sacrificed
all strangers who were cast on their shores, and it was the duty of
the priestess to consecrate each victim before he was slain.  Here,
performing this rite, had Iphigenia lived for more than ten years,
but never yet had a Greek come to this wild land.  She knew, of
course, nothing of what had happened at Troy or afterwards; she did
not know that on his return home her father had been slain by
Clytemnestra his wife, or that Orestes, her {238} brother, had
avenged that death by slaughtering his own mother, after which deed
he had wandered from place to place pursued by the relentless torment
of the Furies.  Bitter against the Greeks for having willed her
sacrifice at Aulis, Iphigenia says of herself that she is "turned to
stone, and has no pity left in her," and she half hopes that the day
will come when a Greek shall be brought to her to be offered in his
turn to the goddess.

In the meantime, Orestes, tormented beyond endurance by the Furies,
had gone to the Oracle of Apollo, to ask how he might be purified
from his sin, and Apollo had told him to go to the land of the Tauri
and bring back to Attica the image of Artemis his sister, so that it
might no longer be stained by the blood of the human sacrifices.  And
so it comes about that Orestes is the first Greek who will be brought
to Iphigenia for sacrifice to Artemis.  It is at this moment that the
play opens.[2]


CHARACTERS OF THE PLAY

  IPHIGENIA.
  ORESTES, her brother.
  PYLADES, friend to Orestes.
  THOAS, King of Tauris.
  A HERDSMAN.
  A MESSENGER.

CHORUS of captive Greek Women, handmaids to Iphigenia.

THE GODDESS, PALLAS ATHENA.

{239}

The scene shows a great and barbaric Temple on a desolate sea-coast.
An altar is visible stained with blood.  There are spoils of slain
men hanging from the roof.  Iphigenia, in the dress of a priestess,
comes out of the Temple, and in a speech that serves really as a
Prologue to the play, she tells her story.  At the end of her speech,
which is haunted throughout by a sense of exile and homesickness, she
describes a strange dream she has just had, which she interprets as
meaning that Orestes, her brother, is dead.  She then goes into the
Temple.

_Voice._

  Did some one cross the pathway?  Guard thee well.

_Another Voice._

  I am watching.  Every side I turn my eye.

(_Enter Orestes and Pylades.  Their dress shows they are travellers.
Orestes is shaken and distraught._)

_Orestes._

  How, brother?  And is this the sanctuary
  At last, for which we sailed from Argos?

_Pylades._

  For sure, Orestes.  Seest thou not it is?

_Orestes._

  The altar, too, where Hellene blood is shed.

_Pylades._

  How like long hair those blood-stains, tawny red!

_Orestes._

  And spoils of slaughtered men--there by the thatch.

_Pylades._

  Aye, first-fruits of the harvest, when they catch
  Their strangers!--'Tis a place to search with care.

(_He searches while Orestes sits._)

During this search, Orestes, in a speech addressed to Apollo,
explains why they are there, and expresses hopelessness {240} at
their ever accomplishing the will of the god, and even suggests their
turning back.  But Pylades encourages him and bids him take courage,
for, he says,

      Danger gleams
  Like sunshine to a brave man's eyes, and fear
  Of what may be is no help anywhere.

_Orestes._

  Aye, we have never braved these leagues of way
  To falter at the end.  See, I obey
  Thy words.  They are ever wise.  Let us go mark
  Some cavern, to lie hid till fall of dark.
  God will not suffer that bad things be stirred
  To mar us now, and bring to naught the word
  Himself hath spoke.  Aye, and no peril brings
  Pardon for turning back to sons of kings.

(_They go out towards the shore._)

After they are gone, enter gradually the women of the Chorus.  These
are Greek women who have been taken captive in war by King Thoas, and
so they are friendly to the exiled and lonely Iphigenia, for they are
just as homesick as she is.  They come now in obedience to a call
from her to assist in mourning for Orestes, who, she is convinced by
her dream, is dead.

{241}

_Chorus._

  Peace!  Peace upon all who dwell
  By the Sister Rocks that clash in the swell
        Of the Friendless Seas.

  * * * *

  From Hellas that once was ours,
  We come before thy gate,
  From the land of the western seas,
  The horses and the towers,
  The wells and the garden trees,
  And the seats where our fathers sate.

_Leader._

  What tidings, ho?  With what intent
    Hast called me to thy shrine and thee,
    O child of him who crossed the sea
  To Troy with that great armament,
  The thousand prows, the myriad swords?
  I come, O child of Atreid Lords.

(_Iphigenia, followed by attendants, comes from the Temple._)

_Iphigenia._

  Alas!  O maidens mine,
  I am filled full of tears:
  My heart filled with the beat
  Of tears, as of dancing feet,
  A lyreless, joyless line,
  And music meet for the dead.

  For a whisper is in mine ears,
  By visions borne on the breath
  Of the Night that now is fled,
{242}
  Of a brother gone to death.
  Oh sorrow and weeping sore,
    For the house that no more is,
  For the dead that were kings of yore
  And the labour of Argolis!

Iphigenia and the Chorus then lament together over the ruin and loss
that has befallen the House of Agamemnon.  Suddenly the Leader of the
Chorus stops them.

_Leader._

  Stay, yonder from some headland of the sea
  There comes, methinks a herdsman, seeking thee.

(_Enter a Herdsman.  Iphigenia is still on her knees._)

_Herdsman._

  Daughter of Clytemnestra and her King,
  Give ear!  I bear news of a wondrous thing.

_Iphigenia._

  What news, that so should mar my obsequies?

_Herdsman._

  A ship hath passed the blue Symplegades,
  And here upon our coast two men are thrown,
  Young, bold, good slaughter for the altar-stone
  Of Artemis.

(_She rises._)

  Make all the speed ye may;
  'Tis not too much.  The blood-bowl and the spray!

{243}

_Iphigenia._

  Men of what nation?  Doth their habit show?

_Herdsman._

  Hellenes for sure, but that is all we know.

_Iphigenia._

  No name?  No other clue thine ear could seize?

_Herdsman._

  We heard one call his comrade "Pylades."

_Iphigenia._

  Yes.  And the man who spoke--his name was what?

_Herdsman._

  None of us heard.  I think they spoke it not.

_Iphigenia._

  How did ye see them first, how make them fast?

_Herdsman._

  Down by the sea, just where the surge is cast,--

_Iphigenia._

  The sea?  What is the sea to thee and thine?

_Herdsman._

  We came to wash our cattle in the brine.

_Iphigenia._

  Go back, and tell how they were taken; show
  The fashion of it, for I fain would know
  All.--'Tis so long a time, and never yet,
  Never, hath Greek blood made this altar wet.

The herdsman tells his tale of how the men were taken prisoners.
Iphigenia hears in silence and at the end of it says:

  'Tis well.  Let thy hand bring them, and mine own
  Shall falter not till here God's will be done.

(_Exit Herdsman._)

{244}

Iphigenia then gives way to her feelings.  There are strangers to be
sacrificed; to that she is accustomed, but these men are Greeks.  Yet
she herself suffered bitter things at the hands of the Greeks; should
she not avenge these?  By degrees, however, as she thinks of her
youth, of her home, she melts, and at length withdraws into the
Temple, raging against the cruel deed that she must do, and not at
all sure that she can nerve herself to do it.

The coming of these Greeks has brought Greece vividly back to the
thoughts of the Chorus.  All Greeks loved the sea and were seafarers,
and the arrival of these two adventurous men reminds these exiled
women of their home, and in their imagination they see the ship cross
the sea, until it touches the Friendless and cruel shore.

_Chorus._

  But who be these, from where the rushes blow
  On pale Eurotas, from pure Dirces,
  That turn not neither falter,
  Seeking Her land, where no man breaketh bread,
  Her without pity, round whose virgin head
  Blood on the pillars rusts from long ago,
  Blood on the ancient altar.

  A flash of the foam, a flash of the foam,
  A wave on the oar-blade welling,
{245}
  And out they passed to the heart of the blue;
  A chariot shell that the wild waves drew.
  Is it for passion of gold they come,
    Or pride to make great their dwelling?

  * * * * *

  Through the Clashing Rocks they burst:
    They passed by the Cape unsleeping
  Of Phineus' sons accurst:
  They ran by the star-lit bay
    Upon magic surges sweeping,
  Where folk on the waves astray
  Have seen, through the gleaming grey,
  Ring behind ring, men say,
    The dance of the old Sea's daughters.

  The guiding oar abaft
    It rippled and it dinned,
  And now the west wind laughed
    And now the south west wind;
  And the sail was full in flight,
  And they passed by the Island White:

  Birds, birds, everywhere,
  White as the foam, light as the air;
  And ghostly Achilles raceth there,
    Far in the Friendless Waters.

  A sail, a sail from Greece,
    Fearless to cross the sea,
  With ransom and with peace
    To my sick captivity.
  O home, to see thee still,
  And the old walls on the hill!

{246}

  Dreams, dreams, gather to me!
  Bear me on wings over the sea;
  O joy of the night, to slave and free,
  One good thing that abideth!

_Leader._

  But lo, the twain whom Thoas sends,
    Their arms in bondage grasped sore
    Strange offering this, to lay before
  The Goddess!  Hold your peace, O friends.

  Onward, still onward to this shrine
    They lead the first-fruits of the Greek.
    'Twas true, the tale he came to speak,
  That watcher of the mountain kine.

  O holy one, if it afford
    Thee joy, what these men bring to thee,
    Take thou their sacrifice, which we,
  By law of Hellas, hold abhorred.

(_Enter Orestes and Pylades, bound, and guarded by Taurians.
Re-enter Iphigenia._)

_Iphigenia._

  So be it.
  My foremost care must be that nothing harms
  The temple's holy rule.--Untie their arms.
  That which is hallowed may no more be bound.
  You, to the shrine within!  Let all be found
  As the law bids, and as we need this day.

(_Orestes and Pylades are set free; some Attendants go into the
Temple._)

{247}

  Ah me!
  What mother then was yours, O strangers, say,
  And father?  And your sister, if you have
  A sister: both at once, so young and brave
  To leave her brotherless!  Who knows when heaven
  May send that fortune?  For to none is given
  To know the coming nor the end of woe;
  So dark is God, and to great darkness go
  His paths, by blind chance mazed from our ken.
    Whence are ye come, O most unhappy men?
  From some far home, methinks, ye have found this shore
  And far shall stay from home for evermore.

Orestes asks Iphigenia not to make their fate worse by dwelling on
it, nor to pity them.  They know where they are and the cruel custom
of the land.

_Iphigenia._

  Say first--which is it men call Pylades?

_Orestes._

  'Tis this man's name, if that will give thee ease.

_Iphigenia._

  From what walled town of Hellas cometh he?

_Orestes._

  Enough!--How would the knowledge profit thee?

_Iphigenia._

  Are ye two brothers of one mother born?

_Orestes._

  No, not in blood.  In love we are brothers sworn.

{248}

_Iphigenia._

  Thou also hast a name: tell me thereof.

_Orestes._

  Call me Unfortunate.  'Tis name enough.

_Iphigenia._

  I asked not that.  Let that with Fortune lie.

_Orestes._

  Fools cannot laugh at them that nameless die.

_Iphigenia._

  Why grudge me this?  Hast thou such mighty fame?

_Orestes._

  My body, if thou wilt, but not my name.

_Iphigenia._

  Nor yet the land of Greece where thou wast bred?

_Orestes._

  What gain to have told it thee, when I am dead?

_Iphigenia._

  Nay: why shouldst thou deny so small a grace?

_Orestes._

  Know then, great Argos was my native place.

_Iphigenia._

  Stranger!  The truth!--From Argos art thou come?

_Orestes._

  Mycenae, once a rich land, was my home.

_Iphigenia._

  'Tis banishment that brings thee here--or what?

_Orestes._

  A kind of banishment, half forced, half sought.

_Iphigenia._

  Wouldst thou but tell me all I need of thee!

_Orestes._

  'Twere not much added to my misery.

_Iphigenia._

  From Argos!--Oh, how sweet to see thee here!

_Orestes._

  Enjoy it then.  To me 'tis sorry cheer.

_Iphigenia._

  Thou knowest the name of Troy?  Far doth it flit.

{249}

_Orestes._

  Would God I had not; nay, nor dreamed of it.

_Iphigenia._

  Men fable it is fallen beneath the sword?

_Orestes._

  Fallen it is.  Thou hast heard no idle word.

_Iphigenia._

  Fallen!  At last!--And Helen taken too?

_Orestes._

  Aye; on an evil day for one I knew.

_Iphigenia._

  Where is she?  I too have some anger stored--

_Orestes._

  In Sparta!  Once more happy with her lord!

_Iphigenia._

  Oh, hated of all Greece, not only me!

_Orestes._

  I too have tasted of her wizardry.

_Iphigenia._

  And came the armies home, as the tales run?

_Orestes._

  To answer that were many tales in one.

_Iphigenia._

  Oh, give me this hour full!  Thou soon wilt die.

_Orestes._

  Ask, if such longing holds thee.  I will try.

_Iphigenia._

  A seer called Calchas!  Did he ever come?

_Orestes._

  Calchas is dead, as the news went at home.

_Iphigenia._

  Good news, ye gods!--Odysseus, what of him?

_Orestes._

  Not home yet, but still living, as men deem.

_Iphigenia._

  Curse him!  And may he see his home no more.

_Orestes._

  Why curse him?  All his house is stricken sore.

_Iphigenia._

  How hath the Nereid's son, Achilles, sped?

_Orestes._

  Small help his bridal brought him!  He is dead.

_Iphigenia._

  A fierce bridal, so the sufferers tell!

{250}

_Orestes._

  Who art thou, questioning of Greece so well?

_Iphigenia._

  I was a Greek.  Evil caught me long ago.

_Orestes._

  Small wonder, then, thou hast such wish to know.

_Iphigenia._

  That war-lord, whom they call so high in bliss--

_Orestes._

  None such is known to me.  What name was his?

_Iphigenia._

  They called him Agamemnon, Atreus' son.

_Orestes._

  I know not.  Cease,--My questioning is done.

_Iphigenia._

  'Twill be such joy to me!  How fares he?  Tell!

_Orestes._

  Dead.  And hath wrecked another's life as well.

_Iphigenia._

  Dead?  By what dreadful fortune?  Woe is me!

_Orestes._

  Why sighest thou?  Had he any link with thee?

_Iphigenia._

  I did but think of his old joy and pride.

_Orestes._

  His own wife foully stabbed him, and he died.

_Iphigenia._

  O God!
  I pity her that slew--and him that slew.

_Orestes._

  Now cease thy questions.  Add no word thereto.

_Iphigenia._

  But one word.  Lives she still, that hapless wife?

_Orestes._

  No.  Her own son, her first-born, took her life.

{251}

_Iphigenia._

  O shipwrecked house!  What thought was in his brain?

_Orestes._

  Justice on her, to avenge his father slain.

_Iphigenia._

  Alas!
  A bad false duty bravely hath he wrought.

_Orestes._

  Yet God, for all his duty, helps him not.

_Iphigenia._

  And not one branch of Atreus' tree lives on?

_Orestes._

  Electra lives, unmated and alone.

_Iphigenia._

  The child they slaughtered--is there word of her?

_Orestes._

  Why, no, save that she died in Aulis there.

_Iphigenia._

  Poor child!  Poor father, too, who killed and lied.

_Orestes._

  For a bad woman's worthless sake she died.

_Iphigenia._

  The dead King's son, lives he in Argos still?

_Orestes._

  He lives, now here, now nowhere, bent with ill.

_Iphigenia._

  O dreams, light dreams, farewell!  Ye too were lies.

* * * * *

_Leader._

  We too have kinsmen dear, but, being low,
  None heedeth, live they still or live they not.

_Iphigenia._  (_With sudden impulse._)

  Listen!  For I am fallen upon a thought,
  Strangers, of some good use to you and me.
  * * * * *
  Stranger, if I can save thee, wilt thou bear
  To Argos and the friends who loved my youth
{252}
  Some word?  There is a tablet which, in ruth
  For me and mine ill works, a prisoner wrote,
  Ta'en by the king in war.  He knew 'twas not
  My will that craved for blood, but One on high
  Who holds it righteous her due prey shall die.
  And since that day no Greek hath ever come
  Whom I could save and send to Argos home
  With prayer to any friend: but thou,
  I think, dost loathe me not; and thou dost know
  Mycenae and the names that fill my heart.
  Help me!  Be saved!  Thou also hast thy part,
  Thy life for one light letter--

(_Orestes looks at Pylades._)

    For thy friend,
  The law compelleth.  He must bear the end
  By Artemis ordained, apart from thee.

_Orestes._

  Strange woman, as thou biddest let it be,
  Save one thing.  'Twere for me a heavy weight
  Should this man die.  'Tis I and mine own fate
  That steer our goings.  He but sails with me
  Because I suffer much.  It must not be
  That by his ruin I should 'scape mine own,
  And win thy grace withal.  'Tis simply done.
  Give him the tablet.  He with faithful will
  Shall all thy hest in Argolis fulfil.
{253}
  And I--who cares may kill me.  Vile is he
  Who leaves a friend in peril and goes free
  Himself.  And, as it chances, this is one
  Right dear to me; his life is as my own.

_Iphigenia._

  O royal heart!  Surely from some great seed
  This branch is born, that can so love indeed.
  God grant the one yet living of my race
  Be such as thou!  For not quite brotherless
  Am even I, save that I see him not,
  Strangers--Howbeit, thy pleasures shall be wrought.
  This man shall bear the message, and thou go
  To death.  So greatly thou wilt have it so.

Orestes then asks somewhat of the ritual by which Iphigenia will
consecrate the victim, and where he will be buried.  Iphigenia
promises that he shall be duly buried according to the Greek customs,
and then she goes into the temple to get the tablet.  During her
absence Orestes and Pylades have a long argument as to which shall
bear the tablet to Argos, and which remain in the island to be
sacrificed.  It is finally decided that Pylades shall go back to
Greece and Orestes shall remain.

(_Enter Iphigenia from the Temple._)

_Iphigenia._

  Go ye within; and have all things of need
  In order set for them that do the deed.
  There wait my word.

(_Attendants go in._)

{254}

    Ye strangers, here I hold
  The many-lettered tablet, fold on fold.
  Yet--one thing still.

Iphigenia then tells Pylades that she is afraid that, once safe and
free, he will forget the promise made when he was in danger of his
life, and so she makes him swear in the name of Zeus, that he will
faithfully bear the message.  She, on her side, in the name of
Artemis, swears that she will in very truth set him free.  Pylades
then reminds her that he might be shipwrecked and so lose the tablet,
and asks that in that case he may be relieved from his vow.  But
Iphigenia, in her desperate longing for deliverance refuses this, and
instead, says that she will tell him what is written in the tablet.
If it should be lost, he must then bear the message by word of mouth.

_Pylades._

  For thy sake and for mine 'tis fairer so.
  Now let me hear his name to whom I go
  In Argolis, and how my words should run.

_Iphigenia._ (_Repeating the words by heart._)

  Say: "To Orestes, Agamemnon's son
  She that was slain in Aulis, dead to Greece
  Yet quick, Iphigenia sendeth peace:"

_Orestes._

  Iphigenia!  Where?  Back from the dead?

_Iphigenia._

  'Tis I.  But speak not, lest thou break my thread.--
  "Take me to Argos, brother, ere I die,
{255}
  Back from the Friendless Peoples and the high
  Altar of Her whose bloody rites I wreak."

_Orestes._ (_aside._)

  Where am I Pylades?  How shall I speak?

_Iphigenia._

  "Else one in grief forsaken shall, like shame
  Haunt thee."

_Pylades._ (_aside._)

  Orestes!

_Iphigenia._ (_overhearing him._)

  Yes: that is the name.
  Ye gods above!

_Pylades._

  Why callest thou on God
  For words of mine?
  'Tis nothing.  'Twas a road
  My thoughts had turned.  Speak on.--No need for us
  To question; we shall hear things marvellous.

_Iphigenia._

  Tell him that Artemis my soul did save,
  I wot not how, and to the altar gave
  A fawn instead; the which my father slew,
  Not seeing, deeming that the sword he drew
  Struck me.  But she had borne me far away
  And left me in this land.--I charge thee, say
  So much.  It is all written on the scroll.

_Pylades._

  An easy charge thou layest on my soul,
  A glad oath on thine own.  I wait no more,
  But here fulfil the service that I swore.
    Orestes, take this tablet which I bear
  To thine own hand, thy sister's messenger.

_Orestes._

  I take it, but I reck not of its scrip
  Nor message.  Too much joy is at my lip.
{256}
  Sister!  Beloved!  Wildered though I
  My arms believe not, yet they crave for thee.
  Now, filled with wonder, give me my delight!

(_He goes to embrace her.  She stands speechless._)

_Leader._

  Stranger, forbear!  No living man hath right
  To touch that robe.  The Goddess were defiled!

_Orestes._

  O sister mine, O my dead father's child,
  Agamemnon's child; take me and have no fear,
  Beyond all dreams 'tis I thy brother here.

_Iphigenia._

  My brother?  Thou?--Peace!  Mock at me no more.
  Argos is bright with him and Nauplia's shore.

_Orestes._

  Unhappy one!  Thou hast no brother there.

_Iphigenia._

  Orestes--thou?  Whom Clytemnestra bare?

_Orestes._

  To Atreus' firstborn son, thy sire and mine.

_Iphigenia._

  Thou sayest it: Oh, give me some proof, some sign!

Old things of home are remembered between the two, and at length
Iphigenia is convinced.

_Iphigenia._ (_falling into his arms_)

  Beloved!  Oh, no other, for indeed
  Beloved art thou!  In mine arms at last,
    Orestes far away.

Then follows a scene in which Iphigenia {257} gives herself up to one
emotion after another, and when Orestes reminds her that they are not
yet safe, she suggests one wild plan after another.

_Iphigenia._

        And now, what end cometh?
      Shall Chance yet comfort me,
      Finding a way for thee
      Back from the Friendless Strand,
        Back from the place of death--
      Ere yet the slayers come
      And thy blood sink in the sand--
      Home unto Argos, home?
  Hard heart so swift to slay
    Is there to life no way?--
      No ship!--And how by land?--
        A rush of feet
      Out to the waste alone.
        Nay: 'twere to meet
      Death, amid tribes unknown
      And trackless ways of the waste--
      Surely the sea were best.
      Back by the narrow bar
        To the Dark Blue Gate!--
      Ah God, too far, too far!--
        Desolate!  Desolate!
    What god or man, what unimagined flame,
      Can cleave this road where no road is, and bring
    To us last wrecks of Agamemnon's name
      Peace from long suffering?

But Iphigenia has not yet learnt all, and at length Orestes tells her
why he is there.  He repeats the words of Apollo:

{258}

          "Go seek the Taurian citadel:
  Seize there the carven Artemis that fell
  From heaven, and stablish it on Attic soil.
  So comes thy freedom,"

And he continues:

          "Sister, in this toil
  Help us!--If once that image I may win
  That day shall end my madness and my sin:
  And thou, to Argos o'er the sundering foam
  My many-oared barque shall bear thee home.
    O sister, loved and lost, O pitying face,
  Help my great peril; help our father's race.
  For lost am I and perished all the powers
  Of Pelops, save that heavenly thing be ours!"

This news somewhat sobers Iphigenia.  She is confronted now with a
very different thing from saving her brother's life.  That had just
now seemed almost impossible, but compared to this new demand, it
seemed almost easy.  This is an act of madness; it will be considered
a most fearful act of sacrilege to steal the image of Artemis, yet
Orestes asks for her help to do it.  And then there is herself and
her own hopes!  She might perhaps succeed in saving his life and
fleeing with him, but to steal the statue and then go with him is a
task beyond any hope of accomplishment.  What shall {259} she do?
She deliberately decides that she will save his life and give him the
statue, and then she herself will confront the angry King and give
her life for her brother.

_Iphigenia._

  I must wait then and be slain:
  Thou shalt walk free in Argolis again,
  And all life smile on thee.--Dearest, we need
  Not shrink from that.  I shall by mine own deed
  Have saved thee.  And a man gone from the earth
  Is wept for.  Women are but little worth.

But Orestes refuses to accept the sacrifice.

_Orestes._

  I stand with thee
  One-hearted here, be it for life or death,
  And either bear thee, if God favoureth,
  With me to Greece and home, or else lie here
  Dead at thy side.

* * * * *

_Iphigenia._

  To steal for thee the image, yet not die
  Myself!  'Tis that we need.

They then begin to discuss every possible means of escape, and at
last an idea comes to Iphigenia.  She will tell the King that Orestes
has come from Greece with his mother's blood upon him, and that
therefore it would be a great offence to sacrifice him to the {260}
goddess.  Before he is sacrificed, he must be cleansed in the waves
of the sea.  But his very presence has denied the image of the
goddess, and so that, too, must be taken to the shore and purified.
Pylades shares in the guilt of his friend and will accompany him to
the shore, and Iphigenia will go down with the image.  The rest must
be the work of Orestes, and he must arrange that they are taken on
board his ship and so escape.  It is a dangerous and a daring plan,
but there is no hope anywhere else.

Iphigenia, Orestes and Pylades will thus be saved, if saving be
possible, but what of the Chorus, of these Greek women, companions of
the exile and loneliness of Iphigenia?  They are indeed "true of
heart and faithful found," for with no hope of going home themselves,
ignored even by Iphigenia in this tremendous moment of her own hope,
they loyally promise secrecy about all that concerns the plot.  Yet
they, too, crave for home and they give voice to their longings.
They see in imagination the Greek land.  Once again the misery of
their capture and enslavement comes before them, but they rise above
their sorrow as they sing of what it will mean to Iphigenia to cross
the sea, to behold her home once again, and to reach the land of
freedom.

{261}

_Chorus._

  Bird of the sea rocks, of the bursting spray,
        O halcyon bird,
  That wheelest crying, crying, on thy way;
  Who knoweth grief can read the tale of thee:
  One love long lost, one song for ever heard
        And wings that sweep the sea.

  Sister, I too beside the sea complain,
        A bird that hath no wing.
  Oh, for a kind Greek market-place again,
  For Artemis that healeth woman's pain;
        Here I stand hungering.
  Give me the little hill above the sea,
  The palm of Delos fringed delicately,
  The young sweet laurel and the olive-tree
        Grey-leaved and glimmering;

  * * * * *

  Ah, the old tears, the old and blinding tears
        I gave God then,
  When my town fell, and noise was in mine ears
  Of crashing towers, and forth they guided me
  Through spears and lifted oars and angry men
        Out to an unknown sea.
  They bought my flesh with gold, and sore afraid
        I came to this dark East
  To serve, in thrall to Agamemnon's maid,
  This Huntress Artemis, to whom is paid
        The blood of no slain beast;
{262}
  Yet all is bloody where I dwell, Ah, me!
  Envying, envying that misery
  That through all life hath endured changelessly.
        For hard things borne from birth
  Make iron of man's heart, and hurt the less.
  'Tis change that paineth; and the bitterness
  Of life's decay when joy hath ceased to be
        That makes all dark the earth.

        Behold,
      Two score and ten there be
      Rowers that row for thee,
    And a wild hill air, as if Pan were there,
      Shall sound on the Argive sea,
      Piping to set thee free.

      Or is it the stricken string
      Of Apollo's lyre doth sing
    Joyously, as he guideth thee
      To Athens, the land of spring;
      While I wait wearying?

      Oh, the wind and the oar,
      When the great sail swells before,
    With sheets astrain, like a horse on the rein;
      And on through the race and roar,
      She feels for the farther shore.
            Ah me,
      To rise upon wings and hold
      Straight on up the steeps of gold
      Where the joyous Sun in fire doth run,
      Till the wings should faint and fold
      O'er the house that was mine of old.
{263}
    Or watch where the glade below
    With a marriage dance doth glow,
  And a child will glide from her mother's side
    Out, out, where the dancers flow:
    As I did, long ago.

    Oh, battles of gold and rare
    Raiment and starred hair,
  And bright veils crossed amid tresses tossed
    In a dusk of dancing air!
    O Youth and the days that were!

(_Enter King Thoas, with Soldiers._)

_Thoas._

    Where is the warden of this sacred gate,
    The Greek woman?  Is her work ended yet
    With these two strangers?  Do their bodies lie
    Aflame now in the rock-cleft sanctuary?

_Leader._

    Here is herself, O King, to give thee word.

(_Enter, from the Temple, Iphigenia, carrying the Image on high._)

_Thoas._

  How, child of Agamemnon!  Hast thou stirred
  From her eternal base, and to the sun
  Bearest in thine own arms, the Holy One?

_Iphigenia._

  Back, Lord!  No step beyond the pillared way.

_Thoas._

  But how?  Some rule is broken?

_Iphigenia._

                                    I unsay
    That word.  Be all unspoken and unwrought!

{264}

_Thoas._

  What means this greeting strange?  Disclose thy thought.

_Iphigenia._

  Unclean the prey was that ye caught, O King.

_Thoas._

  Who showed thee so?  Thine own imagining?

_Iphigenia._

  The Image stirred and shuddered from its seat.

_Thoas._

  Itself?--Some shock of earthquake loosened it.

_Iphigenia._

  Itself.  And the eyes closed one breathing space.

_Thoas._

  But why?  For those two men's blood-guiltiness?

_Iphigenia._

  That, nothing else.  For, oh! their guilt is sore.

_Thoas._

  They killed some of my herdsmen on the shore?

_Iphigenia._

  Their sin was brought from home, not gathered here.

_Thoas._

  What?  I must know this.--Make thy story clear.

_Iphigenia._  (_She puts down the Image and moves nearer to Thoas._)

    The men have slain their mother.

_Thoas._

  God!  And these
  Be Greeks!

_Iphigenia._

  They both are hunted out of Greece.

_Thoas._

  For this thou hast brought the Image to the sun?

_Iphigenia._

  The fire of heaven can cleanse all malison.

{265}

_Thoas._

  How didst thou first hear of their deed of shame?

_Iphigenia._

  When the Image hid its eyes, I questioned them.

_Thoas._

  Good.  Greece hath taught thee many a subtle art.

_Iphigenia._

  Ah, they too had sweet words to move my heart.

_Thoas._

  Sweet words?  How, did they bring some news of Greece?

_Iphigenia._

  Orestes, my one brother, lives in peace.

_Thoas._

  Surely!  Good news to make thee spare their lives--

_Iphigenia._

  My father too in Argos lives and thrives.

_Thoas._

  While thou didst think but of the goddess' laws!

_Iphigenia._

  Do I not hate all Greeks?  Have I not cause?

_Thoas._

  Good cause.  But now--What service should be paid?

_Iphigenia._

  The Law of long years needs must be obeyed.

_Thoas._

  To work then, with thy sword and hand-washing!

_Iphigenia._

  First I must shrive them with some cleansing thing.

_Thoas._

  What?  Running water, or the sea's salt spray?

_Iphigenia._

  The sea doth wash all the world's ills away.

_Thoas._

  For sure.  'Twill make them cleaner for the knife.

{266}

_Iphigenia._

  And my hand, too, cleaner for all my life.

_Thoas._

  Well, the waves lap close by the temple floor.

_Iphigenia._

  We need a secret place.  I must do more.

_Thoas._

  Some rite unseen?  'Tis well.  Go where thou wilt.

_Iphigenia._

  The Image likewise must be purged of guilt.

_Thoas._

  The stain hath touched it of that mother's blood?

_Iphigenia._

  I durst not move it else, from where it stood.

_Thoas._

  How good thy godliness and forethought!  Aye,
  Small wonder all our people holds thee high.

_Iphigenia._

  Dost know then what I fain would have?

_Thoas._

  'Tis thine to speak and it shall be.

_Iphigenia._

  Put bondage on the strangers both.--

_Thoas._

  Why bondage?  Whither can they flee?

_Iphigenia._

  Put not thy trust in any Greek.

_Thoas._  (_To attendants_)

  Ho, men!  Some thongs and fetters, go!

_Iphigenia._

  Stay; let them lead the strangers here, outside the shrine--

_Thoas._

  It shall be so.

_Iphigenia._

  And lay dark raiment on their heads--

_Thoas._

  To veil them, lest the Sun should see.

_Iphigenia._

  And lend me some of thine own spears.

_Thoas._

  This company shall go with thee.

_Iphigenia._

  Next, send through all the city streets a herald--

_Thoas._

  Aye; and what to say?

_Iphigenia._

  That no man living stir abroad.

{267}

_Thoas._

  The stain of blood might cross their way.

_Iphigenia._

  Aye, sin like theirs doth spread contagion.

_Thoas._ (_To an attendant_)

  Forth, and publish my command--

_Iphigenia._

  That none stir forth--nor look--

_Thoas._

  Nor look.  How well thou carest for the land!

_Iphigenia._

  For one whom I am bound to love.

_Thoas._

  Indeed, I think thou hat'st me not.

_Iphigenia._

  And thou meanwhile, here at the temple, wait, O King, and--

_Thoas._

  Wait for what?

_Iphigenia._

  Purge all the shrine with fire.

_Thoas._

  'Twill all be clean before you come again.

_Iphigenia._

  And while the strangers pass thee close, seeking the sea--

_Thoas._

  What wouldst thou then?

_Iphigenia._

  Put darkness on thine eyes.

_Thoas._

  Mine eyes might drink the evil of their crime?

_Iphigenia._

  And, should I seem to stay too long--

_Thoas._

  Too long?  How shall I judge the time?

_Iphigenia._

  Be not dismayed.

_Thoas._

  Perform thy rite all duly.  We have time to spare.

_Iphigenia._

  And God grant this cleansing end as I desire!

_Thoas._

  I join thy prayer.

_Iphigenia._

  The door doth open.

* * * * *

{268}

(_She takes up the Image again._)

  There passeth here a holy thing; begone,
      I charge thee, from the road.
  * * * * *
  Begone and tremble from this road: fly
      swiftly, lest ye be defiled.
  O Queen and Virgin, Leto-born, have pity!
  Let me cleanse this stain,
  And pray to thee where pray I would: a
      clean house shall be thine again,
  And we at last win happiness.  Behold, I
      speak but as I dare;
  The rest--Oh, God is wise, and thou, my
      Mistress, thou canst read my prayer.

(_The procession passes out.  Thoas and the bystanders veiled;
Attendants in front, then Iphigenia with the Image, then veiled
soldiers, then Orestes and Pylades bound, the bonds held by other
veiled soldiers following them.  Thoas goes into the Temple._)

Here follows a song from the Chorus which fills the interval during
which the cleansing ceremonies are supposed to be taking place.  At
the end of the song there enters a messenger running.

_Messenger._

  Ho, watchers of the fane!  Ho, altar-guard,
  Where is King Thoas gone?  Undo the barred
  Portals, and call the King!  The King I seek.

_Leader._

  What tidings--if unbidden I may speak?

{269}

_Messenger._

  The strangers both are gone, and we beguiled,
  By some dark plot of Agamemnon's child:
  Fled from the land!  And on a barque of Greece
  They bear the heaven-sent shape of Artemis.

_Leader._

  Thy tale is past belief.--Go, swiftly on,
  And find the King.  He is but newly gone.

_Messenger._

  Where went he?  He must know of what has passed!

_Leader._

  I know not where he went.  But follow fast
  And seek him.  Thou wilt light on him ere long.

_Messenger._

  See there!  The treason of a woman's tongue!
  Ye are all in the plot, I warrant ye!

_Leader._

  Thy words are mad!  What are the men to me?
  Go to the palace, go!

_Messenger._ (_Seeing the great knocker on the Temple door._)

  I will not stir
  Till word be come by this good messenger
  If Thoas be within these gates or no.--
      (_Thundering at the door._)
  Ho, loose the portals!  Ye within!  What ho!
  Open, and tell our master one doth stand
  Without here, with strange evil in his hand.
      (_Enter Thoas from the Temple._)

_Thoas._

  Who dares before this portal consecrate
  Make uproar and lewd battering of the gate?
  Thy noise hath broke the Altar's ancient peace.

{270}

_Messenger._

  Ye gods!  They swore to me--and bade me cease
  My search--the King was gone.  And all the while--

_Thoas._

  These women?  How?  What sought they by such guile?

_Messenger._

  Of them hereafter!  Give me first thine ear
  For greater things.  The virgin minister
  That served our altar, she hath fled from this
  And stolen the dread Shape of Artemis,
  With those two Greeks.  The cleansing was a lie.

_Thoas._

  She fled?  What wild hope whispered her to fly?

_Messenger._

  The hope to save Orestes.  Wonder on!

_Thoas._

  Orestes--how?  Not Clytemnestra's son?

_Messenger._

  And our pledged altar-offering.  'Tis the same.

_Thoas._

  O marvel beyond marvel!  By what name
  More rich in wonder can I name thee right?

_Messenger._

  Give not thy mind to that.  Let ear and sight
  Be mine awhile; and when thou hast heard the whole
  Devise how best to trap them ere the goal.

_Thoas._

  Aye, tell thy tale.  Our Tauric seas stretch far,
  Where no man may escape my wand of war.

The Messenger gives Thoas an excited account of what has happened,
ending by saying that if he send out pursuers {271} immediately, he
may even yet seize the fugitives.  Thoas gives his orders.

_Thoas._

  Ho, all ye dwellers of my savage town
  Set saddle on your steeds, and gallop down
  To watch the heads, and gather what is cast
  Alive from this Greek wreck.  We shall make fast,
  By God's help, the blasphemers.--Send a corps
  Out in good boats a furlong from the shore;
  So we shall either snare them on the seas
  Or ride them down by land, and at our ease
  Fling them down gulfs of rock, or pale them high
  On stakes in the sun, to feed our birds and die.
  Women: you knew this plot.  Each one of you
  Shall know, before the work I have to do
  Is done, what torment is.--Enough!  A clear
  Task is afoot.  I must not linger here.

While Thoas is moving off, his men shouting and running before and
behind him, there comes a sudden blasting light and thunder-roll, and
Athena is seen in the air confronting them.  This sudden appearance
of a god to solve a problem at the end of a play is known as the
_deus ex machina_, and there was actually some kind of machine by
which the god appeared as if suspended in the air.

{272}

_Athena._

  Ho, whither now, so hot upon the prey,
  King Thoas?  It is I that bid thee stay,
  Athena, child of Zeus.  Turn back this flood
  Of wrathful men, and get thee temperate blood.
  Apollo's word and Fate's ordained path
  Have led Orestes here, to escape the wrath
  Of Them that hate.  To Argos he must bring
  His sister's life, and guide that Holy Thing
  Which fell from heaven, in mine own land to dwell.
  So shall his pain have rest, and all be well.
  Thou hast heard my speech, O King.  No death from thee
  May snare Orestes between rocks and sea:
  Poseidon for my love doth make the sore
  Waves gentle, and set free his labouring oar.

  And thou, O far away--for, far or near
  A goddess speaketh and thy heart must hear--
  Go on thy ways, Orestes, bearing home
  The Image and thy sister.  When ye come
  To god-built Athens, lo, a land there is
  Half hid on Attica's last boundaries,
  A little land, hard by Karystus' Rock,
  But sacred.  It is called by Attic folk
  Halae.  Build there a temple, and bestow
  Therein thine Image, that the world may know
  The tale of Tauris and of thee, cast out
  From pole to pole of Greece, a blood-hound rout
{273}
  Of ill thoughts driving thee.  So through the whole
  Of time to Artemis the Tauropole
  Shall men make hymns at Halae.  And withal,
  Give them this law.  At each high festival,
  A sword, in record of thy death undone,
  Shall touch a man's throat, and the red blood run--
  One drop, for old religion's sake.  In this
  Shall live that old red rite of Artemis.

  And thou, Iphigenia, by the stair
  Of Brauron in the rocks, the Key shall bear
  Of Artemis.  There shalt thou live and die,
  And there have burial.

  * * * * *

  Ye last, O exiled women, true of heart
  And faithful found, ye shall in peace depart,
  Each to her home: behold Athena's will.
                                      Orestes,
  Begone.  Lead forth thy sister from this shore
  In peace; and thou Thoas, be wroth no more.

_Thoas._

  Most high Athena, he who bows not low
  His head to God's word spoken, I scarce know
  How such a one doth live.  Orestes hath
  Fled with mine Image hence.--I bear no wrath.
  Nor yet against his sister.  There is naught,
  Methinks of honour in a battle fought
{274}
  'Gainst gods.  The strength is theirs.  Let those two fare
  Forth to thy land and plant mine Image there.
  I wish them well.
    These bondwomen no less
  I will send free to Greece and happiness,
  And stay my galleys' oars, and bid this brand
  Be sheathed again, Goddess, at thy command.

_Athena._

  'Tis well, O King.  For that which needs must be
  Holdeth the high gods as it holdeth thee.

  Winds of the north, O winds that laugh and run,
  Bear now to Athens Agamemnon's son;
  Myself am with you, o'er long leagues of foam
  Guiding my sister's hallowed Image home.

(_She floats away._)

_Chorus._

_Some women._

  Go forth in bliss, O ye whose lot
  God shieldeth, that ye perish not!

_Others._

  O great in our dull world of clay,
    And great in heaven's undying gleam,
  Pallas, thy bidding we obey:
  And bless thee, for mine ears have heard
  The joy and wonder of a word
    Beyond my dream, beyond my dream.

{275}

The play is over, and the sun is setting, so we, with the rest of the
Athenians, must wend our way homewards.  As we look up at the temples
on the Acropolis, bathed in the golden evening light, we feel no
surprise at the joy beyond their dreams of the lonely, exiled Greek
women, who had heard the joy and wonder of the word that bade them
return to a land of such surpassing loveliness.



[1] Euripides: _Hippolytus_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

[2] From the translation of _Iphigenia in Tauris_ by Gilbert Murray.




{276}

CHAPTER XV

THE TEMPLES OF ATHENS


I. GREEK TEMPLES

A Greek temple was not a place where people met to worship, and it
was never intended to hold a very large number of people.  The
religious ceremonies were carried on in the great spaces outside the
temples, and sacrifices were offered on the altars which were always
in the open air.  The temple was the dwelling-place of the god and
the treasury where the gifts brought by the worshippers were kept.

Greek temples varied in size, but they were all built on the same
general plan.  The whole building was looked upon as the home of the
god, and so the chamber in which the statue was placed was the
central point, and all the other parts of the building were so
constructed that they harmonized with the main purpose of the temple.
Just as a Greek play had only one story in it and no other episodes
were allowed to distract the attention of the audience from the
working out of the plot, so a Greek temple expressed one thought and
nothing in the architecture was allowed to disturb it.

{277}

The earliest form of temple was the shrine, an oblong building with a
portico, which had at first only two pillars in front, but which were
later extended into a row of pillars across the whole front of the
building.  Then a portico was built at both ends of the temple, and
lastly, in some temples a row of columns was built all round the
building, with a double row in the portico at each end.  Above the
portico was a triangular gable called the pediment, which was usually
filled with sculpture.

The Greeks used three kinds of columns in their buildings.  The Doric
column was the simplest; it had no base and tapered very slightly up
to the capital which consisted of a thick slab of stone.  The Doric
was the type most often used by the Greeks, and in its simplicity and
perfection of form it symbolized the finest Greek spirit.  The Ionic
column stood on a base; it was more slender than the Doric, and the
capital consisted of two very graceful spirals.  The Ionic was a
lighter type of column than the Doric and was used a great deal by
the Greeks in Asia Minor.  A third type was introduced later, called
the Corinthian.  The capitals of this column were richly carved in
the form of leaves, but the Greeks never liked it as much as the
simpler and more graceful types, and it was not very much used until
Roman times.  All the columns were fluted.

The Greeks never used ornament for the sake of ornament.  The column
was used as a support and ornament was felt to be entirely out of
place on it, but the decoration on the capital served a purpose.  As
the eye followed the fluting upwards to where {278} the vertical line
met the horizontal, the simple decoration of the capital served to
make the transition from one line to the other less abrupt.  In Greek
architecture no part of a building that bore any strain was
ornamented, and wherever ornament was used it was always in harmony
with the general purposes of the building.

These were the main characteristics of Greek temples.  Hie greatest
Athenian temples were on the Acropolis, the ancient citadel of
Athens, which had been transformed by Pericles into a dwelling-place
for Athena.



II. THE ACROPOLIS IN THE TIME OF PERICLES


    The fittest place for a temple or altar was some site visible
    from afar, and untrodden by foot of man, since it was a glad
    thing for the worshipper to lift up his eyes afar off and offer
    up his prayer.

    Socrates.[1]


The Acropolis was approached by a flight of steps leading to the
Propylaea or Entrance Porch.  Six great Doric columns stood at the
entrance, and opening out to right and left of the main hall were
other porticoes, the walls of which were decorated with paintings
showing the deeds of ancient heroes.  The roof was of white marble,
and standing at this entrance one could catch a glimpse of the sea in
the distance.  Tradition held that it was on this spot that Aegeus
stood to watch for the ship that should being back Theseus, and that
it was from {279} this high rock that he cast himself down in despair
when he saw the ship returning with black sails, a sign, as he
thought, that his son was dead.

To the right of the Propylaea, in the south-west corner of the
Acropolis, was the little temple of Athena Nike, Athena of Victory.
In this temple the goddess herself represented Victory, so she had no
wings, which were always given by the Greeks to statues of Victory,
and the temple came to be known as that of the Wingless Victory.  A
wonderful view is to be had from this temple, and the site for it was
chosen, because from where it stands Salamis is in sight, and it was
to be forever a thank-offering to Athena for the victory gained there
over the barbarian foe.

Passing through the Propylaea, one came out upon the Acropolis, where
rising up in majesty was the great bronze statue of Athena Promachos,
Athena the Warrior Queen, Foremost in Fight, who went out to war with
the armies of Athens and brought them home victorious.  Pheidias, the
great Athenian sculptor who had made the image of Zeus in the temple
at Olympia, had made this statue, using for it the bronze which had
been found amongst the Persian spoils after the battle of Marathon.
The goddess stood upright, clad in armour and holding a spear in her
hand.  The tip of this spear was gilded, and it was said that sailors
as they drew near the land could see it gleaming in the sunshine, and
when they saw it they knew that home was near.

A little further, on the north side of the Acropolis, was the
Erechtheum, called after the mythical {280} King of Athens,
Erechtheus.  It was a very beautiful temple, and one of the porches
has always been known as the Porch of the Maidens, because instead of
being supported by columns, it is supported by the figures of six
maidens.  When the figure of a woman is used for this purpose, it is
called in architecture a Caryatid.

A temple to Athena had always stood on this spot since memory began,
and it was hallowed by all kinds of associations.  Near the temple
was the sacred olive tree of Athena, and within its walls was the old
and most holy wooden statue of Athena, said to have dropped from
heaven.  It was in this temple that the goddess was worshipped in a
more intimate way, for this was Athena Polias, the Guardian of the
City and the Home.  It was for this ancient wooden statue that
specially chosen Athenian maidens wove the beautiful robe called the
peplos, which was carried at the time of the festival held every four
years to the temple and presented to the goddess.

[Illustration: THE PARTHENON, 5th Century B.C.]

But greater than all else on the Acropolis was the Parthenon, created
by Ictinus the architect, and Pheidias the sculptor.  This most
beautiful Greek temple in the world stood on the south side of the
Acropolis.  It was a Doric building surrounded by forty-six great
pillars, and to the Athenian this building was the very soul of
Athens.  Elsewhere on the Acropolis it was Athena the goddess who was
worshipped: Athena the Warrior, Athena the Guardian of the City, and
in one place, though without a temple, Athena the Inspirer of all
{281} Arts and Crafts.  But here in the Parthenon Athena was more
than the goddess, she symbolized Athens itself, all the achievements
of Athens in war and peace, and the spirit that guided the Athenians.

The sculpture on the east pediment represented the birth of Athena.
It was the old Homeric poem interpreted in stone.


    Her did Zeus the counsellor himself beget from his holy head, all
    armed for war in shining golden mail, while in awe did the other
    gods behold it.  Quickly did the goddess leap from the immortal
    head, and stood before Zeus, shaking her sharp spear, and high
    Olympus trembled in dread beneath the strength of the grey-eyed
    Maiden, while Earth rang terribly around, and the sea was boiling
    with dark waves, and suddenly brake forth the foam.  Yes, and the
    glorious son of Hyperion checked for long his swift steeds, till
    the maiden took from her immortal shoulders her divine armour,
    even Pallas Athena; and Zeus the counsellor rejoiced.[2]


Zeus rejoiced not only because Athena was born, but because she
symbolized the birth of Athens; as she sprang from the head of Zeus
arrayed in all the symbols of power, so surely was it the will of the
gods that Athens should be great and powerful.

The sculpture on the west pediment represented the contest of Athena
with Poseidon for the possession of Athens.  Poseidon represented
material prosperity.  His gift to Athens was the sea, over which
sailed her ships, colonizing and trading and bringing wealth to the
state.  But Athens was not {282} to be ruled by Poseidon; she was to
account the things of the mind and spirit of greater value than those
of material prosperity, and the victory was given to Athena.

The pediments symbolized the will of the gods for Athens.  All round
the building under the cornice were smaller groups of sculptures
called metopes, and these represented in stone the way in which
Athens had fulfilled the will of the gods for her.  First, there were
battles between gods and giants, the conflict between order and
disorder, and in every case order had triumphed; then there followed
battles between the ancient heroes of legend and tradition and all
kinds of evil forces in nature, and in these battles Theseus, the
hero-king, fought for Athens and prevailed.

The Parthenon was built after the Persians had been driven out of
Greece.  The Greeks called all who were not of Greek blood
Barbarians, and they believed that it was the will of the gods that
in every conflict between Greek and Barbarian, the Greek should in
the end prevail.  The Greek of the fifth century B.C. thought of all
history as the working out of the great drama of the victory of the
Greek spirit over that of the Barbarian, and the records of this
drama are seen in political history in the development of the
Athenian Empire, in literature, in the history of Herodotus, and in
art in the building of the Parthenon.

But the Parthenon symbolized more than the history of Athens, it was
also the symbol of her religious life.  On the outer wall, under the
colonnade, {283} was the great frieze symbolizing the Panathenaic
procession, that great procession which every four years wound its
way up to the Acropolis.  This was the festival of Athena, and at the
east end of the building was a group of gods and goddesses waiting
for her coming.  They were waiting for her in her own city, where she
would take the foremost place.  In the solemn procession all classes
of Athenians were represented: noble maidens, bearing baskets with
offerings for the sacrifice; youths with offerings, and youths on
horseback; chariots; grave elders and priests; and cattle for the
sacrifice.  Aliens, too, were there, for it was not only Athens that
was symbolized, but the Athenian Empire; symbol of what Athens hoped
would be a united Greece.  It is very difficult to distinguish
between Athenian patriotism and religion.  To the Athenian, the city
was Athena, and Athena the city, and the Parthenon was the crown of
both.

The Parthenon was entered by the eastern porch.  The light inside was
dim, but as the eye grew accustomed to the dimness, the statue of
Athena slowly became clearly visible.  There she stood, a great
figure nearly forty feet high.  She was clad in a sleeveless garment
that reached to her feet, bracelets in the form of serpents were on
her arms, the aegis with the head of Medusa covered her breast.  In
her right hand the goddess bore an image of Victory, and her left
hand rested on a shield, inside of which was coiled a snake.  The
statue was made of gold and ivory, and it was to the Athenians the
symbol of all that was best in the Athenian ideals.  {284} Their
passionate desire for freedom, their unfaltering search for truth,
their great love of beauty were all personified for them in the calm
and queenly figure of her whose battles were won, of Athena
Parthenos.  Having offered their sacrifices outside, they entered her
temple with awe, believing that "he who enters the incense-filled
temple must be holy; and holiness is to have a pure mind."[3]



III. LATER HISTORY OF THE ACROPOLIS

Such was the Acropolis of the fifth century B.C.  But now the statues
and the altars have disappeared, the columns are broken, and the
temples stand in ruins.  Is it just the lapse of time that has
wrought such destruction on those matchless buildings?  When Plutarch
saw them, they had been standing for about five hundred years, and he
said that there was still a bloom of newness upon them that seemed to
preserve them from the touch of time, as if the hand that had wrought
such buildings gave them the spirit of eternal youth.

At the beginning of the fifth century A.D. Alaric the Goth invaded
Greece, but he left Athens undisturbed.  The great statue of Athena
Promachos was still standing, and the story was told later that as
the barbarian chieftain approached the Acropolis, the goddess Athena
appeared before him, clad in mail, with her spear outstretched in
defence of her city.  He was so much awed by the {285} vision that he
withdrew and troubled Athens no more, and he sent messengers to the
Roman rulers of the city and made peace with them.

Not long after, an edict was passed ordering all pagan temples in the
Roman Empire, for Greece then formed part of it, to be closed or else
converted into Christian churches, and from that time onwards nothing
has been heard of the statue of Athena Parthenos, though a small copy
of it was found later.  The Parthenon itself was changed into a
Christian church, dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and it remained so
until Athens was captured by the Turks in 1458.  They changed the
Christian church into a Turkish mosque and built a minaret at one
corner.  No further changes took place until the end of the
seventeenth century, when during a war of the Turks with Venice, the
Venetians were bombarding the Acropolis.  The Venetians were told
that powder was being stored in the Acropolis, and for several days
they directed their fire against it.  At first there was no result,
even the guns, it was said, refusing to do such deadly work on so
glorious a building.  But at length a shell was thrown into it, the
powder exploded, the roof crashed in and a part of the walls
collapsed.

The Parthenon was nothing but a ruin, and for more than a hundred
years the sculptures of Pheidias lay neglected on the ground, broken
and defaced.  But at the beginning of the nineteenth century the
attention of Lord Elgin, who was British Ambassador at
Constantinople, was called to the danger that threatened them from
the ignorance and {286} indifference of the Turks and the
unscrupulousness of travellers and visitors, who often defaced and
carried off pieces of sculpture, and he made arrangements by which
the British Government was allowed to buy the Parthenon sculptures
and remove them to the British Museum.

Yet in spite of the ruin, the destruction and the loss, what is still
left of the ancient temples and statues is of such beauty, that those
who look upon it believe with the Greek poet that it will "live as a
song for all who love music, living and yet to be, as long as earth
or sun remain."



[1] Xenophon: _Memorabilia_.

[2] Homeric Hymn to Athena.

[3] Author Unknown: From _Select Epigrams from the Greek Anthology_,
translated by J. W. Mackail.




{287}

CHAPTER XVI

THE DOWNFALL OF ATHENS


I. RIVALRY BETWEEN ATHENS AND SPARTA AND THE
   BEGINNING OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR

Athens in the middle of the fifth century B.C. was in very truth as
Pericles had said, the "school of Hellas."  For half a century after
the Barbarian had been driven out of Greece, Athens went forward on
the wings of youth and hope and aspiration towards the fulfilment of
her great ideal, that of the perfect citizen in the perfect state.
Everything that was worth while in human life lay in that direction:
Freedom, Order and Progress; Truth and Beauty; Knowledge, Virtue and
Religion; and in the Greek world it was Athens who was the leader in
all these things.[1]

And Athens realized this.  The ideals set forth by Pericles in the
Funeral Speech placed her in the position of a chosen people in the
midst of a barbarian world, and it was to be her mission to save
civilization for the world.  Athens was a democracy, and her freedom,
her thought and her art were not the special possession of a small
privileged {288} group but of the whole body of citizens.  Yet there
was a flaw in the Athenian ideal of democracy; it was built upon
slavery.  The result of this was that in some things the Athenians
were able to reach a point of perfection from which they could make
no further advance.  Their greatest sculpture and architecture were
flawless in their simplicity and beauty.  They have been copied and
imitated, but never surpassed.  The Greek stage set certain
limitations to the drama, but within these limitations the dramas of
the great Athenian dramatists were well-nigh perfect.  Other small
nations in the history of the world have fought for their freedom
just as passionately and with as much self-control, unbroken will and
self-sacrifice, and have obtained it, but it was Athens who first
showed the world that right is stronger than might and will
ultimately prevail.  In their search for truth, the Athenian
philosophers went as far as it was possible for them to go, but the
very fact that they accepted the institution of slavery as a normal
condition of life, made any further advance in political thinking
impossible.  The history of the world shows that progress in
political thought has always come from the struggle of an
unprivileged class to obtain its just rights, and this could not take
place in Athens, for the unprivileged were slaves, and slaves were
slaves and slaves they must always remain.

Athens fell, but her fall did not only or even chiefly come about
because her democracy was founded upon slavery.  In her great days
Athens had been the Liberator of all the enslaved Greeks.  Sparta
{289} had never been interested in the fate of the Greeks who were
still under the Persian yoke, and it was Athens who had created the
Delian League, and who had delivered the Ionians from their foreign
rulers.  But from being their Liberator, Athens gradually became
their Mistress, and little by little she used her position in the
League as a means to increase her own power.  That which in the
beginning had been organized by the statesman who was called by his
fellow-citizens the Just, that which had symbolized the Athenian
ideal of freedom, became the instrument by which Athens became not
only an Empire, but a Tyrant.  And Pericles permitted it to be so.

Pericles had many opponents in Athens.  Some disapproved of his
imperial policy, and others accused him of extravagance in spending
so much of the public money on temples.  The most serious accusation
brought against him was that in beautifying Athens he was spending
not only money from the Athenian treasury, but also using that which
belonged to the Delian League.  This latter accusation was true, and
the people called for an ostracism.  But it resulted in the support
of Pericles by the majority of the Athenians, and in the banishment
of his opponent.

Pericles knew what he was doing when he used the money from the
treasury of the Delian League.  To Athens had been committed the
trust of defending the allied islands and cities from Persian
aggression and it was the money contributed by the allies for the
cost of this defence that was kept in the {290} treasury of the
League.  Pericles maintained that the beautifying of Athens was a
symbol of her might and power, that the great buildings employed
labour and encouraged commerce, both of which added to her
prosperity, and that these outward signs of her wealth and might
added to her ability to protect her allies.  He had won for Athens
the foremost position in Greece, and he was determined that she
should keep it.  To this end he argued that Athens was justified in
using the money of the League, because the way in which it was being
spent added not only to the glory but also to the security of all.

Pericles was also a great lover of all that was beautiful, and he was
honestly desirous that the youth of Athens should grow up in a city
that should be a joy for ever, that would make them good and useful
citizens, and inspire them with an abiding love for and pride in her.
But there is a flaw in the character of a man who holds that the end,
even if it is a great and glorious one, justifies any means.

Now Attica was very small, and in the days of her prosperity the
population of Athens had increased so much that the state could no
longer produce enough food to support the people.  The far-seeing
policy of Themistocles had made Athens stronger on sea than on land,
and by the time of Pericles, the salvation of Athens lay in her navy.
She was increasing her sea-power in all directions and establishing
herself as mistress all over the Aegean and on the shores of the
Euxine.  This policy was not only dictated by the greed of power, but
by the {291} absolute necessity that if Athens were to live, she
should control all the trade routes by which corn reached Greece.
Without the corn from the shores of the Euxine, Athens would starve.

Sparta was a great land power, and at first this increasing sea-power
of Athens did not touch her very closely, but it did affect Corinth,
the next sea-power in Greece after Athens.  As long as Athens
confined her interests to the Aegean and the East, Corinth was not
alarmed, but when the Athenians turned to the West and showed their
intention of establishing their power there, the Corinthians became
seriously alarmed, for this threatened their interests in Sicily and
the South of Italy.  Corinth had always been hostile to Athens, and
she now appealed to Sparta, asking for help to crush Athens.
Corinthian envoys went to Sparta, and in a powerful speech one of
them set forth the grievances of the Greek world against Athens,
representing her power, and entreating the Spartans to lay aside
their policy of inaction and to join with them in crushing the Tyrant
state.


    "Time after time we have warned you of the mischief which the
    Athenians would do to us, but instead of taking our words to
    heart, you chose to suspect that we only spoke from interested
    motives.  If the crimes which the Athenians are committing
    against Hellas were being done in a corner, then you might be
    ignorant, and we should have to inform you of them: but now, what
    need of many words?  Some of us, as you see, have been already
    enslaved; they are at this moment intriguing against others,
    notably against allies of ours; {292} and long ago they had made
    all their preparations in expectation of war....  And you have
    never considered what manner of men are these Athenians with whom
    you will have to fight, and how utterly unlike yourselves.  They
    are revolutionary, equally quick in the conception and in the
    execution of every new plan; while you are conservative, careful
    only to keep what you have, originating nothing, and not acting
    even when action is most necessary.  They are bold beyond their
    strength; they run risks which prudence would condemn; and in the
    midst of misfortune they are full of hope.  Whereas it is your
    nature, though strong, to act feebly; when your plans are most
    prudent, to distrust them; and when calamities come upon you, to
    think that you will never be delivered from them.  They are
    impetuous, and you are dilatory; they are always abroad, and you
    are always at home.  For they hope to gain something by leaving
    their homes; but you are afraid that any new enterprise may
    imperil what you have already.  When conquerors, they pursue
    their victory to the utmost; when defeated, they fall back the
    least.  Their bodies they devote to their country as though they
    belonged to other men; their true self is their mind, which is
    most truly their own when employed in her service.  When they do
    not carry out an intention which they have formed, they seem to
    have sustained a personal bereavement; when an enterprise
    succeeds, they have gained a mere instalment of what is to come;
    but if they fail, they at once conceive new hopes and so fill up
    the void.  With them alone to hope is to have, for they lose not
    a moment in the execution of an idea.  This is the life-long
    task, full of danger and toil, which they are always imposing
    upon themselves.  None enjoy their good things less, because they
    are always seeking for more.  To do their duty is their only
    {293} holiday, and they deem the quiet of inaction to be as
    disagreeable as the most tiresome business.  If a man should say
    of them, in a word, that they were born neither to have peace
    themselves nor to allow peace to other men, he would simply speak
    the truth.

    "In the face of such an enemy, Lacedaemonians, you persist in
    doing nothing.  But let your procrastination end.  Do not allow
    friends and kindred to fall into the hands of their worst
    enemies; or drive us in despair to seek the alliance of others;
    in taking such a course we should be doing nothing wrong either
    before the Gods who are the witnesses of our oaths, or before men
    whose eyes are upon us.  For the true breakers of treaties are
    not those who, when forsaken, turn to others, but those who
    forsake allies whom they have sworn to defend.  We will remain
    your friends if you choose to bestir yourselves; for we should be
    guilty of an impiety if we deserted you without cause; and we
    shall not easily find allies equally congenial to us.  Take heed
    then; you have inherited from your fathers the leadership of
    Peloponnesus; see that her greatness suffers no diminution at
    your hands."

    Thus spake the Corinthians.  Now there happened to be staying at
    Lacedaemon an Athenian embassy which had come on other business,
    and when the envoys had heard what the Corinthians had said, they
    felt bound to go before the Lacedaemonian assembly, not with the
    view of answering the accusations brought against them by the
    cities, but they wanted to put before the Lacedaemonians the
    whole question, and make them understand that they should take
    time to deliberate and not be rash.  They also desired to set
    forth the greatness of their city, reminding the elder men of
    what they knew, and informing the younger of what lay beyond
    their experience.  They thought that their words would sway {294}
    the Lacedaemonians in the direction of peace.  So they came and
    said that, if they might be allowed, they too would like to
    address the people.[2]


The Athenians were invited to speak, and they reminded the Spartans
of how Athens had done more than any other State to save Greece from
the Persian invader, and that Sparta herself owed her liberty to the
undismayed courage of Athens.


    We maintain, [they said], that we rendered you a service at least
    as great as you rendered us.  The cities from which you came to
    help us were still inhabited and you might hope to return to
    them; your concern was for yourselves and not for us; at any rate
    you remained at a distance while we had anything to lose.  But we
    went forth from a city which was no more, and fought for one of
    which there was small hope; and yet we saved ourselves, and bore
    our part in saving you.  If, in order to preserve our land, like
    other states, we had gone over to the Persians at first, or
    afterwards had not ventured to embark because our ruin was
    already complete, it would have been useless for you with your
    weak navy to fight at sea, but everything would have gone quietly
    just as the Persian desired.[3]


The Athenians then attempted to justify their imperial policy and to
point out that, had the situation been reversed, and had it been the
Lacedaemonians who had acquired an empire, they would have found it
just as necessary as had Athens to rule with a strong hand, and that
they would have {295} been even worse hated than was Athens.  They
concluded with a passionate appeal for peace:


    Do not then be hasty in deciding a question which is serious; and
    do not, by listening to the misrepresentations and complaints of
    others, bring trouble upon yourselves.  Realize, while yet there
    is time, the inscrutable nature of war; and how when protracted
    it generally ends in becoming a mere matter of chance, over which
    neither of us can have any control, the event being equally
    unknown and equally hazardous to both.  The misfortune is that in
    their hurry to go to war, men begin with blows, and when a
    reverse comes upon them, then have recourse to words.  But
    neither you, nor we, have as yet committed this mistake; and
    therefore while both of us can still choose the prudent part, we
    tell you not to break the peace or violate your oaths.  Let our
    differences be determined by arbitration according to the treaty.
    If you refuse, we call to witness the Gods, by whom you have
    sworn, that you are the authors of the war; and we will do our
    best to strike in return.[4]


The Spartans did not heed the plea for peace, and in 431 B.C. the
long dreary war, known in history as the Peloponnesian War, began and
dragged itself out for nearly thirty years.  Compared to modern
warfare the actual fighting was not on a very large scale, and we
seem to be reading of battles between what were, after all, only
rather small states.  But though the states were small, the statesmen
who guided their policies and the men who fought for them were men of
human passions like ours; and {296} though the method of warfare has
changed, the effect of war on the minds and lives of men and women
living at the time has changed very little.  The future is hidden
from the eyes of each generation of men, but the past lies open
before them; and to those who read the past with understanding comes
enlightenment when similar difficulties surround them, for the past
shows not only the beginning and the middle, but also the end of the
story.

When the Peloponnesian War broke out, almost fifty years had gone by
since the Persian had been driven out of Greece, and the heroes of
Marathon, of Thermopylae and of Salamis had already passed into
history.  That war had been between the Greek and the Barbarian, this
war was between Greek and Greek, and it rapidly spread over almost
the whole Greek world.  The real cause was the rivalry between Athens
and Sparta, and it was fought to determine which should be supreme in
Greece.  Athens was a great sea-power, Sparta a great land-power;
Athens was a freedom-loving democracy, Sparta was still governed by
an oligarchy; Athens was dependent for her life on the corn that came
from afar, Sparta was practically self-sufficing.  When the war
began, each side was confident and sure of victory.  How was it to
end?



II. ATHENS DURING THE WAR

During the first part of the war Athens was supreme at sea; and she
strengthened her hold on all the trade routes.  But she did not dare
meet Sparta {297} in a great open pitched battle on land, for the
military power of the latter was no legend, but a most formidable
fact.

Everything, however, did not go well with Athens during those first
few years.  Every year the Spartans had invaded Attica and burnt and
plundered the land surrounding Athens.  This had driven all the
country people into the city, where conditions became very congested
and intolerable.  And then it was that a scourge fell upon Athens
from which she never recovered.  For two long summers and two long
winters the Angel of Death stood over the city and darkened it with
his wings and smote the inhabitants, so that one out of every four
died.  It was the Plague.  The whole dreadful story can be read in
the pages of Thucydides: how it began in the Peiraeus and then spread
to Athens; of the sufferings of those who were seized with it, the
rapidity with which it spread and the impossibility of caring for the
sick or burying the dead; of the lawlessness in the disorganized
terror-stricken city; and of all the misery which came from seeing
the inhabitants of the city dying in such numbers and from knowing
that without the walls the country was being ravaged.

When the horror had passed and Athens once more lifted up her head,
she was no longer the Athens of old.  Her spirit was not only broken
but changed.  The war and the plague together lay heavy upon the
Athenians, and they blamed Pericles because he had persuaded them to
go to war, declaring that he was the author of all their troubles.
Once again he {298} made a great speech to them, reminding them that
Athens had never yet yielded to misfortune, and that the greatest
states and the greatest men are those who, when misfortunes come, are
the least depressed in spirit and the most resolute in action.  But
Pericles did not live to guide Athens through the troubled waters
which lay ahead of her.  He had experienced the same misfortunes as
his fellow-citizens.  His sister, his sons, and the friends who were
nearest to him had died of the plague, and he himself was ill.  As he
lay dying, some of his friends who were still alive were sitting near
him, and they spoke together of his greatness, his power and the
number of his victories.  They did not think he was conscious, but he
heard all that they said, and when they had finished, asked them why
they did not speak or make mention of that which was the most
excellent and greatest thing of all.  "For," said he, "no Athenian,
through my means, ever wore mourning."[5]

Pericles had been a good general; he had added to the power of Athens
both at home and abroad; and he had made her defences more secure by
completing the Long Walls which had been begun by Themistocles.  As a
statesman, Pericles was an imperialist, and he believed that the
Athenian Empire, which had grown naturally out of the position of
Athens as Liberator of the Ionian Greeks, embodied the right
relationship between Athens and her allies.  Like Themistocles, he
had a deep distrust of Sparta, and believing that sooner or later
{299} war with her was inevitable, he did all that lay in his power
to make Athens ready when that day should come.

Though of noble birth, Pericles had always been on the side of the
people in Athens, and during his rule the powers of the people were
very much extended.  Every office in the state was filled by popular
election each year, so that there was constant change amongst those
in authority and Athens could never be sure of any settled policy in
her affairs either at home or abroad.  The supreme and final
authority lay in the Assembly, but like all popular assemblies, it
could be swayed and, at several critical moments in the history of
Athens, was swayed, by sudden bursts of passion, or by the fiery
eloquence of an unwise or an ambitious and self-seeking speaker.  But
as long as Pericles lived, the dangers of the democracy he had
developed were not very apparent, for he was trusted absolutely, and
he kept a wise, firm and restraining hand on the passions of the
people.

Pericles died in the year 429 B.C., and in the years following his
death the results of a long war began to be felt.  Food became scarce
and prices were high; it was difficult to get servants, for in the
general disorganization of life that had come with the plague, slaves
had escaped in large numbers; the young men of Athens were no longer
to be seen in the Agora and other public places, for all men capable
of bearing arms were with the army.

Four years after the death of Pericles, Sparta made {300} offers of
peace, but feeling ran very high in Athens and it was believed that a
peace then would not be lasting, so the offer was rejected and it was
determined to carry on the war to the bitter end.

There is nothing that so well describes conditions in Athens during
these war years as the comedies of Aristophanes.  They carry us back
to those exciting days and it is amazing to see how much freedom of
speech was allowed.  The _Knights_, the _Clouds_, and the _Wasps_
were all written in these years, and they are full of the excitement
of the time, and often of outspoken criticism of those responsible
for the carrying on of the war.  But the war brought a lowering of
ideals, and even where there was victory, there was also sorrow and
loss and the ruin of homes.  Euripides, one of the great dramatists
of the time, in the _Trojan Women_, a play written during the war,
stripped war of all its glamour and showed the misery that comes to
the conquered:

                          And they whom Ares took,
  Had never seen their children: no wife came
  With gentle arms to shroud the limbs of them
  For burial, in a strange and angry earth
  Laid dead.  And there, at home, the same long dearth
  Women that lonely died, and aged men
  Waiting for sons that ne'er should turn again,
  Nor know their graves, nor pour drink-offerings,
  To still the unslaked dust.  These be the things
  The conquering Greek hath won!

  * * * * * * *

{301}

  Would ye be wise, ye Cities, fly from war!
  Yet if war come, there is a crown in death
  For her that striveth well and perisheth
  Unstained: to die in evil were the stain![6]


Pericles was dead, and Cleon who had succeeded him as leader of the
people had no power to inspire the Athenians to be true to their
highest ideals, and as conditions grew more and more difficult,
Athens was forced at length to give herself up to a fight for her
life.  Anger, suspicion and hatred took the place of the old ideals,
and it seemed as if her strength had turned to weakness and despair.
And then Athens sealed her own doom, for to save her own citizens
from heavy taxation in order to carry on the war, without asking
their consent she doubled the amount of the tribute paid to her by
her allies every year, and so she broke the Charter once made in good
faith between them.

But the end had not yet come.  For a time success lay with the
Athenians, and they forced a Spartan garrison to surrender to them at
Sphacteria on the west coast of the Peloponnesus, a victory which
greatly encouraged them.  But the years dragged on and the war
continued and there seemed no end in sight.  Then it was that
Brasidas, a Spartan general, marched North from the Peloponnesus
through Boeotia and Thessaly until he reached Amphipolis, an Athenian
colony on the borders of Thrace and Macedonia, which he besieged.
Cleon had gone to Amphipolis to help the Athenians and he was
expecting assistance from an Athenian general who {302} was marching
to the relief of the city.  But he did not arrive in time, and
Amphipolis was taken by the Spartans.  Both Cleon and Brasidas were
killed, and Athens exiled the general who had failed to arrive in
time.  He devoted the period of his exile to gathering materials for
a history of the war, and though he may have been unsuccessful as a
general, he became one of the greatest historians, not only of
Greece, but of the world.  His name was Thucydides.[7]

The surrender of Amphipolis brought a lull in the war, and owing to
the efforts of the Athenian general, Nicias, in 421 B.C. a peace was
made, which was to last for fifty years.



III. ALCIBIADES

The Peace of Nicias did not last very long, however.  Athens and
Sparta were both too jealous of each other to be really reconciled,
and neither kept to the terms of peace.  There was a party in Athens
which favoured peace, but it was not so powerful nor so popular as
the war party, and its leader, Nicias, did not possess the qualities
of leadership which characterized the leader of the other side.  This
leader was Alcibiades, a young man who had recently risen to power
and who was very popular.  He was of noble birth, rich, very
good-looking and of great personal charm.  He lisped when he spoke,
but it was said that this "became him well and gave a grace and
persuasiveness to his rapid speech." {303} When he began to study, he
obeyed all his other masters fairly well, but refused to learn to
play the flute, because he said it disfigured the face, and also
because it was not possible to speak or sing whilst playing it.
Alcibiades was a leader of fashion amongst the Athenian youths and as
soon as it became known that he despised the flute, playing on it
went out of fashion and became generally neglected.

Alcibiades was sought out by many people who liked to be in his
company chiefly because of his great personal beauty, but it is
evident that at this time he must have shown many noble qualities and
a good disposition, for Socrates, the great philosopher, showed much
affection for him.  Socrates saw that his wealth and position caused
him to be flattered and made so much of by all kinds of people that
he feared he would be corrupted by it, and he resolved, if possible,
that his good qualities should be preserved.  On his side, Alcibiades
recognized the great worth of Socrates and listened willingly to his
teaching.

Both Socrates and Alcibiades took part in one of the early campaigns
of the Peloponnesian War.  They shared the same tent and stood next
to each other in battle, and in one sharp fight both behaved with
special bravery.  This was the occasion on which Alcibiades was
wounded, but Socrates threw himself before him and protected him and
beyond any question saved his life.

Alcibiades had great advantages for entering public life; his noble
birth, his riches, the personal {304} courage he had shown in many
battles and the multitude of his friends and dependents threw open
the doors for him.  His popularity had also increased because of his
success at the Olympic games.  He had spent great sums of money on
horses and chariots, and never did anyone else send so many as seven
chariots to the Games.  And they were so well equipped that in one
race he carried off the first, second and fourth prizes, which far
outdid any distinction that ever was known or thought of in that
kind.[8]

But Alcibiades did not follow the wise teaching of Socrates, and he
grew luxurious, dissipated and lawless in his way of living; he wore
long purple robes like a woman, which dragged after him as he went
through the market place; and he had a soft and luxurious bed
prepared for him on his galley.  All this made him disliked by a
great number of Athenians and gradually raised up enemies for him;
yet such was his personal charm, his eloquence, his courage and his
beauty that the Athenians made excuses for his excesses, indulged him
in many things and gave soft names to his faults, attributing them to
his youth and good nature.[9]

Such was the man, unstable, ambitious and unscrupulous to whom was
entrusted the guidance of affairs at Athens at this most critical
hour of her fortunes.

Up to this time the relations of Athens with the Greeks beyond the
sea had been chiefly confined to those in Ionia, but there were rich
lands dwelt in by {305} Greeks to the West, especially in Sicily and
the South of Italy.  Even in the life-time of Pericles the Athenians
had cast a longing eye upon Sicily, but they did not attempt anything
there till after his death.  An opportunity for interference in
Sicilian affairs was given them in 415 B.C. when the Peace of Nicias
had brought a period of truce in the war with Sparta.  The Greeks in
one of the cities in Sicily appealed to Athens for help against
Syracuse which was oppressing them, and Alcibiades seized upon this
as the first step in an Athenian conquest of Sicily.  This was but
the beginning of his ambitious plan, for he dreamed not only of the
mastery of Sicily, but of nothing less than the conquest of Carthage
and of Athenian rule over the whole Mediterranean world.

Alcibiades roused Athens to enthusiasm for an expedition to Sicily
and the young men, in particular, shared his hopes and ambitions and
listened to him when he talked of the wonders of the countries to
which they were going, so that great numbers of them might be seen
sitting in the wrestling grounds and public places, drawing on the
ground maps of Sicily and the situation of Carthage.  Nicias,
conservative, experienced and loyal, saw that it was not the welfare
of Athens but his own personal ambition and love of glory that was
moving Alcibiades, and did everything in his power to dissuade the
people from following such a rash and ambitious policy.  He told them
that even if they conquered Sicily they could not hope to keep it,
and that the course they were in favour of pursuing would only {306}
add to the hatred already felt for them by Sparta, and could only end
in disaster.

But the Athenians were deaf to the pleas of Nicias, and it was voted
that the expedition should take place.


    Then the preparations began.  Lists for service were made up at
    home and orders given to the allies.  The city had newly
    recovered from the plague and from the constant pressure of war;
    a new population had grown up; there had been time for the
    accumulation of money during the peace; so that there was
    abundance of everything at command.

    While they were in the midst of their preparations, the Hermae or
    square stone figures carved after the ancient Athenian fashion,
    and standing everywhere at the doorways both of temples and
    private houses, in one night had nearly all of them throughout
    the city their faces mutilated.  The offenders were not known,
    but great rewards were publicly offered for their detection, and
    a decree was passed that anyone, whether citizen, stranger, or
    slave, might without fear of punishment disclose this or any
    other profanation of which he was cognizant.  The Athenians took
    the matter greatly to heart; it seemed to them ominous of the
    fate of the expedition; and they ascribed it to conspirators who
    wanted to effect a revolution and to overthrow the democracy.

    Certain metics and servants gave information, not indeed about
    the Hermae, but about the mutilation of other statues which had
    shortly before been perpetrated by some young men in a drunken
    frolic; and of this impiety they accused, among others,
    Alcibiades.  A party who were jealous of his influence over the
    people {307} took up and exaggerated the charges against him,
    clamorously insisting that he was at the bottom of the whole
    affair.  In proof they alleged the excesses of his ordinary life,
    which were unbecoming in the citizen of a free state.

    He strove then and there to clear himself of the charges, and
    also offered to be tried before he sailed (for all was now
    ready), in order that, if he were guilty, he might be punished,
    and if acquitted, might retain his command.  But his enemies
    feared that if the trial took place at once he would have the
    support of the army, and that the people would be lenient.  They
    therefore exerted themselves to postpone the trial.  To this end
    they proposed that he should sail now and not delay the
    expedition, but should return and stand his trial within a
    certain number of days.  Their intention was that he should be
    recalled and tried when they had stirred up a stronger feeling
    against him, which they could better do in his absence.  So it
    was decided that Alcibiades should sail.

    About the middle of summer the expedition started for Sicily.
    Early in the morning of the day appointed for their departure,
    the Athenians and such of their allies as had already joined them
    went down to the Peiraeus and began to man the ships.  The entire
    population of Athens accompanied them, citizens and strangers
    alike.  The citizens came to take farewell, one of an
    acquaintance, another of a kinsman, another of a son; the crowd
    as they passed along were full of hope and full of tears; hope of
    conquering Sicily, tears because they doubted whether they would
    ever see their friends again, when they thought of the long
    voyage on which they were sending them.  At the moment of parting
    the danger was nearer; and terrors which had never occurred to
    them when they were voting the {308} expedition now entered into
    their souls.  Nevertheless their spirits revived at the sight of
    the armament in all its strength and of the abundant provisions
    which they had made.  The strangers and the rest of the multitude
    came out of curiosity, desiring to witness an enterprise of which
    the greatness exceeded belief.

    No armament so magnificent or costly had ever been sent out by
    any single Hellenic power.  Never had a greater expedition been
    sent to a foreign land; never was there an enterprise in which
    the hope of future success seemed to be better justified by
    actual power.

    When the ships were manned and everything required for the voyage
    had been placed on board, silence was proclaimed by the sound of
    the trumpet, and all with one voice before setting sail offered
    up the customary prayers; these were recited, not in each ship,
    but by a single herald, the whole fleet accompanying him.  On
    every deck both officers and men, mingling wine in bowls, made
    libations from vessels of gold and silver.  The multitude of
    citizens and other well-wishers who were looking on from the land
    joined in the prayer.  The crews raised the Paean, and when the
    libations were completed, put to sea.[10]


In due time they reached Sicily, where the generals in command held a
conference as to the best way of beginning the attack.

In the meantime the enemies of Alcibiades in Athens took up the
charges of impiety which had been made against him and did not rest
until an order had been sent to Sicily ordering his return that he
might be brought to trial.

{309}


    From every quarter suspicion had gathered around Alcibiades, and
    the Athenian people were determined to have him tried and
    executed; so they sent a summons to him and to others against
    whom information had been given.  He was ordered to follow the
    officers home and defend himself, but the latter were told not to
    arrest him; for the Athenians, having regard to their interests
    in Sicily, were anxious not to cause excitement in their own
    camp, or to attract the attention of the enemy.[11]


So Alcibiades and those who were accused with him left Sicily.  They
sailed in their own ship, but were escorted by the Athenian galley
sent for them.  Before reaching Greece, both ships put in at a port
in Italy, and here Alcibiades and his companions left their ship and
disappeared, "fearing to return and stand their trial when the
prejudice against them was so violent.  They were sought for, but the
crew of the galley could not find them and so they gave up the search
and returned home."[12]

Before making plans for a further escape, Alcibiades lay concealed
for a short time in Italy.  It seemed strange to one who was with him
that he had not enough faith in Athenian justice to return home and
face a trial, but when asked if he did not trust his own native
country, Alcibiades replied: "In everything else, yes; but in a
matter that touches my life, I would not trust even my own mother,
lest she might by mistake throw in the black ball instead of the
white."[13]  As Alcibiades did not appear in Athens to answer the
charges against him, {310} the Assembly convicted him and his
companions of impiety, confiscated their property, sentenced them to
death, and pronounced a solemn curse on their names.  When this news
reached him, all he said was: "I will make them feel that I am alive."

Alcibiades kept his word.  He crossed to the Peloponnesus and went
first to Argos.  When he found there was no hope of his returning to
Athens, he sent a message to Sparta, asking for a safe-conduct to
that city, and assuring the Spartans that he would make them amends
by his future services for all the mischief he had done them while he
was their enemy.  The Spartans gave him the security for which he
asked, and he went to them eagerly, and was well received.  In return
for this, he betrayed the weak points of his native city to her
enemies and gave them valuable advice as to the best means of
conquering Athens.

Now one characteristic of Alcibiades was the extraordinary ease with
which he could adapt himself to his surroundings.  Whenever he saw
that it was to his own interest to adopt the habits and ways of those
with whom he came in contact, he did so with no hesitation.  At
Sparta, he gave himself up to athletic exercises, he cut his hair
short, bathed in cold water and dined on black broth; in Ionia, he
was luxurious, gay and indolent; in Thrace, always drinking; in
Thessaly, ever on horseback; and when later he lived with the Persian
satrap, he exceeded the Persians themselves in magnificence and
pomp.[14]

But though in Sparta Alcibiades lived as a {311} Spartan and appeared
devoted to their interests, he was, nevertheless, an Athenian, and
the Spartans did not trust him.  The Greeks never wholly trusted each
other, and lack of sincerity in their political relations was one of
the weak points in their character.  When Alcibiades found that he
was looked upon with suspicion in Sparta and that his life was
actually in danger, he fled to Ionia and took refuge with the Persian
satrap with whom he soon became a great favourite.  And, indeed, the
charm of daily intercourse with this extraordinarily fascinating and
dangerous man was more than any one could resist.  Even those who
feared and envied him could not but take delight, and feel a
friendliness towards him, when they saw him and were in his company.
It was only in his absence that his real character was recognized.

And now followed a period of disloyal intrigue with the Persians.
Alcibiades advised them to interfere in the war between Athens and
Sparta, and sometimes to help one side and sometimes the other, until
both should be so exhausted that the Persian King could easily
overcome them.  Thus, not content with betraying Greek to Greek,
Alcibiades descended to the shameful depths of betraying Greece to
the Barbarian.



IV. THE DOWNFALL OF ATHENS AND THE SUPREMACY OF SPARTA

Alcibiades had been summoned back to Athens at the very beginning of
the expedition to Sicily.  {312} It was in the summer of 415 B.C.
that the Athenian fleet had set out with such magnificence and with
such high hopes.  Two years later, news was brought to Athens which
at first the Athenians would not believe, so appalling was it.  There
had been a fearful battle in the harbour at Syracuse, the Athenians
had been utterly vanquished, and great numbers had been imprisoned in
the quarries which were deep and narrow.


    The sun by day was still scorching and suffocating, for they had
    no roof over their heads, while the autumn nights were cold.
    They were only allowed about half a pint of water and a pint of
    food a day.  Every kind of misery which could befall man in such
    a place befell them.  The Athenians had been utterly and at all
    points defeated.  Fleet and army had perished from the face of
    the earth; nothing was saved, and of the many who went forth, few
    returned home.[15]


The Athenians were at first in utter despair.


    Whichever way they looked there was trouble; they were
    overwhelmed by their calamity, and they were in fear and
    consternation unutterable.  The citizens mourned and the city
    mourned; they had lost the flower of their youth, and there were
    none to replace them.  And when they saw an insufficient number
    of ships in their docks, and no crews to man them, nor money in
    the treasury, they despaired of deliverance.

    During the following winter all Hellas was stirred by the great
    overthrow of the Athenians in Sicily.  The states which had been
    neutral determined that the {313} time had come when, invited or
    not, they could no longer stand aloof from the war; they must of
    their own accord attack the Athenians.  They considered, one and
    all, that if the Sicilian expedition had succeeded, they would
    sooner or later have been attacked by them.  The war would not
    last long, and they might as well share in the glory of it.  The
    Lacedaemonian allies, animated by a common feeling, were more
    eager than ever to make a speedy end of their protracted
    hardships.  But none showed greater alacrity than the subjects of
    the Athenians, who were everywhere willing even beyond their
    power to revolt; for they judged by their excited feelings, and
    would not admit a possibility that the Athenians could survive
    another summer.[16]


Athens was hated because from being the great deliverer of Greece,
she had become a tyrant and an oppressor, and the small states who
had been ruled by her were more than ready to transfer their
allegiance to Sparta who held out promises of freedom from oppression
if they would join her.  Yet Sparta was at this very time bargaining
with the Persian King and promising that she would recognize his
right to rule over all that the Great Kings had formerly ruled, even
the Greeks who lived in Asia Minor, in return for money with which
Sparta could pay her sailors.  Never had Athens sunk so low as that.
The end was not far off, but Athens, having recovered from her first
overwhelming despair, regained some of her old courage.  She
economized in every way, so that new ships could be built, and {314}
she kept on the alert, lest she should be taken unawares by some
surprise attack.

It was at this moment that Alcibiades began to intrigue and plot for
a return to Athens.  Gradually his friends gained the upper hand, the
government of Athens had not been successful and it was overthrown.
It had been said that the feeling of the Athenians towards Alcibiades
was that "they love, they hate, but cannot do without him," and they
proved the truth of the saying by recalling him.  As of old, when
once they came under the charm of his personality, the Athenians
yielded to their enthusiasm for him.


    As soon as he was landed, the multitude who came out to meet him
    scarcely seemed so much as to see any of the other captains, but
    came in throngs about Alcibiades, and saluted him with loud
    acclamations, and followed him; those who could press near him
    crowned him with garlands, and they who could not come up so
    close yet stayed to behold him afar off, and the old men pointed
    him out, and showed him to the young ones.[17]


Yet there was bitterness mixed with this rejoicing, for the Athenians
remembered that it was by following the advice of this man that some
of their greatest disasters had fallen upon them.

The story of all that followed may be read in the pages of Thucydides
and Xenophon.  For a time Athens seemed to regain her old power and
she won so great a victory over the Spartans that these proposed a
peace, but it was to be a peace as between {315} equals, and Athens
would hear of no peace, unless she herself should dictate it.  So the
war continued, until the ill-success of some ships in an engagement
with the Spartans caused the people to turn once more against
Alcibiades, and again he was exiled.  After that the end came
quickly.  In 405 B.C. one last great battle was fought in which the
Athenians were utterly defeated.  The news of this disaster was taken
to Athens, and it was night when the messenger arrived.  When the
tale was told


    a bitter wail of woe broke forth.  From Piraeus, following the
    line of the Long Walls up to the heart of the city, it swept and
    swelled, as each man to his neighbour passed on the news.  On
    that night no man slept.  There was mourning and sorrow for those
    that were lost, but the lamentation was merged in even greater
    sorrow for themselves, as they pictured the evils they were about
    to suffer.  On the following day the public assembly met, and,
    after debate, it was resolved to block up all the harbours save
    one, to put the walls in a state of defence, to post guards at
    various points, and to make all other necessary preparations for
    a siege.[18]


The Spartans came and closed in upon Athens.  A hundred and fifty
ships were moored off the Peiraeus, and a strict blockade was
established against all merchant ships entering the harbour.


    The Athenians, finding themselves besieged by land and sea, were
    in sore perplexity what to do.  Without ships, without allies,
    without provisions, the belief gained {316} hold upon them that
    there was no way of escape.  They must now, in their turn, suffer
    what they had themselves inflicted upon others.[19]


At last, starved into submission, they surrendered, and terms were
made with Sparta.  They were bitter and humiliating terms:


    That the Long Walls and fortifications of Peiraeus should be
    destroyed; that the Athenian fleet, with the exception of twelve
    vessels, should be surrendered; that the exiles should be
    restored; and lastly, that the Athenians should acknowledge the
    headship of Sparta in peace and war, leaving to her the choice of
    friends and foes, and following her lead by land and sea.[20]


The Athenians themselves were made to help in the destruction of the
walls, and as they did so, their enemies rejoiced to the music of the
flute, believing that with the fall of Athens would dawn a day of
liberty for Greece.

For over thirty years Sparta ruled in Greece.  At the beginning of
the Peloponnesian War, she had demanded of Athens that she should
restore the liberties of all the Greeks who were her allies.  Athens
had refused, and now the Greek world waited anxiously to see what use
Sparta would make of her great victory.

It soon became evident that the rule of Sparta was not to be a light
one.  Military governors were placed in every city of the old Delian
League, and the citizens were forced to pay a heavy tribute to {317}
Sparta.  Thirty men were set to rule in Athens, and for the eight
months that these Thirty were in power, Athens endured cruelty,
tyranny and lawlessness.  The Spartan domination soon became so
unendurable that one by one a number of Athenians fled from the city
and took refuge in Thebes: in Thebes, who had hitherto been one of
the bitterest enemies of Athens, but who now realized that freedom
and justice were not to be found in the Spartan ideal of empire, for
it was nothing less than empire at which Sparta was aiming.  At last
a sufficient number of exiles had gathered at Thebes for them to make
an attempt to drive out the Thirty from Athens.  They were
successful, and the old Athenian form of government was restored.

But there was no real peace, and for a few years fighting went on in
different places.  Sometimes Sparta was successful, sometimes Athens,
but nothing decisive happened.  At last Sparta began to intrigue with
Persia, and in 386 B.C., Artaxerxes the King interfered in the
affairs of Greece, and proposed terms of peace, known as the King's
Peace, which were accepted.  The Greek cities in Asia Minor were to
belong once more to the Persians, and all the other Greek city-states
were to be independent, and the treaty concluded with the words:
"Should any refuse to accept this peace, I, Artaxerxes, will make war
upon them, with the help of those who are of my mind, both by land
and sea, with ships and with money."

It was a betrayal of Greece to the ancient foe.  The Greek states had
never been able to unite for {318} long at a time.  Had they been
able to hold together, and especially had Athens and Sparta done so,
they could have prevailed against the Persian in Asia Minor and
maintained the independence of their kinsmen in Ionia.  But their
jealous fears of anything that might limit their freedom as
independent states made any permanent alliance impossible, and the
long years of the Peloponnesian War, of all wars in history one of
the most humiliating, because so unnecessary and unjustifiable, had
bred hatreds and suspicion, greed and jealousy, from which Greece
never recovered.  But though politically her power was gone, her work
for the world was not finished.



V. THE MARCH OF THE TEN THOUSAND[21]

Artaxerxes, the King of Persia, had a younger brother, Cyrus, who was
accused to him of plotting against his life.  He had Cyrus seized and
would have put him to death, but his mother made intercession for him
and so his life was spared.  This set Cyrus to thinking, not only how
he might avoid ever again being in his brother's power, but how, if
possible, he might become King in his stead.  Now Cyrus was a man who
was much beloved.  He was honourable, upright and chivalrous, and
marvellously skilled in horsemanship.  He understood, not only how to
make friends, but also how to keep them, and any man who did him
willing service was sure to win his reward.  For this reason, Cyrus
was always able to command men who were willing to follow {319} him
in any undertaking, no matter how dangerous it might be.

In order to possess himself of the throne of his brother, it was
necessary for Cyrus to raise an army, and he sent trusted agents to
various places to collect as many men as would be willing to follow
him on a hazardous expedition.  Amongst other men who joined his army
were a great many Greeks.  Though the King's Peace was not made for
some years after this, the great battles of the Peloponnesian War
were over, and there were large numbers of men, who had spent so many
years in fighting that they were restless and unwilling to return to
their old settled life.  About ten thousand Greeks joined the army of
Cyrus, and in 401 B.C. they set out.  These Greeks had not been told
the real object of the expedition; they thought they were to fight
against some hill-tribes in Asia Minor, and they joined the rest of
the army in Sardis, not knowing the long march they were about to
begin.

At first all seemed to be going well, but when they had gone for some
distance, the Greeks began to suspect that they were going further
than they had expected, and some of them wanted to turn back.  But
Cyrus promised to give them more pay, and they continued their march.
On they went, until they reached the Euphrates.  They crossed the
river, and for some days they continued their march along the
opposite bank until they reached Cunaxa, not far from Babylon.  Here
at length Cyrus met the Persian army, which came against him under
the King, his brother.  A fierce battle followed, in which {320} the
Greeks were victorious, but Cyrus was killed, and so the victory
availed them nothing.  The Persians entrapped the Greek generals and
murdered them, and there was nothing left for the Greeks to do, but
in some way or other to return to Greece.  But Greece was more than a
thousand miles off, and they did not know the way; they had no
leaders, they were in a strange land and surrounded by enemies, and
they had no means of procuring supplies by the way.  Nevertheless,
they decided in spite of all these difficulties, to choose new
generals and to start.

Chief of the new generals was a young Athenian called Xenophon, and
he advised the Greeks, there were ten thousand of them, to burn all
the baggage that they did not need and to set out and find their way
back as best they could to Greece.  They followed his advice, and
Xenophon himself has given us the account of that March of the Ten
Thousand back to Greece.  He called his story the _Anabasis_ or the
_March Up Country_ and he tells us how they went through strange and
unknown lands, and how they suffered from enemies, from the cold and
from hunger.  They followed the Tigris for a time and passed the
ruins of Nineveh, but so complete had been the destruction of that
proud city that the retreating Greeks did not know that they were
treading her beneath their feet.

Winter came on, and the cold was terrible.  In one place they marched
through deep snow, with the north wind blowing in their teeth,
benumbing the men.  They suffered from snow-blindness and {321}
frostbite, and some of them in despair refused to go on.  But in
spite of all these hardships, the greater number went on, until at
length they reached a city where they were given a friendly
reception.  The governor of the city gave them a guide, who promised
that within five days he would lead them to a place from which they
would see the sea, "and," he added, "if I fail of my word, you are
free to take my life."  He kept his promise, and on the fifth day
they reached a mountain which the men in front immediately climbed.
From the top they caught sight of the sea, a symbol to the Greeks of
home and safety.  A great cry arose and the shout grew louder and
louder, so that Xenophon feared that something extraordinary had
happened and he mounted his horse and galloped to the rescue.  But as
he drew nearer, he heard the soldiers shouting and passing on to each
other the joyful cry: "Thalatta!  Thalatta!"  "The Sea!  The Sea!"
When all had reached the summit, they fell to embracing one another,
generals and officers and all, and the tears flowed down their cheeks.

The Sea was the Euxine, and without very great difficulty the Greeks
found ships which took them home.  But before they left the spot from
whence they had first seen the sea, they erected a great pile of
stones, on which they laid all that was left to them of their scanty
possessions, some skins, and wicker shields and staves, and these
they dedicated to the Gods of Greece for having granted them so great
a deliverance.



[1] See A. E. Zimmern: _The Greek Commonwealth_.

[2] Thucydides, I.

[3] Ibid.

[4] Thucydides, I.

[5] Plutarch: _Life of Pericles_.

[6] Euripides: _The Trojan Women_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

[7] See p. 386.

[8] From Plutarch: _Life of Alcibiades_.

[9] Ibid.

[10] _Thucydides_, VI.

[11] Thucydides, VI.

[12] Ibid.

[13] Plutarch: _Life of Alcibiades_.

[14] From Plutarch: _Life of Alcibiades_.

[15] Thucydides, VII.

[16] Thucydides, VIII.

[17] Plutarch: _Life of Alcibiades_.

[18] Xenophon: Hellenica, II.

[19] Xenophon: Hellenica II.

[20] Ibid.

[21] Based on Xenophon: _The Anabasis_.




{322}

CHAPTER XVII

THE GREAT DAYS OF THEBES


I. LEGENDS AND EARLY HISTORY OF THEBES

Up to the end of the Peloponnesian War, the history of Greece had
been chiefly the history of Athens and Sparta.  The end of the war
left Sparta supreme, but she did not know how to use her power.  She
was stern and harsh, cared little for literature, and disliked
changes.  She had not the imagination to put herself in the place of
Athens and to understand how she should rule such independent,
sea-faring, intellectually alert and artistic people.  The short
period of her supremacy ended in failure, and then she was, in her
turn, overthrown by another Greek state.  This state was Thebes, a
state which had not hitherto played a very honourable part in Greek
history.  Always jealous of Athens, she had taken every opportunity
to side against her.  She had treated the sturdy, independent little
city of Plataea with great cruelty; she had sided with the Barbarian
invader during the Persian Wars and with Sparta during the
Peloponnesian War, and it was only when the Spartan rule became {323}
intolerable to friends and enemies alike, that she offered a refuge
to the Athenian exiles.

The city of Thebes lay in the rich plains of Boeotia, where meat and
corn and wine were to be had abundantly.  The near by hills provided
excellent hunting, and the Thebans were a people known to their
neighbours as loving pleasure and all the good things of the world,
as being good fighters, but men who were intellectually dull.  There
were some exceptions, however, for Thebes produced two men of genius:
Pindar, the poet, and Epaminondas, the mighty general.

Pindar was born in the sixth century B.C. but he lived to be an old
man, and the Persians had been driven out of Greece before he died.
He was a noble, and his poems are the last lyrics that sing of an
order of society that was about to give way to the rule of the
people.  Many of Pindar's lyrics were written in honour of the
winners at the Olympic Games, and in reading them one can almost see
the chariot racing along the course, and hear the people shouting,
and feel the joy of the victor as he receives his prize.  Pindar was
very conservative; he belonged to a generation which had not yet
begun to question the existence of the gods, and all his poems are
filled with unquestioning faith in them and in their righteousness.
Especially did he delight to honour Apollo, and long after his death
it was believed that he was particularly dear to the god, for it was
said that every night at Delphi he was honoured by the summons: "Let
Pindar the poet come in to the supper of the god."

{324}

But if Thebes had had no honoured past in history, she was rich in
legend and story.  Thebes had been founded by Cadmus in obedience to
the word of Apollo.  On the spot where the city was to be built, he
had slain a fearful dragon, and taking the dragon's teeth he had sown
them in the ground as a sower sows his seed, and immediately a host
of armed men had sprung up from the ground, who became the first
citizens of the new city.  With their help, Cadmus built a citadel
which was known through all the days of Theban history as the Cadmeia.

Thebes was surrounded by strong walls and the city was entered by
seven gates.  Another story told how the foundations of these walls
and gateways had been laid by Amphion, who then took his lyre and
played such divine music on it that the walls rose by magic as he
played, until they stood in such strength that they completely
protected the city, and later were able to endure a great siege.

But the gods had not always smiled upon Thebes.  Pindar tells us that
"for every good a mortal receives from the gods, he must likewise
receive two evils," and this seemed to be true of the royal house of
Thebes.  Dark and tragic are the tales of the fate of these ancient
rulers.  It was Oedipus, who having first guessed the answer to the
riddle of the Sphinx, then in ignorance killed his own father and
became King, only to learn in later years of what he had done, and to
be driven forth from his kingdom, blind and helpless.  Other legends
tell of Antigone, the faithful daughter of Oedipus, who accompanied
him in his wanderings and tended him until his death.



{325}

II. EPAMINONDAS

Epaminondas was born in Thebes late in the fifth century B.C.  He
belonged to a very old family, one of the few which claimed to be
descended from the dragon's teeth sown by Cadmus.  Though of an
ancient family, he was poor, but he was among the best educated among
the Thebans; he had been taught to play the harp and to sing to its
accompaniment, to play the flute and to dance.  A wise philosopher
was his instructor, to whom he was so attached that, young as he was,
he preferred the society of the grave and stern old man to that of
companions of his own age.  After he grew up and began to practise
gymnastics, he studied not so much to increase the strength as the
agility of his body; for he thought that strength suited the purposes
of wrestlers, but that agility made a man a better soldier, so he
spent most of his time in war-like exercises.

Epaminondas, we are told, was


    modest, prudent, grave, wisely availing himself of opportunities,
    skilled in war, brave in action and of remarkable courage.  He
    was so great a lover of truth that he would not tell a falsehood,
    even in jest; he was also master of his passions, and gentle in
    disposition.  He was a remarkable keeper of secrets, a quality no
    less serviceable sometimes than ability to speak eloquently.[1]


Amongst the statesmen who helped to make Greece great, none were more
honourable or of {326} greater integrity than Epaminondas.  It was
not possible to corrupt or bribe him and he was entirely free from
covetousness.  This was shown when the envoy of King Artaxerxes the
Persian came to Thebes to bribe Epaminondas with a large sum of gold
(to get the Thebans to help the King), but Epaminondas said to him:


    There is no need for money in this matter; for if the King
    desires what is for the good of the Thebans, I am ready to do it
    for nothing; if otherwise, he has not sufficient silver or gold
    to move me, for I would not exchange the riches of the whole
    world for my love for my country.  I do not wonder that you have
    tried me thus as you did not know me, seeing that you thought me
    like yourself, and I forgive you; but get you away immediately
    lest you corrupt others, though unable to corrupt me.[2]


Under Epaminondas, Thebes became the ruling power in Greece, but only
for a very short time.  The Thebans were good soldiers only as long
as they had inspiring leaders, without a great leader they were
unable to hold what they had gained.  One of the characteristics of a
great man is that he knows how to use his opportunities, and
Epaminondas had this gift.  The story of his life is the story of a
great general.  At his side was his friend Pelopidas, a man of
extraordinary courage, of great enthusiasm, and of utter devotion to
his leader.

Epaminondas made the Theban army a very formidable fighting force,
and with this powerful army {327} he set himself to break the power
of Sparta and to put that of Thebes in its place.  In 371 B.C. the
Spartans were defeated by the Thebans under Epaminondas in a great
battle at Leuctra, not far from Thebes, and this victory made Thebes
for the time the chief military power in Greece.  For nine years she
kept her power, though fighting continued.  Epaminondas wanted to
capture Sparta itself, and he marched four times down into the
Peloponnesus.  In spite of the long marches his men were obliged to
make, they were in splendid condition.  They had implicit faith in
their general and would follow him anywhere.  "There was no labour
which they would shrink from, either by night or by day; there was no
danger they would flinch from; and with the scantiest provisions,
their discipline never failed them."[3]

The Thebans had marched for the fourth time to the Peloponnesus, and
they were at Mantinea, and here in 362 B.C. Epaminondas fought his
last great battle against Sparta.  Thebes was victorious, but she
bought her victory dearly, for Epaminondas was mortally wounded.  As
he was carried from the field, he asked for the two captains who
stood nearest to him and would take his place.  But he was told that
both had been killed.  "Then make peace with the enemy," he murmured,
and drawing out the spear which had wounded him, he fell back dead.

Epaminondas was dead, and there was no one to take his place.  He had
broken the power of Sparta, and the Peloponnesus was now divided into
{328} a number of camps, each at war with the other, and confusion
reigned everywhere in Greece.  Thebes had been no more able to unite
Greece than Sparta had been, but under Epaminondas the art of war had
been so developed and changed that in the hands of a commander of
genius, an army had become a more formidable weapon than had ever
before been deemed possible.

Six years before the battle of Mantinea, a half-barbarian boy of
fifteen had been brought from Macedonia to Thebes as a hostage.  This
boy was Philip of Macedon, and he spent three years in Thebes,
learning all that the greatest military state then in Greece could
teach him.  He was destined himself to be a great commander, and the
father of one yet greater.  There was now no Greek state powerful
enough to uphold Greek freedom.  As a statesman, Epaminondas had
failed, for he left nothing but confusion behind him, but as a
general of genius, he was the teacher of Philip and Alexander of
Macedon, whose growing power was now to menace the freedom, not only
of Greece, but of the world.



[1] Cornelius Nepos: _Life of Epaminondas_.

[2] Cornelius Nepos: _Life of Epaminondas_.

[3] Xenophon: Hellenica, VII.




{329}

CHAPTER XVIII

ALEXANDER THE GREAT


I. PHILIP OF MACEDON

History is the story of the way in which man has learned how to live,
and in learning this, man has come from time to time to periods of
great change: periods when the old order of things has changed,
passing into the new.  These times are always very difficult for
those who live in them, for so much of the old seems to be undergoing
destruction that the building of the new is not noticed, for those
who destroy generally make more noise than those who build.

Greece was living through one of these periods of change when Philip
became King of Macedon.  Not very much is known about the early
Macedonians.  They were partly barbarian, and partly Greek, and when
they first appear in history were very disunited.  In the plains
dwelt a number of tribes, who were said to be of Greek origin.  They
were closely bound to the King and the chief of them were known as
his Companions.  Scattered about the hills were numerous tribes, more
barbarian than Greek, who looked on the King of Macedonia as their
overlord, but who were a constant {330} source of danger to him, as
they were frequently struggling for independence.  When a weak king
ruled, the story of Macedonia became that of petty warfare with these
hill-tribes, but strong kings were always trying to unite these
warring elements into a nation.

In 359 B.C., Philip became King of Macedonia.  He had spent three
years in Thebes, where he had seen the transformation that the
military genius of Epaminondas had effected in the Theban army, and
now at the age of twenty-four, he found himself ruler of Macedonia.
But his inheritance was one that might have daunted the stoutest
heart.  He had no allies and no money; enemies surrounded him on all
sides, and there was no unity in his kingdom.  But he had youth, a
few faithful friends, unbounded ambition, and a body fit to endure
any hardships.  Philip never asked anything of his soldiers that he
was not ready to do himself, yet he was not a man whom they loved,
and he inspired fear rather than affection.

Philip had three definite aims in his policy: to create a standing
army, one that would be ready to march and fight at all times, in
winter as well as summer; to unite all Macedonia into a real kingdom,
and then to unite all Greece under his rule.  Having done that, he
intended to march into Asia against the Persian King.

Philip created his army, he subdued and united Macedonia, and then he
was ready to turn to Greece.  Athens, Sparta and Thebes were now all
weak.  The power of the city-state was passing away and was {331} to
yield in time to the new idea of national unity, but it was not to
yield without a conflict.  The struggle between Philip and the Greek
states was more than a struggle between a strong state and several
weak ones; it was a conflict of ideas.  On the one side was Athens
and the states who sided with her, the last representatives of the
independent city-state who still jealously guarded their political
freedom; on the other side was Philip, who represented this new idea
of national unity.  He determined to subdue most of Greece by force,
but he would have liked Athens to yield to him of her own free will.
The power of her fleet and her armies had been broken, but her
thought, her art and her culture remained.  Could Philip have been
received by Athens with good-will, and been recognized by her as the
leader of all Greece; he would have held it of greater importance
than any military victory.  He wrote letters to her statesmen, sent
special envoys to Athens to plead his cause, he tried to prove to her
that her fears of him were groundless, and he treated the very soil
of Attica as if it were sacred.  It is a striking picture: Philip,
the warrior, at the head of a powerful army, lowering his sword
before the politically weak little state, because of the might of her
spirit.  And that spirit was not dead.  One more flash of the old
Athenian independence flamed out in the defiance she hurled at Philip.

Philip advanced.  He seized and held Thermopylae, the gateway into
Greece; he upheld the rights of Delphi against a neighbouring state
and was {332} recognized by the Oracle as the defender of Apollo.
Then he marched into Boeotia, where Athens and Thebes made a last
tremendous stand against him.  In 338 B.C. one of the decisive
battles of the world was fought at Chaeronea.  On one side was an
army of the last representatives of the old city-state, a confused
array of men, some of them citizen-soldiers serving without pay, some
of them hired mercenaries; and on the other side, the first great
army of one united nation.  The battle was fought on a hot summer's
day, and it was fierce and long, but at length the Greeks gave way
and Philip was victorious.  He had little mercy for Thebes, and she
drank the cup of bitterness to the dregs.  Some of her leaders were
banished, others were put to death, a Macedonian garrison was placed
in the city and all Theban lands were confiscated.

Athens was treated with greater mercy.  On the day of the victory
over her, Philip


    did not laugh at table, or mix any amusements with the
    entertainment; he had no chaplets or perfumes; and as far as was
    in his power, he conquered in such a way that nobody might think
    of him as a conqueror.  And neither did he call himself the King;
    but the general of Greece.  To the Athenians, who had been his
    bitterest enemies, he sent back their prisoners without ransom,
    and restored the bodies of those that were slain in battle for
    burial, and he sent Alexander his son to make peace and an
    alliance with them.[1]


Underlying all his ambition, all his reliance on military power, was
yet the feeling, partly unconscious yet there, that, after all, the
things of the spirit {333} were greater than those of pomp and power,
and he longed for recognition from Athens.  But Athens, though forced
to recognize his supremacy, never accepted him willingly.

Philip's next move was to organize an expedition into Asia, in order
to crush the power of Persia, and as such an expedition would take
Philip out of Greece, most of the Greek states agreed to join it.
But first he returned to Macedonia, where enemies were always to be
found stirring up hostility to him.  A royal marriage gave a good
excuse for a great public festivity, and a procession was planned, in
which Philip, robed in white, was to walk in state.  It must have
been a moment of great triumph.  His ambitions were fulfilled.  The
Macedonian army was the greatest in the world, he had united the
hostile elements in his kingdom and made of them a nation, he had
conquered Greece and been recognized as the chief general of all the
Greek armies, and now he was about to set forth to conquer Persia.
He was still young, and there seemed nothing to prevent the
fulfilment of every further ambition.  But suddenly, as the stately
procession moved forward, a man darted out from the crowd of
spectators, buried his dagger deep in the heart of the King, and
Philip fell dead.

He was succeeded by his son Alexander, who in a speech to the
Macedonians summed up the achievements of his father.  He said to
them:


    My father found you, vagabond and poor, most of you clad only in
    skins, tending a few sheep on the {334} mountain sides, and to
    protect them you had to fight against the border tribes, often
    with small success.  Instead of the skins, my father gave you
    cloaks to wear and he led you down from the hills into the plains
    and made you the equal in battle of the neighbouring barbarians,
    so that your safety depended no longer on the inaccessibility of
    your mountain strongholds, but on your own valour.  He taught you
    to live in cities, and he gave you good laws and customs, and
    instead of being the slaves and subjects of those barbarians by
    whom you and your possessions had long been harried, he made you
    lords over them.  He also added the greater part of Thrace to
    Macedonia, and by seizing the most conveniently situated places
    on the sea-coast, he threw open your country to commerce.  He
    made it possible for you to work your mines in safety.  He made
    you rulers over the Thessalonians, of whom you had formerly been
    in mortal fear, and by humbling the Phocians he gave you, instead
    of a narrow and difficult road into Greece, a broad and easy one.
    To such a degree did he humble the Athenians and Thebans, who had
    ever been ready to fall upon Macedonia, that instead of your
    paying tribute to the former and being vassals to the latter,
    both states turned to us for protection.  He marched into the
    Peloponnesus and after setting affairs there in order, he was
    publicly declared commander-in-chief of the whole of Greece in
    the expedition against the Persian.  And he considered this great
    distinction not as personal honour to himself, but as a glory for
    Macedonia.[2]


The new King was only twenty years old.  It seemed as if his father
had been cut off at the height of his career, and that his death
could mean nothing but disaster to the power of Macedonia.  But what
seems like a tragedy and the failure of human hopes, is sometimes the
door through which an individual or a nation passes to greater
things.  Philip had done {335} his work.  He was a great soldier and
had made great conquests, but he inspired no love and he lacked the
imagination which would have made him see with the eyes of the
conquered, and so rule them that they would have become real parts of
a mighty whole.  His son was young, but he had this gift, and so the
tragedy of his father's death was the beginning of new and greater
opportunities for him, and the door through which Greece was to pass
from the old order into the new.



II. DEMOSTHENES

Though forced to acknowledge the political supremacy of Philip,
Athens had never given him the real homage he so greatly desired,
that of the spirit.  And that she persisted in her refusal was
largely due to the orator Demosthenes.

Politically, Athens was now weak, and her constant wars were a great
strain on all her resources.  But at this time, most of her fighting
was done at a distance from Athens and by hired mercenaries.  A great
change had come over her since the days of Marathon and Salamis.  No
longer was it the pride of the Athenians that her citizens themselves
defended her, and though the young men liked to boast that their
forefathers had fought at Marathon, they preferred a more
pleasure-loving life than was possible in a camp, and so they paid
other men to go out and fight for them.

Demosthenes fought against this spirit, and when Philip made advances
to Athens and tried to {336} conclude an alliance with her,
Demosthenes made speech after speech against such a policy, imploring
the people not to make terms with the stranger, but to make ready for
war, and to give their own lives on the battle-field instead of
paying others to die for them.

Demosthenes had been a delicate child, very shy and with a stammer in
his speech.  He grew up, however, with a passion for oratory, and he
would go to hear the noted orators of his time and listen to every
word they said, going home afterwards to practise the art of speaking
himself.  The first time he spoke in public, he met with
discouragement, for his style was awkward, his voice weak and he
stammered.  He determined, however, that he would overcome all these
obstacles, and


    he built himself a place to study in underground, and hither he
    would come constantly every day to form his action, and to
    exercise his voice; and here he would continue, oftentimes
    without intermission, two or three months together, shaving one
    half of his head, that so for shame he might not go abroad,
    though he desired it ever so much.[3]


It was known that Demosthenes worked very hard over his speeches, and
that he never spoke in the Assembly unless he had thought over the
subject and prepared what he intended to say.  It became a matter of
joke in Athens that instead of depending on inspiration, his speeches
"smelt of the lamp."  In his old age, Demosthenes told some {337} of
his friends how he had overcome his defects of speech:


    His inarticulate and stammering pronunciation he overcame and
    rendered more distinct by speaking with pebbles in his mouth; his
    voice he disciplined by declaiming and reciting speeches or
    verses when he was out of breath, while running or going up steep
    places; and that in his house he had a large looking-glass,
    before which he would stand and go through his exercises.[4]


To cure a habit he had of raising his left shoulder while speaking,
he suspended a naked sword over it whenever he practised, and he
would stand on the sea-shore during a storm to declaim, so that he
might accustom himself to the uproar in a public assembly.

Demosthenes has been called the greatest of orators.  Opinions have
differed since, as to whether his policy was the wisest for Athens to
follow at that moment, but every word he uttered was inspired by a
passionate love for Athens, and he at all times entreated the
Athenians to be true to their own great spirit and their ancient
patriotism.


    Never to this day, [he said on one occasion], has this People
    been eager for the acquisition of money; but for honour it has
    been eager as for nothing else in the world.  It is a sign of
    this that when Athens had money in greater abundance than any
    other Hellenic people, she spent it all in the cause of honour;
    her citizens contributed from their private resources, and she
    never shrank from danger when glory was to be won.  Therefore
    {338} she has those eternal and abiding possessions, the memory
    of her actions, and the beauty of the offerings dedicated in
    honour of them, the Porticoes which you see, the Parthenon, the
    Colonnades, the Dockyards.


The speeches of Demosthenes against the policy of making friends with
Philip are known as the _Philippics_, a word which has become part of
later language, and in the greatest of these, he shows the Athenians
how their lowered ideals have permitted political corruption and were
leading them to destruction.


    What is the cause of these things? [he asked], for as it was not
    without reason that the Hellenes in old days were so prompt for
    freedom, so it is not without reason or cause that they are now
    so prompt to be slaves.  There was a spirit, men of Athens, a
    spirit in the mind of the People in those days which is absent
    today, the spirit which vanquished the wealth of Persia, which
    led Hellas in the path of freedom, and never gave way in face of
    battle by sea or land; a spirit whose extinction today has
    brought universal ruin and turned Hellas upside down.  What was
    this spirit?  It was nothing subtle or clever.  It meant that
    those who took money from those who aimed at dominion or at the
    ruin of Hellas were execrated by all.  Where are such sentiments
    now?  They have been sold in the market and are gone.[5]


In burning words Demosthenes pleaded with the Athenians to fight
themselves with their old spirit for their freedom.


{339}


    I wonder that you, men of Athens, who once raised your hand
    against Sparta in defence of the rights of the Hellenes ... who
    spent your own fortunes in war contributions and always bore the
    brunt of the dangers of the campaign, that you, I say, are now
    shrinking from marching, and hesitating to make any contribution
    to save your own possessions....  This is our own personal and
    immediate duty; and I say that you must contribute funds, you
    must go on service in person with a good will....  You must get
    rid of all excuses and all deficiencies on your own part; you
    cannot examine mercilessly the actions of others, unless you
    yourselves have done all that your duty requires.[6]


Demosthenes possessed the power of appealing to both the reason and
the emotions of his hearers, and in the end Athens followed his
advice.  But it resulted in disaster.  Those who had opposed
Demosthenes, especially the statesman Aeschines, turned upon him in
anger, and accused him of sacrificing the lives of the young men, and
of spending their treasure for nothing.  Athens had followed his
advice and had been beaten, and now Philip was her master.  As
Aeschines and his opponents had been laying such stress on the
consequences of his policy, Demosthenes defended himself in what was,
perhaps, the greatest of his speeches.  In one part of it he warned
the Athenians that what he had to say might startle them, but


    let no one, [he said], in the name of Heaven, be amazed at the
    length to which I go, but give a kindly {340} consideration to
    what I say.  Even if what was to come was plain to all
    beforehand; even if all foreknew it; even if you, Aeschines, had
    been crying with a loud voice in warning and protestation, you
    who uttered not so much as a sound; even then, I say, it was not
    right for the city to abandon her course, if she had any regard
    for her fame, or for our forefathers, or for the ages to come.
    As it is, she is thought, no doubt, to have failed to secure her
    object, as happens to all alike, whenever God wills it: but then,
    by abandoning in favour of Philip her claim to take the lead of
    others, she must have incurred the blame of having betrayed them
    all.  Had she surrendered without a struggle those claims in
    defence of which our forefathers faced every imaginable peril,
    who would not have cast scorn upon you, Aeschines--upon you, I
    say; not, I trust, upon Athens nor upon me?  In God's name, with
    what faces should we have looked upon those who came to visit the
    city, if events had come round to the same conclusion as they now
    have, if Philip had been chosen as commander and lord of all, and
    we had stood apart, while others carried on the struggle to
    prevent these things; and that, although the city had never yet
    in time past preferred an inglorious security to the hazardous
    vindication of a noble cause?  What Hellene, what foreigner, does
    not know that the Thebans, and the Spartans who were powerful
    still earlier, and the Persian King would all gratefully and
    gladly have allowed Athens to take and keep all that was her own,
    if she would do the bidding of another, and let another take the
    first place in Hellas?  But this was not, it appears, the
    tradition of the Athenians; it was not tolerable; it was not in
    their nature.  From the beginning of time no one had ever yet
    succeeded in persuading the city to throw in her lot with those
    who were strong, but {341} unrighteous in their dealings, and to
    enjoy the security of servitude.  Throughout all time she has
    maintained her perilous struggle for pre-eminence, honour and
    glory.  And this policy you look upon as so lofty, so proper to
    your own national character that, of your forefathers also, it is
    those who have acted thus that you praise most highly.  And
    naturally, for who would not admire the courage of those men, who
    did not fear to leave their land and their city, and to embark
    upon their ships that they might not do the bidding of another;
    who chose for their general Themistocles (who had counselled them
    thus), and stoned Cyrsilus to death, when he gave his voice for
    submission to a master's orders--and not him alone, for your
    wives stoned his wife also to death.  For the Athenians of that
    day did not look for an orator or a general who would enable them
    to live in happy servitude; they cared not to live at all, unless
    they might live in freedom.  For everyone of them felt that he
    had come into being, not for his father and his mother alone, but
    also for his country.  And wherein lies the difference?  He who
    thinks he was born for his parents alone awaits the death which
    destiny assigns him in the course of nature: but he who thinks
    that he was born for his country also will be willing to die,
    that he may not see her in bondage, and will look upon the
    outrages and the indignities that he must needs bear in a city
    that is in bondage as more to be dreaded than death.

    Now were I attempting to argue that _I_ had induced you to show a
    spirit worthy of your forefathers, there is not a man who might
    not rebuke me with good reason.  But, in fact, I am declaring
    that such principles as these are your own; I am showing that
    _before_ my time the city displayed this spirit, though I claim
    that I, too, have had some share, as your servant, in carrying
    {342} out your policy in detail.  But in denouncing the policy as
    a whole, in bidding you be harsh with me, as one who has brought
    terrors and dangers upon the city, the prosecutor, in his
    eagerness to deprive me of my distinction at the present moment,
    is trying to rob you of praises that will last throughout all
    time.  For if you condemn the defendant on the ground that my
    policy was not for the best, men will think that your own
    judgment has been wrong, and that it was not through the
    unkindness of fortune that you suffered what befell you.  But it
    cannot, it cannot be that you were wrong, men of Athens, when you
    took upon you the struggle for freedom and deliverance.  No! by
    those who at Marathon bore the brunt of the peril--our
    forefathers.  No! by those who at Plataea drew up their
    battle-line, by those who at Salamis, by those who off Artemisium
    fought the fight at sea, by the many who lie in the sepulchres
    where the People laid them, brave men, all alike deemed worthy by
    their country, Aeschines, of the same honour and the same
    obsequies--not the successful or the victorious alone!  And she
    acted justly.  For all these have done that which it was the duty
    of brave men to do; but their fortune has been that which Heaven
    assigned to each.[7]



III. ALEXANDER THE GREAT

At the age of twenty, Alexander succeeded to Philip's throne.  He is
one of the personalities in history who have most appealed to the
imagination, not only of his contemporaries, but of all ages.  He had
the beauty of a young Greek god, a brilliant mind and personal charm
which endeared him to his {343} companions.  From his father he had
inherited great military genius, extraordinary powers of
organization, tireless energy and inordinate ambition; and from his
mother, a wild, half-barbarian princess, a passionate nature, given
to outbursts of fierce and uncontrolled anger, and a romantic
imagination.

[Illustration: ALEXANDER THE GREAT.  British Museum.]

During the boyhood of Alexander, his father was constantly away at
war, but he saw to it that his son was well educated.  His first
teachers accustomed him to a Spartan discipline, and so trained his
body that in later years he was able to undergo fatigue and endure
hardships that astonished all who were with him.

When Alexander was twelve years old, an episode occurred which
convinced his father that he needed the best guidance that could be
found for him.  A horse, Bucephalus by name, was offered to Philip
for the sum of thirteen talents, and the King, with the Prince and
many others,


    went into the field to try him.  But they found him so very
    vicious and unmanageable that he reared up when they endeavoured
    to mount him, and would not so much as endure the voice of any of
    Philip's attendants.  Upon which as they were leading him away as
    wholly useless and untractable, Alexander, who stood by, said:
    "What an excellent horse do they lose for want of address and
    boldness to manage him!"  Philip at first took no notice of what
    he said; but when he heard him repeat the same thing several
    times, and saw he was much vexed to see the horse sent away, "Do
    you reproach," said he to him, "those who are older than
    yourself, as if you knew more, and were better able to manage him
    than they?"  "I {344} could manage this horse," said he, "better
    than others do."  "And if you do not," said Philip, "what will
    you forfeit for your rashness?"  "I will pay," answered
    Alexander, "the whole price of the horse."  At this the whole
    company fell a-laughing; and as soon as the wager was settled
    amongst them, he immediately ran to the horse, and taking hold of
    the bridle, turned him directly towards the sun, having, it
    seems, observed that he was disturbed at and afraid of the motion
    of his own shadow; then letting him go forward a little, still
    keeping the reins in his hands and stroking him gently, when he
    found him begin to grow eager and fiery, with one nimble leap he
    securely mounted him, and when he was seated, by little and
    little drew in the bridle, and curbed him without either striking
    or spurring him.  Presently, when he found him free from all
    rebelliousness he let him go at full speed.  Philip and his
    friends looked on at first in silence and anxiety for the result;
    till seeing him turn and come back rejoicing and triumphing for
    what he had performed, they all burst out into acclamations of
    applause; and his father, shedding tears, it is said, for joy,
    kissed him as he came down from his horse, and in his transport
    said: "O my son look thee out a kingdom equal to and worthy of
    thyself, for Macedonia is too little for thee!"[8]


It was evident that Alexander would not submit to be controlled in
what he did, but that a steady guiding hand was needed to develop his
best nature, and so Philip sent for the philosopher Aristotle, who
was his tutor for four years.  Aristotle taught him the best that
Greece could offer in literature, philosophy and natural science.
Alexander had no small {345} opinion of his own powers, and
considered himself quite the equal, if not the superior, of the best
minds of his time, and he wanted to be recognized as such.  Later,
when Aristotle had published some of his writings, Alexander wrote to
him: "You have not done well to publish your books of oral doctrine;
for what is there now that we excel others in, if those things which
we have been particularly instructed in be laid open to all?"[9]
Alexander had been born with a love for study, and his education gave
him a real appreciation of all that was best in Greek thought.  He
used to sleep with a copy of Homer under his pillow, and he told
Aristotle that he would "rather excel others in the knowledge of what
is excellent than in the extent of his power and dominion."[10]
Alexander grew to love his tutor greatly, and in after years he would
say that as from his father he had received life, so from Aristotle
had he learned to lead a good life.

Such a personality soon made Alexander the idol of Macedonia, but, as
in the case of his father, that was not enough; Macedonian, and
therefore in the eyes of Greece a half-barbarian, he wanted to be
accepted by the Greeks as a Greek and to receive their hero-worship.
Like Philip, he was determined to march into Asia, subdue the Persian
King and become a world ruler, but it was necessary that he should
subdue Greece first.  He did this very quickly, and in 335 B.C., one
year after he became King, he marched against Thebes, which had
organized a revolt against him.  He came upon the city {346} with
almost magical swiftness, for in thirteen days he had transported his
army two hundred and fifty miles.  A rumour had spread in Greece that
he was dead, but suddenly, there he was before the walls of Thebes.
In two days all was over.  The city was razed to the ground, and the
inhabitants either slain or sold into slavery.  Yet in the midst of
all the horror, Alexander gave an order which seized upon the Greek
imagination: the house of Pindar was to be left untouched for no war
was being waged against Greek civilization.

Alexander went to Corinth, where he was elected General of the army
that was to invade Persia.  He was surrounded by men who praised and
flattered him, but one man refused to take any notice of him
whatever.  This was the cynical philosopher Diogenes.


    Alexander found him in a cask by the roadside.  When he saw so
    much company near him, he raised himself a little, and vouchsafed
    to look upon Alexander; and when Alexander kindly asked whether
    he wanted anything.  "Yes," said, he, "I would have you stand
    from between me and the sun."  Alexander was so struck at this
    answer, and surprised at the greatness of the man, who had taken
    so little notice of him, that as he went away he told his
    followers, who were laughing at the moroseness of the
    philosopher, that if he were not Alexander, he would choose to be
    Diogenes.[11]


The time had now come when at the head of a mighty army, Alexander
could start for Asia.  This {347} army was made up of Macedonians and
of men from all the most warlike states of Greece.  It had been
thoroughly trained and disciplined, and it served under a general
only twenty-two years of age, it is true, but who had already shown
himself a military genius and who was adored by every soldier from
the highest to the lowest.  It was an army that was never to know
defeat.

Alexander did not hide his purpose from the Persian King, for he sent
him word that he considered himself lord of Asia: "I, Alexander,
consider the whole of thy treasure, and the whole of thy land to be
mine."  To the Greeks this did not represent any over-weening pride,
for Alexander was but expressing the belief that was held by
Aristotle, the greatest Greek thinker of the age, that Greeks were
justified in enslaving the Barbarian.

No story of conquest is more romantic than that of Alexander.  On
first reaching Asia Minor he went to Ilium, where he dedicated his
armour to Athena, and took in its place some weapons which tradition
said had been used in the Trojan War, and he laid a wreath on the
tomb of Achilles.  Then he started on his march.  He came, whilst
passing through Asia Minor, to Gordium, where he saw the celebrated
Gordian knot, by which the yoke was fastened to the pole of an
ancient chariot.  An old prophecy had been made that the man who
untied this knot would rule the world.  Alexander tried to loosen it,
but losing patience, he took his sword and cut it.  He meant to rule
the world, and he knew that his empire would only be won by the sword.

{348}

Alexander marched through Syria into Egypt, and when he was in Egypt,
he made a journey through the desert of Libya to consult the oracle,
Zeus Ammon.


    Few men would have started upon so long and dangerous a journey
    without misgivings, for there was likely to be scarcity of water,
    and violent winds that would blow about the poisonous sand of the
    desert and cause the death of those who inhaled it.  But
    Alexander was not to be turned from anything he was bent upon;
    for hitherto fortune had helped him in all his plans, and the
    boldness of his temper gave him a passion for overcoming
    difficulties.  In this journey the gods seemed to favour him as
    usual, for plentiful rains fell, which not only relieved the
    soldiers from fear of dying of thirst, but made the sand moist
    and firm to travel on and purified the air.  Besides, some ravens
    kept up with them in their march, flying before them and waiting
    for them if they fell behind; but the greatest miracle of all was
    that if any of the company went astray in the night, the ravens
    never ceased croaking until they were guided to the right path
    again.

    Having passed through the wilderness, they came to the place
    where the high-priest of Ammon bade Alexander welcome in the name
    of the god, and called him son of Zeus.  And being asked by the
    King whether any of his father's murderers had escaped
    punishment, the priest charged him to speak with more respect,
    since his was not a mortal father.  Then Alexander desired to
    know of the oracle if any of those who murdered Philip were yet
    unpunished, and further concerning dominion, whether the empire
    of the world should be his?  This, the god answered, he should
    obtain, and that Philip's death {349} was fully revenged, which
    gave him so much satisfaction that he made splendid offerings to
    Zeus, and gave the priests very rich presents.[12]


Before leaving Egypt, Alexander founded the city of Alexandria,


    which takes its name from him.  The position seemed to him a very
    fine one in which to found a city, and he thought it would become
    a prosperous one.  Therefore he was seized by an ardent desire to
    undertake the enterprise, and he marked out the boundaries of the
    city himself, pointing out where the market-place was to be
    constructed, where the temples were to be built, stating how many
    there were to be, and to what Greek gods they were to be
    dedicated, and specially marking a spot for a temple to the
    Egyptian Isis.  He also pointed out where the wall was to be
    carried out.  The soothsayers, (pondering upon certain lucky
    omens), told Alexander that the city would become prosperous in
    every respect, but especially in regard to the fruits of the
    earth.[13]


Before his death, Alexander founded many cities called by his name,
but the Alexandria of Egypt was the greatest, and the one that was to
survive even to the present day.  For more than two thousand years it
has held its position as one of the chief ports in the Eastern part
of the Mediterranean.  Alexander did not intend that it should become
the capital of Egypt, but he did intend that it should take the place
of Tyre, so that the trade coming {350} from the East should be in
the hands of Greeks and not of Phoenicians.

The army worshipped Alexander, and he knew how to appeal to the
imagination of his followers and to gain their devotion.  He was once
detained by a serious illness, caused by bathing in an ice-cold
river.  One of his physicians had prepared medicine for him, but
before he had taken it, one of his commanders sent the King a letter
bidding him beware of Philip (the physician) who, he said, had been
bribed by Darius to poison him.  Having read the letter, Alexander


    put it under his pillow without showing it to anybody, and when
    Philip came in with the potion, he took it with great
    cheerfulness and assurance, giving him the letter to read.  It
    was well worth being present to see Alexander take the draught
    and Philip read the letter at the same time.[14]


On one occasion


    he had made a long and painful march of eleven days, during which
    his soldiers suffered so much from want of water that they were
    ready to give up.  While they were in this distress it happened
    that some Macedonians who had fetched water in skins upon their
    mules from a river they had found out came about noon to the
    place where Alexander was, and seeing him almost choked with
    thirst, presently filled a helmet and offered it to him.  He
    asked them to whom they were carrying the water; they told him to
    their children, adding that if his life were but saved, it was no
    matter for them though {351} they all perished.  Then he took the
    helmet into his hands, and looking round about, when he saw all
    those who were with him stretching their heads out and looking
    earnestly after the drink, he returned it again with thanks
    without taking a drop of it.  "For," said he, "if I alone should
    drink, the rest will be out of heart."  When the soldiers heard
    him speak in this way, they one and all cried out to him to lead
    them forward boldly, and began whipping on their horses.  For
    whilst they had such a King they said they defied both weariness
    and thirst, and looked upon themselves to be little less than
    immortal.[15]


On another occasion the hardships endured by the army were so great
that the men were almost ready to refuse to follow Alexander any
further.  But he called them together, and spoke to them, reminding
them that he asked no one to suffer what he himself did not suffer.


    I often sit up at night to watch for you, [he said], that you may
    be able to sleep.  Who is there of you who knows that he has
    endured greater toil for me than I have for him?  I have been
    wounded with the sword in close fight; I have been shot with
    arrows; and though I have suffered these things for the sake of
    your lives, your glory, and your wealth, I am still leading you
    as conquerors over all the land and sea, all rivers, mountains
    and plains.[16]


And the magic of his personality silenced all their murmuring and
banished all their discontent.

{352}

Followed by this devoted army, Alexander started on a marvellous
campaign which led him to the uttermost limit of the then known
world, even beyond the Indus into India.  In battle after battle he
met those who opposed his path and conquered them.  Alexander did not
know the meaning of the word _impossible_.  He was told once that a
certain mountain pass was impracticable.  For other men, it would
have been, but Alexander gave orders that his spearmen should cut
steps in the steep rock, and where before only the surest-footed
goats had climbed, Alexander and his men passed in safety.  His men
followed him over snowy mountains in winter, and across thirsty
deserts in summer, up and down the lower ranges of the Himalaya
Mountains, where the best European armies of today can only go with
difficulty.  They crossed the plains of India in the rainy season,
and even went through that country so unfit for human habitation that
Mohammedan conquerors of a later age declared it was a place fit only
to be dwelt in by the souls of the lost.

Nothing stopped Alexander, not the mountain barrier, nor the deep
river, nor the burning sands.  On he went, until he reached what he
believed to be the River Ocean that girdled the earth.

Everywhere Alexander had been victorious, until even the Great King
of Persia himself was utterly defeated and Alexander was seated upon
his throne.  He burnt the Persian palace at Persepolis in order "to
take vengeance on the Persians for their deeds in the invasion of
Greece, when they razed Athens to the ground and burnt down the
temples.  He also {353} desired to punish the Persians for all the
other injuries they had done the Greeks."[17]

When the news of the victories of Alexander over the Persians reached
Greece, great was the amazement.  For centuries, the name of the
Great King had stood for all that was powerful and invincible.
Though he had been driven out of Greece, he was still believed to be
omnipotent in Asia.  The general feeling was voiced by one of the
orators, speaking of what was happening in the Athenian Assembly:


    What is there strange and unexpected that has not happened in our
    time?  We have not lived the life of ordinary men, and the things
    we have seen will become a tale of wonder to posterity.  Is not
    the King of the Persians, he who channelled Athos, he who bridged
    the Hellespont, he who demanded earth and water of the Greeks, he
    who dared to write in his letters that he was lord of all men
    from the rising of the sun unto its setting, is he not struggling
    now, no longer for lordship over others, but already for his life?


Alexander had conquered the Great King and seated himself on the
royal throne of Persia under the canopy of gold.  But now that he had
reached the summit of his ambition and was master of the greatest
empire in the world, a change came over him, and he began to indulge
his passions and to give himself up to all kinds of dissipation.  He
dressed like a Persian, which deeply offended the {354} Greeks, who
became jealous of the increasing favour the King showed to the
Barbarian.

Slowly the leaders of Alexander's army began to realize the change
that was taking place in their general, and though he gained in
popularity with the Persians, he began to lose some of the devotion
hitherto felt for him by the Greeks and Macedonians, and he was
becoming estranged from his old followers.  At length they realized
that it was not a Greek conquest that would enslave Asia of which he
dreamed, but of a world empire, in which the Barbarian would live on
equal terms with the Greek.  Alexander was far-seeing beyond his age,
and he had learned that men whose customs are alien to those in which
he had been brought up were not always to be despised, and that if he
dreamed of holding the world empire he had conquered, he could only
do so by treating all parts of it alike, and by encouraging
intercourse between the different races which composed it.  However
wise this may have been, it is not difficult to understand the
feeling of the older Greeks who had been educated to feel a gulf
between them and the Barbarian that nothing could ever bridge.  The
climax of the estrangement between Alexander and his old companions
came in a tragic scene at a banquet.  Alexander and his friends had
been drinking fast and furiously, then songs had been sung, some of
which ridiculed the Macedonian officers who had recently been
unfortunate in a skirmish.  The older men present were offended, but
Alexander laughed and had the song repeated.  Clitus, who had been an
old and trusted friend of {355} the King, said angrily: "It is not
well to make a jest of Macedonians among their enemies, for, though
they have met with misfortunes, they are better men than those who
laugh at them."  Angry words passed between him and the King, until,
unable to control his rage, Alexander snatched a spear from one of
his guards and ran it through the body of Clitus, who fell dead to
the ground.  Dead silence followed this mad deed, and Alexander was
sobered by the sight of the man he had loved lying dead at his feet,
slain by his own hand.  He drew the spear out of the body and would
have killed himself with it, had the guards not interfered and led
him by force to his chamber.  All that night and the next day he wept
bitterly and would speak to no one.  At length one of his friends
entered the room where he lay and said to him in a loud voice:


    Is this the Alexander whom the whole world looks to, lying here
    weeping like a slave for fear of what men will say?  It is
    Alexander himself who, by the right of his conquests, should be
    the law to decide what is right and wrong.  Do you not know,
    Alexander, that Zeus is represented with Justice and Law on
    either side of him, to show that all the deeds of a conqueror are
    lawful and just?[18]


The King was soothed by these words, for he was only too ready to
believe, as his friend had said, that whatever he might choose to do
was right.  But he was spoiled by such flattery which only increased
{356} his arrogance and made him yield more to his passions than
before.

Having conquered and established an empire which extended from Greece
and Macedonia in Europe across Asia to India, and which included
Egypt and Libya, Alexander prepared to set out on yet another
expedition to the West and to enter Arabia.  He was in Babylon, and
spent a long day attending to military duties.  Towards evening, he
left his chair of state to take a little relaxation.  During his
absence, a half-crazy man appeared, who, without any warning, sat
himself down on the King's seat.  The attendants looked on in horror
at such an act, which seemed to them great impiety, but they did not
dare turn him out, for suddenly superstitious fears took hold of
them, and in frightened voices they whispered to each other that this
could foretell nothing but some great calamity.

It was in the early summer of 323 B.C. that Alexander was ready to
start on his march, but the night before he was to leave Babylon, he
became ill of a fever.  For a few days he was still able to attend to
some business from his bed, but he grew rapidly worse.  Suddenly the
army realized that he was dying, and his old friends, forgetting
whatever estrangement had come between them, entreated to be allowed
to see him once more.  They were admitted to the chamber where he
lay, and passed in silence before him.  He was so weak that he "could
not speak, and only touched the right hand of each, and raised his
head a little, and signed with his eyes."  The next day Alexander was
dead.  {357} Deep and awe-struck silence fell upon the city and camp
for four days, and then, his generals having found amongst his papers
plans for the western campaign, they endeavoured to carry them out.
But they were not successful, and never again did the great army
fight under one leader.  Having lost the almost magical inspiration
of Alexander's leadership, his successors were unable to keep the
empire which he had conquered.

Almost from the moment of his death, Alexander was worshipped as a
god.  He was the great hero of his age, and even in his life-time, it
was believed that he was half-divine.  Dying so young, he was only
thirty-three, possessed of great strength and god-like beauty,
capable of rare generosity, brave almost to recklessness, planning
conquests so far-reaching that they appealed to the imagination of
everyone, given to outbursts of savage anger and vindictive rage, all
these characteristics were looked upon as more than human.  For more
than two thousand years, the name of Alexander has been immortal in
the East.  There is hardly an ancient city from Babylon almost to the
borders of China, that does not claim Alexander as its founder; his
name still clings to old traditions and legends; to this very day the
Parsees curse him for having caused the destruction of the ancient
sacred Persian writings when he captured Persepolis and burnt it.
Later generations of men have differed as to the lasting value of
some of his work, but the name of Alexander, and the story of his
hero-deeds have become a permanent possession of the imagination of
mankind.



[1] From Justin.

[2] Arrian: _Anabasis of Alexander_.

[3] Plutarch: _Life of Demosthenes_.

[4] Plutarch: _Life of Demosthenes_.

[5] Third Philippic.

[6] Second Olynthiac Oration.

[7] On the Crown.

[8] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[9] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[10] Ibid.

[11] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[12] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[13] Arrian: _Anabasis of Alexander_.

[14] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[15] Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.

[16] Arrian: _Anabasis of Alexander_.

[17] Arrian: _Anabasis of Alexander_.

[18] From Plutarch: _Life of Alexander_.




{358}

CHAPTER XIX

THE GIFTS OF GREECE TO THE WORLD


I. THE GREEK SPIRIT

What man achieves is, in regard to its permanent value, of less
importance than the spirit in which he achieves it; what one learns
is of less importance than how one learns; learning facts is of less
importance than developing certain qualities of mind.  It is not
possible, and were it possible it would not be desirable, to
reproduce in modern life, the conditions of a past age, but certain
qualities of the mind and spirit are undying, and some of the
greatest of these qualities have come to us from the Greeks.


    History is the story of the way in which man has learned and is
    still learning, how to live: of how through long centuries he has
    sought to satisfy the practical needs of his body, the
    questioning of his mind, and the searching of his spirit.[1]


Mankind is still engaged upon the high adventure for this three-fold
quest, and not yet has any one civilization succeeded in bringing
into perfect accord the demands of the body, of the mind, and of
{359} the spirit.  If, in the beginning of this story in the ancient
world, the Hebrews stand supreme amongst the teachers of those who
have sought to satisfy the searching of the spirit, so are the Greeks
the great teachers of those who have sought to satisfy the
questioning of the mind.  The Greeks gave to the mind of man three
definite qualities: the love of Freedom, the love of Truth, and the
love of Beauty.  These are practical qualities which show themselves
quite definitely in what the Greeks did, in what they thought and in
what they built, or in other words, in their political history, their
literature and their art.

It must not be thought that the Greeks perfectly fulfilled their
great ideals.  Greek history shows quite clearly that they did not.
If the story of the Greeks as it has been told in this book has
emphasized their ideals rather than their failure always to attain
these, it is because their ideals are the imperishable gifts they
have given to the world.  But the Greeks were not dreamers; they were
practical men, keen and interested in all the practical affairs of
every day life.  Their history shows how they failed in perfectly
carrying out their ideals because of certain weaknesses of character
and of certain conditions and limitations in their life from which
the men of to-day can learn many useful lessons.  The greatness of
the Greeks lies, not in what they did not do or did imperfectly, but
in their spirit, that spirit which in their political history, their
literature and their art sought for Freedom, for Truth, and for
Beauty.

{360}

The Greeks showed the world the way to Freedom.  They won their own
national freedom against almost overwhelming odds, for never before
had a small country maintained her independence in the face of a
great empire, and been victorious.  They also maintained a political
freedom, which they carried too far, for the inability of Greek
states to form alliances and to unite was one of the sources of
weakness which finally led to their downfall.  Nevertheless the
spirit of sturdy independence is one that has endured.  The Greeks
carried their vision of freedom further than the political
independence of each state, and one of their chief characteristics
was their personal freedom.  In a speech to the Athenian army before
the battle in the harbour at Syracuse, Nicias "reminded them that
they were the inhabitants of the freest country in the world, and how
in Athens there was no interference with the daily life of any
man."[2]  Modern times are apt to pride themselves on the freedom of
speech allowed to all, but no modern state permits greater liberty of
speech (and some would not tolerate as much) than was allowed in
Athens in the fifth century B.C. when Aristophanes wrote his
satirical comedies.

The Greeks loved Truth.  By this is not meant truthfulness, for the
Greeks were insincere and never trusted even one another, but the
spirit which desired to see all things straight, "with an unclouded
clearness of mind"; the spirit which could distinguish clearly
between right and wrong, which {361} could judge without prejudice or
passion, above all the spirit which knew its own limitations and
which acknowledged what it did not know.  Perhaps the greatest Greek
searcher for truth was Socrates, and some knowledge of his life and
teaching will show us what is our debt to Greece in the story of how
the mind of man has gained freedom in its search for truth.



II. SOCRATES

During the last years of the Peloponnesian War, a strange figure
might have been seen in Athens: a short, ugly, odd-looking man,
poorly-clad and utterly indifferent to criticism of his habits or
appearance, but a man to whom every one listened when he began to
speak.  This was Socrates, the Greek philosopher.

His father was a stone-cutter and a poor man, but he seems to have
given to his son the best education that was to be had in Athens, for
Socrates often quoted from Greek literature, especially from Homer,
and he speaks of having studied with his friends "the treasures which
the wise men of old have left us in their books."

Very little is known of the early life of Socrates, but he passed his
youth and early manhood during the greatest years of Athenian
history.  He was born ten years after the Persian had been defeated
at Plataea and driven out of Greece; as a boy, he had seen the Long
Walls being built; he had grown up in the Athens of Pericles, a
contemporary of {362} Sophocles, and Euripides, of Pheidias and of
Thucydides.  When the clouds gathered over Athens and war came, he
served in the army as a common soldier; he had lived through the
short-lived triumphs and the tragic disasters which befell the city;
he had been hungry when food was scarce, he had seen Athens besieged
and taken; he had watched the Long Walls destroyed, and he had lived
through the Terror when the Thirty ruled Athens.  It was a life lived
in very stirring times, and Socrates had taken his share in the
happenings.  During the war, he served in one of the northern
campaigns, and he amazed everyone by his extraordinary power of
enduring hunger and thirst, and all the hardships of a cold Thracian
winter.  One of his friends says of this time that


    his fortitude in enduring cold was surprising.  There was a
    severe frost, for the winter in that region is really tremendous,
    and everybody else either remained indoors, or if they went out
    had on an amazing quantity of clothes, and were well shod, and
    had their feet swathed in felt and fleeces: in the midst of this,
    Socrates with his bare feet on the ice and in his ordinary dress
    marched better than the other soldiers who had shoes, and they
    looked daggers at him because he seemed to despise them.  Another
    tale of what he did on this expedition is worth hearing.  One
    morning, he was thinking about something which he could not
    resolve; he would not give it up, but continued thinking from
    early dawn until noon--there he stood fixed in thought; and at
    noon attention was drawn to him and the remark ran through the
    wondering crowd that {363} Socrates had been standing and
    thinking about something ever since the break of day.  At last in
    the evening after supper, some Ionians out of curiosity (I should
    explain that this was not in winter but in summer), brought out
    their mats and slept in the open air that they might watch him
    and see whether he would stand all night.  There he stood until
    the following morning, and with the return of light he offered up
    a prayer to the Sun and went his way.[3]


At the close of the war Socrates was in Athens, a man now of over
sixty years of age.  He held one or two offices of state, when he was
known for his fearless refusal to do what he thought was wrong.  On
one occasion he refused to obey orders that were given him, because
he believed that obedience would involve him in doing what he thought
to be wrong.  "I showed," he said, "not by mere words but by my
actions, that I did not care a straw for death: but that I did care
very much indeed about doing wrong."

Socrates was very poor and as he would take no money for his
teaching, his means of livelihood were very scanty.  He went about
barefoot and had only one cloak which he wore until it was so old
that it became a matter of joke amongst his friends.  He not only had
no luxuries of any kind, but hardly the bare necessities of life, yet
he was quite content and used to say: "How many things there are
which I do not want."  Socrates married Xanthippe, a woman of a most
violent temper.  He used to say that one ought to live with a restive
woman, just {364} as horsemen manage violent-tempered horses; and "as
they," said he, "when they have once mastered them, are easily able
to manage all others; so I, after managing Xanthippe, can easily live
with anyone else whatever."[4]

The Athenians had always been intellectually very alert and had tried
to solve all kinds of problems.  They asked how it was that things
came into being, how they continued to exist, of what they were made
and similar questions.  But when Athens had become an Empire and
ruled over many men and states, the questions began to change.
People were less interested in how things originated, than in
questions arising from their daily experience.  They asked, what is a
state, what is a citizen, what is justice, what is temperance,
courage, cowardice and so on.  In order to answer these questions, a
body of teachers had arisen in Athens who were called Sophists, or
_Wise Men_.  They taught every kind of subject and established a
number of schools.  The older Greek teachers did not like these
Sophists, partly because they took money for their teaching, and
hitherto, though Athenian philosophers had accepted presents, they
had never charged definite fees; partly because they taught so many
subjects that it was thought they could teach nothing thoroughly;
partly because they seemed to aim at teaching young men to argue in
order to get the better of their opponents rather than to seek for
Truth; and above all, because they were often sceptical as to the
existence of the gods.  There {365} were some very good teachers
amongst the Sophists, and they opened up a great many new fields of
thought to the Athenians, but a weak side to their teaching was that
they only stated general principles, and often asserted as absolute
facts things that never had been definitely proved one way or the
other.  They used words carelessly without stopping to think of their
real meaning, and they never suggested that there was anything they
did not know.

Socrates saw that though the teaching of the Sophists might increase
_information_ it was fatal to real thinking, and he began to teach in
Athens in order to show what real thinking was.  He taught in no
school, had no classes and took no pay.  He was willing to talk to
any and everyone who would listen to him.  He ever


    lived in the public eye; at early morning he was to be seen
    betaking himself to one of the promenades or wrestling grounds;
    at noon he would appear with the gathering crowds in the
    market-place; and as day declined, wherever the largest throng
    might be encountered, there was he to be found, talking for the
    most part, while anyone who chose might stop and listen.[5]


Socrates talked to and questioned everyone and tried to show people
what real knowledge was.  He was filled with a passionate belief in
the importance of truth above all things.  He said that to make
inaccurate statements and to use words with a wrong or careless
meaning was "not only a fault in itself, {366} it also created an
evil in the soul."  He showed those who listened to him the evil that
came from pretending to know what one did not know, and the first
step in his teaching was to make them realize their ignorance.  To
this end he questioned and cross-examined them, until they
contradicted themselves, or found no answer and generally ended in
hopeless difficulties, simply because they would not acknowledge at
the beginning that they did not know what he had asked.  One of his
friends once said: "Indeed, Socrates, I no longer believe in my
answers; everything seems to me to be different from what it used to
seem," and another speaking of him said: "Socrates makes me
acknowledge my own worthlessness.  I had best be silent for it seems
that I know nothing at all."

Socrates believed that Virtue was Knowledge, that if a man knew a
thing was wrong, he would not do it, and that those who knew what was
right would always do it.  In this Socrates was not wholly right; he
only saw a part of the truth, but his greatness lies in that he was
the first to teach the importance of having a reason for what we
believe, of learning accurate habits of mind, and that the search for
knowledge is one rich in imagination and beauty.

Socrates was always arguing, talking, questioning, but he was never
rude or discourteous to those who disagreed with him, he never
brought his own personal feelings into his arguments, and he never
descended to expressions of wounded pride or irritation.

{367}

The teaching of Socrates opened the minds of those who listened to
him to the possibilities to which knowing the truth might lead them,
and he had great influence over numbers of young Athenians.  It was
all new to them, they had never heard anything like it before.  "Mere
fragments of you and your words," said one of them, "even at
second-hand, and however imperfectly repeated, amaze and possess the
soul of anyone who hears them," and he went on to say,


    I have heard Pericles and other great orators and I thought that
    they spoke well, but I never had any similar feeling; my soul was
    not stirred by them, nor was I angry at the thought of my own
    slavish state.  But this Socrates has often brought me to such a
    pass that I have felt as if I could hardly endure the life I am
    leading.  For he makes me confess that I ought not to live as I
    do, neglecting the wants of my own soul.  And he is the only
    person who ever made me ashamed, and there is no one else who
    does the same.[6]


But if Socrates gained friends, his method of exposing the ignorance
of others also gained him enemies.  No one before had ever thought
such thoughts, and to ordinary Athenians his questioning was wicked.
But Xenophon, one of his friends, tells us that "no one ever heard
him say or saw him do anything impious or irreverent, and he was so
piously and devoutly religious that he would take no step apart from
the will of heaven."  Yet his {368} enemies maintained that he
disbelieved in the gods.  His teaching was all the more disturbing
because Athens, having been defeated by Sparta, had just lived
through the terrible months of the rule of the Thirty, and though
these had been driven out, (this was in the year 399 B.C.), Athens
was in a state of unrest, of fear and of suspicion.  Anyone who
taught anything new was looked upon as a possible enemy to the state,
and the enemies of Socrates seized this opportunity to bring definite
accusations against him.  They said: "Socrates is guilty, inasmuch as
he does not believe in the gods whom the city worships, but
introduces other strange deities; he is also guilty inasmuch as he
corrupts the young men, and the punishment he has incurred is
death."[7]

A trial followed.  In an Athenian trial, first the accusers made
their speeches, and then the accused was allowed to defend himself.
Plato, the great pupil of Socrates, has given us the speech made by
his master at his trial, a speech known as the _Apology of Socrates_.
In it, the philosopher, an old man now of over seventy, set forth the
principles which had guided him in his teaching.

He began by saying that he had never taught men to disbelieve in the
gods, and that the accusation of impiety against him was false, but
he did say that it was fair to ask him just what he had been trying
to do which had given rise to these reports.  He then told them the
story of how a friend of his had gone to Delphi, and had asked the
Oracle if there were {369} any man wiser than he, and that the Oracle
had answered that there was no man.


    Now see why I tell you this.  I am going to explain to you the
    origin of my unpopularity.  When I heard of the Oracle I began to
    reflect.  What can God mean by this dark saying?  I know very
    well that I am not wise, even in the smallest degree.  Then what
    can he mean by saying that I am the wisest of men?  It cannot be
    that he is speaking falsely, for he is a god and cannot lie.  And
    for a long time I was at a loss to understand his meaning: then,
    very reluctantly, I turned to seek for it in this manner.  I went
    to a man who was reputed to be wise, thinking that there, if
    anywhere, I should prove the answer wrong, and meaning to point
    out to the Oracle its mistake, and to say, "You said that I was
    the wisest of men, but this man is wiser than I am."


But Socrates went on to say that after talking to this man, who was a
politician, he found that he was not wise because he thought he knew
things that he did not know, and because he would not acknowledge his
ignorance.  He tried to prove to him that he was not wise, but only
succeeded in making him his enemy.


    Next, [said Socrates], I went to another who was reputed to be
    still wiser than the last, with exactly the same result.  And
    there again I made him, and many other men, my enemies.

    By reason of this examination, Athenians, I have made many
    enemies of a very fierce and bitter kind, who have spread abroad
    a great number of calumnies about me, {370} and people say that I
    am a "wise man."  For the bystanders always think that I am wise
    myself in any matter wherein I convict another man of ignorance.
    But, my friends, I believe that only God is really wise: and that
    by this oracle he meant that men's wisdom is worth little or
    nothing.  I do not think that he meant that Socrates was wise.
    He only made use of my name, and took me as an example, as though
    he would say to men: "He among you is the wisest, who, like
    Socrates, knows that in very truth his wisdom is worth nothing at
    all."  And therefore I still go about testing and examining every
    man whom I think wise, whether he be a citizen or a stranger, as
    God has commanded me: and whenever I find that he is not wise, I
    point out to him on the part of God that he is not wise.  And I
    am so busy in this pursuit that I have never had leisure to take
    any part worth mentioning in public matters, or to look after my
    private affairs.  I am in very great poverty by reason of my
    service to God.[8]


Socrates then went on to prove that nothing in his teaching could
corrupt the young men, as his enemies declared he was doing, and to
prove his belief in the gods.  He knew that he was on trial for his
life, but no fear of death stopped him from speaking that which he
believed to be the truth.


    My friends, [he said], if you think that a man of any worth at
    all ought to reckon the chances of life and death when he acts,
    or that he ought to think of anything but whether he is acting
    rightly or wrongly, and as a good or bad man would act, you are
    grievously mistaken.  It would be very strange conduct on my
    {371} part if I were to desert my post now from fear of death or
    of any other thing, when God has commanded me, as I am persuaded
    that he has done, to spend my life in searching for wisdom, and
    in examining myself and others.  That would indeed be a very
    strange thing: and then certainly I might with justice be brought
    to trial for not believing in the gods; for I should be
    disobeying the Oracle, and fearing death, and thinking myself
    wise when I was not wise.  For to fear death, my friends, is only
    to think ourselves wise, without being wise: for it is to think
    that we know what we do not know.  For anything that man can
    tell, death may be the greatest good that can happen to them: but
    they fear it as if they knew quite well that it was the greatest
    of evils.  And what is this but that shameful ignorance of
    thinking that we know what we do not know?

    Athenians, if you put me to death, you will not easily find
    another man to fill my place.  God has sent me to attack the
    city, as if it were a great and noble horse, to use a quaint
    simile, which was rather sluggish for its size, and which needed
    to be roused by a gadfly: and I think that I am that gadfly that
    God has sent to the city to attack it; for I never cease from
    settling upon you as it were at every point, and rousing and
    exhorting, and reproaching each man of you all day long.[9]


Socrates then referred to the custom in Athens that when a man was on
trial for his life, his wife and children sometimes appeared in court
in order to appeal to the pity of the judges and so obtain a
favourable sentence, but he refused to do that, for knowing that the
judges had taken an oath to administer justice justly, he believed
that such an {372} act on his part would be an attempt to make them
break their oaths.


    Were I to be successful and to prevail on you by my prayers to
    break your oaths, I should be clearly teaching you to believe
    that there are no gods; and I should be simply accusing myself by
    my defence of not believing in them.  But, Athenians, that is
    very far from the truth.  I do believe in the gods as no one of
    my accusers believes in them: and to you and to God I commit my
    cause to be decided as is best for you and for me.


Socrates was found guilty by 281 votes to 220, and the penalty to be
inflicted was death.  He had the right under Athenian law to suggest
an alternative penalty.


    What counter-penalty shall I propose to you Athenians?  What I
    deserve, of course, must I not?  What is a suitable reward to be
    given to a poor benefactor who requires leisure to exhort you?
    There is no reward, Athenians, so suitable for him as a public
    maintenance in the Prytaneum.  It is a much more suitable reward
    for him than for any of you who has won a victory at the Olympic
    Games with his horse or his chariots.  So if I am to propose the
    penalty which I really deserve, I propose this--a public
    maintenance in the Prytaneum.

    Or shall I propose imprisonment?  And why should I pass the rest
    of my days in prison, the slave of successive officials?  Or
    shall I propose a fine, with imprisonment until it is paid?  I
    have told you why I will not do that.  I should have to continue
    in prison, for I have no money to pay a fine with.  Shall I then
    propose exile?  {373} Perhaps you would agree to that.  Life
    would indeed be very dear to me if I were unreasonable enough to
    expect that strangers would cheerfully tolerate my discussions
    and reasonings, when you who are my fellow-citizens cannot endure
    them, and have found them so burdensome and odious to you that
    you are seeking now to be released from them.  No indeed,
    Athenians, that is not likely.  A fine life I should lead for an
    old man, if I were to withdraw from Athens, and pass the rest of
    my days in wandering from city to city, and continually being
    expelled.[10]


The alternatives were not accepted, as indeed Socrates knew they
would not be, and he was condemned to die.  He accepted the sentence
calmly, "and with infinite gentleness and manliness.  No one within
the memory of man, it is said, ever bowed his head to death more
nobly."[11]  But death offered no terrors to Socrates.


    If death [he said to his judges] is a journey to another place,
    and the common belief be true, that there are all who have died,
    what good could be greater than this?  Would a journey not be
    worth taking, at the end of which, in the other world, we should
    be released from the self-styled judges who are here, and should
    find the true judges who are said to sit in judgment below?  Or
    what would you not give to converse with Orpheus and Homer?  I am
    willing to die many times if this be true.  And above all, I
    could spend my time in examining those who are there, as I
    examine men here, and in finding out which of them thinks himself
    {374} wise, when he is not wise.  What would we not give, my
    judges, to be able to examine the great leader of the expedition
    against Troy, or Odysseus, or countless other men and women whom
    we could name?.  It would be an infinite happiness to converse
    with them, and to live with them, and to examine them.  Assuredly
    there they do not put men to death for doing that.  For besides
    the other ways in which they are happier than we are, they are
    immortal, at least if the common belief be true.

    But now the time has come, and we must go hence; I to die, and
    you to live.  Whether life or death is better is known to God,
    and to God only.[12]


Socrates was taken to prison where he spent a month before his
sentence was carried out.  The delay was caused by the voyage of the
sacred ship, said to be that of Theseus, which had only just set out
on its annual voyage to Delos, and no Athenian could be put to death
during its absence.[13]  He spent this month talking to his friends,
especially to Crito, who was very devoted to him, and who entreated
him to escape from prison, an escape for which he could very easily
have arranged.  But the brave old man, loyal to his principles to the
end, refused, and he reminded Crito how all his life he had taught
that the greatest misfortune that could befall a man was to do wrong,
and the greatest crime a man could commit against his state was to
break her laws.

The last day arrived.  The story of that day has been told by one who
was present:

{375}


    I will try to relate the whole story to you from the beginning.
    On the previous days I and the others who had always met in the
    morning at the court where the trial was held, which was close to
    the prison; and then we had gone in to Socrates.  We used to wait
    each morning until the prison was opened, conversing: for it was
    not opened early.  When it was opened, we used to go in to
    Socrates, and we generally spent the whole day with him.  But on
    that morning we met earlier than usual; for the evening before we
    had learnt, on leaving the prison, that the ship had arrived from
    Delos.  So we arranged to be at the usual place as early as
    possible.  When we reached the prison, the porter, who generally
    let us in, came out to us and bade us wait a little, and not to
    go in until he summoned us himself; "for the Eleven," he said,
    "are releasing Socrates from his fetters, and giving directions
    for his death today."  In no great while he returned and bade us
    enter.  So we went in and found Socrates just released, and
    Xanthippe, you know her, sitting by him, holding his child in her
    arms.  When Xanthippe saw us, she wailed aloud, and cried, in her
    woman's way, "This is the last time, Socrates, that you will talk
    with your friends, or they with you."  And Socrates glanced at
    Crito, and said, "Crito, let her be taken home."  So some of
    Crito's servants led her away, weeping bitterly and beating her
    breast.[14]


Once more Socrates and his friends conversed, and once more he
expressed his joy at "going to the place where he hoped to gain the
wisdom that he had passionately longed for all his life."  They
talked together until later in the day, and then {376} he rose and
went into another room to bathe himself:


    Crito went with him and told us to wait.  So we waited, talking
    of him and dwelling on the greatness of the calamity which had
    fallen upon us: it seemed as if we were going to lose a father,
    and to be orphans for the rest of our life.  When he had bathed,
    and his children had been brought to him, he had two sons quite
    little, and one grown up, and the women of his family were come,
    he spoke with them in Crito's presence and gave them his last
    commands; then he sent the women and children away, and returned
    to us.  By that time it was near the hour of sunset, for he had
    been a long while within.  When he came back to us he sat down,
    but not much was said after that.


Presently the gaoler came in and told him that the hour had come for
him to die:


    I have found you, [he said], the noblest and best man that has
    ever come here; and now I am sure that you will not be angry with
    me, but with those who you know are to blame.  And so, farewell,
    and try to bear what must be as lightly as you can; you know why
    I have come.


With that he turned away weeping and went out.


    Then Crito made a sign to his slave who was standing by, and the
    slave went out, and after some delay returned with the man who
    was to give the poison, carrying it prepared in a cup.  When
    Socrates saw him, he asked, "You understand these things, my good
    sir, what have I to do?"

    {377}

    "You have only to drink this," he replied, "and to walk about
    until your legs feel heavy, and then lie down; and it will act of
    itself."  With that he handed the cup to Socrates, who took it
    quite cheerfully, without trembling, and without any change of
    colour or of feature, and looked up at the man with that fixed
    glance of his, and asked, "What say you to making a libation of
    this draught?  May I, or not?"  "We only prepare so much as we
    think sufficient, Socrates," he answered.  "I understand," said
    Socrates.  "But I suppose that I may, and must, pray to the gods
    that my journey hence may be prosperous: that is my prayer; be it
    so."  With these words he put the cup to his lips and drank the
    poison quite calmly and cheerfully.  Till then most of us had
    been able to control our grief fairly well; but when we saw him
    drinking, and then the poison finished, we could do so no longer:
    my tears came fast in spite of myself: it was not for him, but at
    my own misfortune in losing such a friend.  Even before that
    Crito had been unable to restrain his tears, and had gone away,
    and Apollodorus, who had never once ceased weeping the whole
    time, burst into a loud cry, and made us one and all break down
    by his sobbing and grief, except only Socrates himself.  "What
    are you doing, my friends?" he exclaimed.  "I sent away the women
    chiefly in order that they might not offend in this way; for I
    have heard that a man should die in silence.  So calm yourselves
    and bear up."  When we heard that we were ashamed, and we ceased
    from weeping.[15]


Socrates then walked about a little, but soon lay down on the couch,
and slowly the numbness crept {378} over him.  He knew that when it
reached his heart, he would die.  Once more he spoke.  "Crito," he
said, "I owe a cock to Aesculapius; do not forget to pay it."  These
were his last words, for in a few minutes he was dead.


    Such was the end [said the friend who was with him to the last]
    of a man who, I think, was the wisest and justest, and the best
    man that I have ever known.  But I did not pity him, for he
    seemed to me happy, both in his bearing and in his words, so
    fearlessly and nobly did he die.  I could not help thinking that
    the gods would watch over him still on his journey to the other
    world, and that when he arrived there it would be well with him,
    if it was ever well with any man.[16]



    III. GREEK LITERATURE: THE PHILOSOPHERS

    The word _philosophy_ means the love of wisdom, and to the Greeks
    this wisdom was the serious effort made to understand both the
    world and man.  To us _philosophy_ generally means a wise
    understanding of the right way of living, but with the Greeks it
    included a great deal of what we to-day call _science_.  Greek
    philosophy was concerned with finding out the origins of things,
    and from that knowledge to build up a right way of life.  We do
    not to-day go to the Greeks to learn science: their answers to
    the questions asked were, some of them, wrong, and some of them
    inadequate.  But modern science has been made possible by the
    qualities of mind which {379} the Greeks brought to their
    enquiries: their passionate desire to know the truth about
    things, their power of going behind old superstitions, and of
    seeing things as they really are, their open-mindedness and
    willingness to accept new truths, their powers of patient study
    and observation and of reaching the unknown from the known.

    The earliest Greek philosophers lived in Ionia in the sixth
    century B.C., and the greatest of them were Thales of Miletus and
    Pythagoras of Samos.  Something has already been said about
    Thales.[17]  He went further than the Egyptians and Babylonians
    had done, not so much because of the new discoveries he made, but
    because he brought to those discoveries not only the desire to
    know that they were facts, but the desire to go behind the facts
    and find out the reason for their existence.

    Thales lived to be an old man, but neither age nor infirmities
    lessened his zeal for learning, and


    it is said that once he was led out of his house by an old woman
    for the purpose of observing the stars, and he fell into a ditch
    and bewailed himself, on which the old woman said to him: "Do
    you, O Thales, who cannot see what is under your feet, think that
    you shall understand what is in heaven?"[18]


Pythagoras of Samos lived later in the sixth century than Thales.  He
was a great traveller and seems to have visited not only the mainland
of Greece, but also Egypt and Crete, where he had {380} many rare
experiences going into the innermost parts of temples where as a rule
no strangers were admitted.  He also went to Italy where he founded a
school, and gathered about three hundred pupils round him.

Though it was not believed by the world at large until nearly two
thousand years later, Pythagoras taught that the world was round,
and, as far as is known, he was the first thinker who made this
discovery.  It was Pythagoras who laid the foundations for later
mathematical knowledge, especially in geometry and arithmetic, and
who taught that there was a science of numbers apart from their use
as a practical means of calculation.

In the fifth century B.C., Athens had become an Empire and the
"school of Hellas," and the centre of Greek learning was found there
and no longer in Ionia.  The story of Socrates has already been
told.[19]  This great teacher did not write anything himself because
he believed that it was a greater thing for a man to live well than
to write well, and that his particular way of teaching and constant
intercourse with his fellow-men was the best way of teaching those
truths in which he believed.  The account of his life and teaching,
however, was written down and given to the world by his pupil Plato,
who carried on his master's work.  Plato was about twenty-eight years
old when Socrates was put to death, and for twelve years after that
time he travelled.  Then he returned to Athens, bought a house and
garden (unlike Socrates he was well-off), and spent the {381} next
forty years of his life teaching in the Academy.  Plato was an
idealist, and in addition to his writings about Socrates, he has left
us the _Republic_, the picture of what he thought an ideal state
should be, and some other works in which he discusses at great length
what things it is most worth while that men should pursue in life,
and why they should pursue them.  He taught that goodness was worth
being sought after for its own sake and not for any material reward
that comes from pursuing it.  In all his teaching he emphasizes the
fact that the greatest things in life and those which are eternal are
not always the things that can be seen, and that the soul of man does
not live on material things but on wisdom, beauty, truth and love.
The importance of Plato in this teaching was that he was the
forerunner of the great Christian writers who believed with St. Paul
that "the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal."[20]

As a young man, Plato had seen in Athens under the rule of the
Thirty, the lawlessness and confusion that arose from a tyrannously
ordered state, and the _Republic_ was an attempt to show what he
thought life in an ideal state might be.  His vision is not a very
practical one, but Plato was not a practical statesman.  The great
value of the _Republic_ to the world to-day is that just because its
ideals could never be wholly carried out, the questions which all
statesmen in all ages have had to settle, could be and were
fearlessly discussed, unhampered {382} by the compromises and
conventions which beset modern politics.

Plato could write of other things besides politics and ideals.  He
had a gift for poetry which comes out in many a fairy-tale that he
introduces here and there into his writings, knowing that sometimes a
great truth can be more easily driven home in such a form.  Socrates
and a friend were once walking by the stream Ilissus.  It was a hot
summer's day, and as they were barefoot, they cooled their feet in
the water and then sat down under the shade of a plane-tree to rest
and talk.  And as they rested, Socrates told his friend the legend of
the grasshoppers.  They were said to have been


    human beings in an age before the Muses.  And when the Muses came
    and song appeared they were ravished with delight; and singing
    always, never thought of eating and drinking, until at last in
    their forgetfulness they died.  And now they live again in the
    grasshoppers; and this is the return which the Muses make to
    them: they neither hunger nor thirst, but from the hour of their
    birth they are always singing, and never eating or drinking; and
    when they die they go and inform the Muses in heaven who honours
    them on earth.[21]


When Philip of Macedon wanted the best Greek teacher known as a tutor
for his son Alexander, he sent for Aristotle.  We know very little
about the life of Aristotle.  He had been a pupil of Plato at the
Academy for twenty years and had learnt the best of all that great
philosopher could teach him.  {383} On his return from Macedonia, he
founded a school of his own at Athens, the Lyceum, where he spent the
rest of his life teaching and studying.  He died in 322 B.C., one
year after his pupil Alexander.  But if little is known of the
details of his life, we know something of his character from things
that Alexander said about him, and the esteem in which he held him,
and something of the kindliness of his nature from his will which has
been preserved.  He made provision for all who had faithfully served
him and gave many of his slaves their freedom.  He had been twice
married, and his second wife "who behaved so well towards me," was so
provided for that she could marry again, and he made arrangements for
the marriage of his daughter.  In reading of the life of the Athenian
man and the Athenian woman, their ways seem to lie far apart and the
wife to have had very little share in the interests of her husband.
In his will Aristotle gives us a glimpse of the place which the wife
sometimes, at least, held.  He left directions that the bones of his
first wife, the wife of his youth, were to be taken from their
resting-place and buried with his, and this was to be done "as she
herself charged."

The work of Aristotle is amazing, for he not only wrote on every
conceivable subject, but wrote as a master.  For more than a thousand
years after his death, the books he wrote were studied in schools and
universities, and formed the foundation of all education.  He wrote
on astronomy, mathematics, biology, botany and many other subjects,
and he has not only been called the _Father of Natural Science_,
{384} but his writings remained the standard authority on many
scientific subjects for centuries after his death.  Aristotle was
more practical than Plato, though less inspiring as a writer.  As we
have already seen, he, too, wrote about an ideal state in his
_Politics_.[22]  Aristotle believed that the life of a state was like
that of an individual; that the aim of both should be noble living,
and that peace and justice between states was just as important as
between individuals.  But he did more than describe an ideal state;
he described the education which such a state should give to its
youth, the result of which should be not that a man should boast that
his state was great and glorious, but that, being the citizen of such
a state, in all that he did he should strive to be worthy of her.

Greek philosophy and science had begun in Ionia and then passed to
Athens.  To the thinkers of the fourth century B.C. the fall of
Athens must have seemed a great disaster, but in reality it was of
the utmost service to the world.  The Greek spirit was one of those
imperishable things that cannot die, and it was to go out from Athens
and spread over a wider world than it had hitherto known.  It spread
first to Alexandria where, in the Hellenistic Age, the next great
group of philosophers and men of science were to be found.



IV. GREEK LITERATURE: THE HISTORIANS

The word _history_ is a Greek word and means an _enquiry_.  The
Greeks were not the first people in {385} the world who wrote
history, but they wrote it as it had never been written before, and
some of the greatest history in the world is that which was written
by Greeks.  These writers were not content with merely narrating
events that had taken place, they made what the word history means,
an enquiry.  They possessed the imagination, not only to describe
events and scenes vividly, but to feel as the people about whom they
were writing felt, and to understand the passions that moved them at
great crises of their history.  They were the first historians who
took the trouble to find out why nations and individuals acted as
they did, and to sift their evidence, finding out what was true and
what was false.

The oldest of the Greek historians was Herodotus, the _Father of
History_, an Ionian born in Halicarnassus in 484 B.C.  He spent a
good part of his life travelling, during which time he collected
materials which he afterwards used in his history.  He was a man who
was intensely interested in everything he saw, a very credulous
traveller, for he seems to have believed almost everything that was
told him: old traditions, all kinds of miraculous occurrences, and
many things that it is evident could never have happened.  Though he
undoubtedly believed a great deal that was not true, he did not
swallow all that was told him, for after narrating some marvel he
will say: "I am bound to report all that is said, but I am not bound
to believe it."

Herodotus was a deeply religious man, and he lived before the
disturbing days when men began to {386} question the existence of the
gods.  To him history was a great drama, the plot of which was the
triumph of the Greek over the Barbarian, which he saw as the will of
the gods, and to him, as to all devout Greeks of his day, all
wrong-doing, all disobedience to the will of the gods brought its own
punishment, its retribution, what the Greeks called its Nemesis.

As a story-teller, Herodotus is unrivalled.  He wrote his history in
order that "the great and wonderful deeds done by the Greeks and
Persians should not lack renown," and the earlier books which give an
account of all he had learnt in his travels in the East, of Egypt and
Babylonia, of Lydia and Persia, lead up to the great climax, the
invasion of Greece by the Persians.[23]  In the pages of Herodotus we
live again, as we live nowhere else, through all the excitement and
thrill of the days when Greece fought the Barbarian and drove him out
of the land.

The greatest of the Greek historians was Thucydides, great not only
among the Greek writers, but among the historians of the world.  He
was born about 471 B.C., and he wrote the history of the
Peloponnesian War.  Thucydides was an Athenian, a man of wealth and
good position, and was one of the few who had the plague and
recovered from it.  As the war went on, he was anxious to fight and
help to bring it to a victorious close, but a far greater career was
in store for him.  He was elected a general and sent at the head of
an army to relieve {387} Amphipolis and prevent its surrender to the
Spartans.  But he arrived too late, the city had been taken, and he
was exiled in consequence.[24]  To this exile we owe his history.

Thucydides is one of the most accurate and impartial of historians.
He was filled with an abiding love for Athens, but, unlike some
Athenians, he felt no bitterness towards her for exiling him.  The
only remark he makes about his banishment is that it gave him the
opportunity to write his history.  He was scrupulously fair to both
sides, and he tells us himself of the care he took to be accurate and
to accept nothing on the evidence of mere tradition.


    Men do not discriminate, [he said], and are too ready to receive
    ancient traditions about their own as well as about other
    countries; and so little trouble do they take in the search after
    truth; so readily do they accept whatever comes first to hand.
    Of the events of the war I have not ventured to speak from any
    chance information, nor according to any notion of my own; I have
    described nothing but what I either saw myself, or learned from
    others of whom I made the most careful and particular enquiry.
    The task was a laborious one, because eye-witnesses of the same
    occurrences gave different accounts of them, as they remembered
    or were interested in the actions of one side or the other.  If
    he who desires to have before his eyes a true picture of the
    events which have happened, and of the like events which may be
    expected to happen hereafter in the order of human things, shall
    pronounce what I have written {388} to be useful, then I shall be
    satisfied.  My history is an everlasting possession, not a prize
    composition which is heard and forgotten.[25]


Unlike Herodotus, Thucydides did not trace events to the will of the
gods, but he held that the deeds of men and the use or misuse they
made of their opportunities were responsible for them.  He never
moralizes, but in the clear and reasoned order in which he narrates
events the story is carried down from the beginning to its inevitable
conclusion.

Thucydides has preserved for all time the memory of what Athens was
in her greatest days, and the ideals of one of her great
statesmen.[26]  But the claim of his book to be an "everlasting
possession" is justified not because of the actual history he
recorded, but because of the critical and scientific way in which he
made his enquiry which has become a model for all later historians.

Thucydides left the story of the Peloponnesian War unfinished; he
never even finished the last sentence.  The story was completed by
Xenophon.  He was not a great historian like his predecessors, but he
has left us valuable information about the later events of the war in
the _Hellenica_, the romantic tale of adventure which tells how a
band of Ten Thousand Greeks found their way home from the heart of
Mesopotamia,[27] and the _Economist_, a delightful picture of a Greek
household.[28]

{389}

There is one other Greek writer, who, though he did not write
history, has left us much valuable historical information.  This was
Plutarch (A.D. 46-120) who lived long after the great days of Greece
had passed.  He was a Greek from Boeotia, a well-educated man who had
many friends with whom he was wont to discuss all kinds of subjects:
Philosophy, history, literature, or politics, and he was also a
writer.  The great work for which his name is remembered is the
_Parallel Lives of the Greeks and Romans_.  These are the
biographies, arranged in pairs of a Greek and a Roman, each pair
followed by a comparison between the two.  Plutarch never imagined
that he was writing history, and in these _Lives_ there is no wide
view over a whole period, but in each life there is a vivid picture
of a personality and a character.  Plutarch knew how to choose
picturesque details and anecdotes, and he was attracted by simple,
upright, honourable, patriotic characters, which makes his book a
storehouse of stories about such men.  Few biographies in the world
have been read so widely or have achieved such immortality as have
the _Lives_ of Plutarch, and probably none have done more to
encourage manliness and the spirit of good sportsmanship.



V. GREEK LITERATURE: THE DRAMATISTS

A classic is a work of art or of literature that never dies, a book
that will be read forever, no matter when or by whom it was written.
We have said that when the history of a nation is recorded in {390}
language we call it literature, but by such literature is meant not
only historical writing, but whatever takes the form of letters.  The
history of a nation is an enquiry into how that nation _thinks_ as
well as into what it _does_, and its philosophers, historians and
dramatists are as much a part of its history as its statesmen and men
of action.  The great Greek dramatists were men living the life of
their time, and it was a time when stirring things were happening.
The dramas of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides were written during
the period which began with the repulse of the Persians, which
included the golden days of Pericles, and which saw the tragic
changes which came over Athens during the long-drawn-out misery of
the Peloponnesian War.

Now the great Greek dramas are among the classics of the world.[29]
There are various reasons for this, but one, and not the least, is
that they are the outward expression of that love of beauty and of
self-control that is one of the priceless gifts of Greece to the
world.  To the Greek, beauty meant perfection in all that he did, the
association of beautiful words and forms with beautiful deeds and
scenes.  To him _beauty_ was the same as _goodness_, and ugliness was
evil.  And beauty meant self-control, the absence of all excess and
exaggeration.  The Greek dramatists had no models to guide them, yet
they produced works that almost perfectly attained this Greek ideal
of Beauty.

The oldest of these dramatists was Aeschylus.  He took an active part
in the Persian Wars, and he {391} thought this of so much greater
importance than any literary success he had achieved, that his
epitaph, said to have been written by himself, saying nothing about
his poetry, states only that he fought the Persians.  His name and
birthplace were inscribed and then that "the grove of Marathon can
bear witness to his good soldierhood, and the long-haired Mede who
felt it."  One of the few Greek plays of which the plot was not taken
from ancient Greek legend was the _Persians_ of Aeschylus,[30]
interesting because it is the first historical play written by a poet
who took part himself in the events of which it tells.

The greatest work of Aeschylus was a Trilogy, (i.e., three
consecutive plays bearing on the same subject): the _Agamemnon_, the
greatest of all his plays; the _Libation-Bearers_, and the _Furies_.
These tell the tale, so often told in the Greek drama, of the murder
by his wife of Agamemnon on his return from Troy, of Orestes who
avenged his father's death, of the Furies who followed him as a
result of his deed, and of how in the end he found release.  These
plays are haunted throughout by the belief that over certain families
hangs a curse, that the sins of their fathers are visited on their
children, and that from this punishment there is no escape.
Aeschylus was filled with the realization of the power of the great
unseen forces that move the world, but he believed that if on one
side there were the Furies demanding blood for blood, on the other
were Apollo and Athena, symbols of the self-control that could
overcome the heritage of anger and of passion.

{392}

Sophocles lived through the great years of Athens.  Only sixteen
years old when the battle of Salamis was fought, he must have been
filled with all the enthusiasm of youth over the victory.  It was
said of Sophocles that he had "such charm of character that he was
loved by everybody wherever he went."  Life seems to have been happy
and prosperous for him from the beginning.  He won the first prize at
the festival with his first play, and when he was only twenty-eight
he won a prize over Aeschylus who was then nearly sixty.

The greatest plays of Sophocles are those which tell of the ancient
legends of Thebes: of Oedipus as King, and then as Outcast, and of
_Antigone_, who in one play--_Oedipus at Colonus_--goes forth with
her exiled father, and in another, the great play that bears her
name, was faced with the terrible problem of having to break either
the laws of God or those of the state, and of deciding which she
would do.  By all who understand the real greatness of the Greek
drama, Sophocles is accounted the greatest of the dramatists.  He
represents in literature the spirit that Athena Parthenos represented
on the Acropolis: a spirit of reverence, of the serenity that comes
when the conflict is over and the victory won, and of triumphant
belief in all that is good and beautiful and true.

[Illustration: SOPHOCLES.  Lateran Museum, Rome]

Very different from either Aeschylus or Sophocles was Euripides.
According to tradition, he was born in the island of Salamis on the
very day of the battle.  As he grew up, he became a friend of
Socrates, but for the most part he lived a solitary {393} life, not
very much liked, and taking as little part in public life as he
could.  He was essentially a student, and was one of the first
Athenians to collect a library.  Euripides lived in Athens during the
Peloponnesian War, a period of restless questioning, of breaking away
from old traditions and beliefs, of lowering of the old ideals.  The
war had brought a new spirit and Euripides represented it.  He
criticized customs and beliefs which he thought were unworthy of the
best spirit in Athens, he questioned belief in the gods, and in one
great play, the _Trojan Women_,[31] he showed the misery brought by
war.  He was the first poet to strip war of its glamour and to show
it as it affected the conquered.  In the _Electra_ and in _Iphigenia
in Tauris_,[32] Euripides deals with the familiar tragedy of Orestes,
pursued by the Furies after the murder of his mother, and in the
_Alcestis_ he tells the old tale of how a noble woman was willing to
sacrifice her life for that of a selfish husband, and of how she was
brought back from the gates of Hades by Heracles.

The strength of Euripides lies in his wonderful portrayal of
character.  He judges his characters by the standards of the men and
women of his own day and not by those of the gods and heroes, and he
is a merciless critic.  This makes his dramas most extraordinarily
vivid and human, but it also accounts for some of the criticism and
dislike he met with in his own day.

Aristophanes wrote comedies.[33]  His plays are based on the daily
life of his time, and, to {394} understand them, one must know what
were the political questions of his day, who were the leaders, who
were the writers, the gossip of the Agora and the barber's shop, the
likes and dislikes of the men amongst whom he lived.  But to those
who know enough of these things to follow his allusions, the plays of
Aristophanes are full of interest, and we learn a great deal about
life in Athens from them.

Aristophanes was younger than Euripides, but, unlike the older man,
he was very conservative, and he disliked the new ways by which the
Sophists were teaching the youths, for he believed that the new
methods would make them irreverent, good at idle talk but at nothing
else, shallow and effeminate.  He constantly compared the young men
of his own day with those of the generation that had fought at
Marathon, and in comparing them he found them wanting, for to him the
heroes of the age of Marathon represented all that was best in
Athenian manhood.



VI. GREEK ART

The Greeks loved Beauty, especially the Athenians of the fifth
century B.C., but they did not spend all their time in a conscious
search for it.  They were very busy about and interested in a great
many other things: the administration of the city, relations with
other states, often fighting, trading and travelling, building ships
and sending out colonies.  We have already seen what the Greeks meant
by {395} Beauty,[34] and an appreciation of it touched all these
things.

Now a great mistake has been made in modern times in that art has too
often been looked upon as a luxury, as something that the rich can
have but not the poor, something that has not very much to do with a
practical every-day life.  But to believe that is to misunderstand
altogether what art is, for art is something that is _done_, not
something that is merely _looked at_.  All men have within them a
vision of what kind of world they would make, if it was left to them
to order, and in its widest meaning art is the outward and concrete
expression of that vision.  To confine art to architecture, sculpture
and painting, is to rob it of half its meaning.  The forms of art are
as many and varied as are the interests of every-day life, and this
belief is one of the great gifts of Greece to the world.  It was not
given to every Greek to be a great artist.  Not every one could be an
Aeschylus and write the _Agamemnon_, a Sophocles and write the
_Antigone_, a Pheidias and create the _Parthenon_, or a Praxiteles
and model the _Hermes_, but every one could work in the spirit of
which these great works are the supreme examples.

The history of a nation is an enquiry into how that nation expresses
itself in stone and marble, as well as into what it thinks and does;
and its architects, artists and sculptors stand beside its
historians, philosophers, dramatists and statesmen as the men who
have made its history.

In its narrower, modern sense, art is the {396} outward sign of the
spirit of a nation as it is expressed in painting and in stone and
marble.  Except for the vase-paintings, Greek painting has almost
entirely disappeared, but the achievements of the Greeks in
architecture and sculpture are amongst the greatest that the world
has ever seen.  Something has already been said about Greek
architecture[35]; the same spirit expressed itself in Greek
sculpture.  To know the Greeks and the real worth of what they have
given to the world, it is not enough to read _about_ them; one must
learn to know them at first-hand.  To do that one must read what they
wrote (if not in Greek, then in translations), and look at what they
built and at their sculpture (if not at the originals, then by means
of casts and photographs), and when one does that, one begins to know
a little of what the spirit was that produced such things.  The
Greeks considered that the human form was the most fitting subject
for representation in sculpture, yet they were not great portrait
makers; that was left for a later race to achieve.  What they aimed
at doing was to give outward expression to those qualities of the
mind and spirit which they, as a people, prized so highly: Beauty,
Self-control, Harmony, Restraint.  The greatest Greek sculpture was,
as it were, the answer, wrought in marble, to the prayer of Socrates
to Pan: "Beloved Pan, and all ye other gods who haunt this place,
give me beauty in the inward soul; and may the outward and the inward
man be at one."[36]

{397}

The Greeks lived at a time when so much was being done for the first
time, and to all their art they brought a spirit of Youth and of Joy
in creation, yet also a spirit of Patience in achieving results, for
they were never in a hurry, and they knew that there were no short
cuts to the perfection which was to them so important a part of
beauty.  Their statues are very idealistic, but their idealism was
practical, and though, as we know, they did not always fulfil their
ideals, they knew that fulfilment was possible.  Though the sculpture
of the Greeks represented man, not as he always was, but as they
believed he might be, did he but follow where his best instincts led,
it did sometimes result in something that to them was not only an
ideal, but something so real and life-like that they could say of a
sculptured figure of a Sleeping Ariadne:


    Strangers, touch not the marble Ariadne, lest she even start up
    on the quest of Theseus.[37]



[1] _The Book of the Ancient World_.

[2] Thucydides, VII.

[3] Plato: _Symposium_, translated by Jowett.

[4] Diogenes Laertius.

[5] Xenophon: _Memorabilia_.

[6] Plato: _Symposium_, translated by Jowett.

[7] Diogenes Laertius.

[8] Plato: _Apology_, translated by F. J. Church.

[9] Plato: _Apology_, translated by F. J. Church.

[10] Plato: _Apology_, translated by F. J. Church.

[11] Xenophon: _Memorabilia_.

[12] Plato: _Apology_, translated by F. J. Church.

[13] See p. 9.

[14] Plato: _Phaedo_, translated by F. J. Church.

[15] Plato: _Phaedo_, translated by F. J. Church.

[16] Plato: _Phaedo_, translated by F. J. Church.

[17] See p. 111.

[18] Diogenes Laertius.

[19] See p. 361 ff.

[20] II Corinthians IV, 18.

[21] Plato: _Phaedrus_, translated by Jowett.

[22] See p. 72.

[23] See Chapters viii and ix.

[24] See p. 302.

[25] Thucydides, I.

[26] See _The Funeral Speech_, p. 187.

[27] See Chapter XVI, v. _The March of the Ten Thousand_.

[28] See Chapter XII, ii. _The Athenian Lady_.

[29] For the construction of a Greek drama, see Chapter XIV.

[30]See p. 163.

[31] See p. 300.

[32] See Chapter XIV.

[33] See p. 300.

[34] See p. 390.

[35] See Chapter XV.

[36] See in this connection the reference to Praxiteles on p. 222.

[37] Author Unknown: From _Select Epigrams from the Greek Anthology_,
translated by J. W. Mackail.




{398}

CHAPTER XX

THE HELLENISTIC AGE


I. THE EXTENT OF GREEK INFLUENCE

Alexander was a great conqueror and he won for himself a mighty
empire.  But that empire did not last, for his successors were unable
to hold it together.  It would almost seem as if he had crowded into
his short reign of barely thirteen years, hero deeds and marvellous
exploits, which however much they may have done to enrich tradition
and to appeal to the imagination, were hardly of any great permanent
value.  Alexander, however, did more than create a passing empire; he
did more than any other one man to spread the knowledge of Greek
civilization over the world.  Wherever he passed with his conquering
army he founded cities, where he established colonies of Greeks: men
who spoke the Greek tongue, who worshipped the Greek gods, who read
and loved Greek literature, and who lived according to Greek ideals.
Such cities were founded in Egypt, in Asia Minor, in Syria, in
Babylonia, in Persia and even in the distant lands till then unknown,
further to the mysterious East.

{399}

But Alexander did yet more to spread Greek civilization than by the
founding of cities.  All the great ports of the Eastern Mediterranean
were in his hands, which meant that Greek merchants were established
there, and that the whole commerce of that region was in the hand of
Greeks.

The history of Greek civilization may be divided into two periods.
The first lasted until the days of Alexander; it included the early
experiments made by Greek states in the art of governing themselves,
the repulse of the Barbarian, the great days of Athens, the
disastrous Peloponnesian War.  Through all this period Greece was
learning how to do things.  She was in the making and was creating
what was to live as long as men should love what was great, but she
was living for herself.  This period is called the _Hellenic Period_.

Beginning with Alexander, Greek civilization stepped out into a new
age.  Greece was no longer living for herself, she was living for the
world.  Greek civilization had been far-flung over Asia; the
Barbarian was adopting Greek customs, Greece was the teacher of the
world, in science, in art, and in all that was meant by civilized
living.  This period lasted from the time of Alexander until Greece
became part of the Roman Empire in 146 B.C., and is known as the
_Hellenistic Age_.  The centre of Greek civilization was now no
longer in Athens, but in Alexandria, the city in Egypt founded by
Alexander, and which from its situation was the natural link between
the East and the West.


{400}

II. ALEXANDRIA

Alexandria had not been founded for very many years before she was
the rival of Carthage, that powerful commercial city founded by the
Phoenicians, as mistress of the Mediterranean, and in the Eastern
Mediterranean, known as the Levant, she held undisputed sway.  From
that time to the present day Alexandria has been the door through
which the commerce of the East and the West has passed.

In the Hellenistic Age, Alexandria developed into a very beautiful
city.  Temples and all kinds of public buildings, great palaces and
gardens, docks and warehouses were built.  At the entrance to the
harbour stood a great lighthouse, called the Pharos from the island
on which it stood, and which was considered so great a marvel that it
was numbered amongst the Seven Wonders of the ancient World.

This period was in many ways like a more modern one.  Greek
civilization had stepped out into a new world.  The conquering armies
of Alexander, going out to the ends of the earth, had made
communication possible between places that had hitherto hardly known
of each other's existence.  Science had made such remarkable strides
that man's power over nature had been enormously increased, and the
increase of scientific knowledge was affecting the old religious
beliefs in the gods.  Nothing seemed to be quite the same as it had
hitherto been, and then, as at all such times, the minds of {401} men
were affected by the changes.  Some became more conservative than
before and wanted nothing changed, because to them the old was
necessarily the best, and there was only evil in what was new.
Others went to the other extreme and wanted everything changed,
because to them the new must necessarily be better than the old.  But
quietly in between these two extremes were the thinkers, those who
were keeping alive that Greek spirit which knew that the vision of
the whole truth had not yet been given to any man, and that the way
to progress was not by destroying the old, but by building upon it in
order to go on from a firm foundation to a fuller knowledge of the
truth.  Not to Thales, nor to Socrates, nor to Aristotle, nor yet to
the men of the twentieth century has the complete vision of the truth
of all things been vouchsafed, but to those who follow the quest in
the spirit of the Greeks of old is granted to add a little to the
progress of human knowledge.

It was in the Museum at Alexandria that the thinkers worked.  This
Museum was founded by Ptolemy Soter, one of the rulers of Egypt after
the break-up of Alexander's empire, and very much developed by his
son, Ptolemy Philadelphus.  This Museum, the Temple of the Muses, was
what today would be called a university.  It had lecture halls where
mathematicians, astronomers, poets and philosophers taught; courts
and porches where men walked and talked, houses where the men of
learning lived.  Above all, it had a Library, which contained several
thousand books.  This library was {402} catalogued by Callimachus,
the first librarian of whom there is any record, and there were a
hundred and twenty books of his catalogue.  Book, however, is a wrong
word to use for the collection in the Alexandrian Library, for there
were no _books_ then, as we know them.  Rolls took the place of
books, and Callimachus soon found that the big rolls were very
inconvenient.  It is said that he complained that "a big book is a
big nuisance," and that it was when he was librarian that the plan of
dividing the large rolls into a number of smaller ones was thought
of.  These were easier to handle, but one work required a great many
of the smaller rolls, and thirty-six were required for the Iliad and
the Odyssey.

As the fame of the Library spread, students from all over the Greek
world came to Alexandria, and there was a great demand for additional
copies of the works in the Library.  For more than three centuries,
Alexandria was the great book-producing mart in the world.  The
Museum possessed a good collection of the best known copies of the
works of the classic writers, and Ptolemy Philadelphus very much
enlarged this collection.  He bought every copy of all existing Greek
works he could find, and as he paid very high prices for them, there
was a steady flow of books to Alexandria from all over the civilized
world.  It is said that he refused to send food to the Athenians at a
time of famine unless they agreed to give him certain copies they
still possessed of the works of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides.
He paid liberally for them, not {403} only in the promised shipment
of corn but also in silver.

As more and more copies of the classic writers were wanted, a regular
publishing trade arose in Alexandria.  Callimachus was not only the
Librarian of the Library, but a publisher of the works of classic
writers.  Large numbers of copyists were employed whose business it
was to make careful and accurate copies of the works required.  This
accounts for the fact that in certain works of ancient literature it
is sometimes difficult to know what is the really original form of
certain lines or passages, because in spite of their care, the
copyists made mistakes, and unfortunately many original copies of the
classics were lost in the great fire which destroyed the Library in
the last century B.C.  The Alexandrian school of copyists was a very
famous one, and Alexandrian Editions of the classics were considered
the very best to be had.

Not only were Greek works copied, but other literature was translated
into Greek and then copied.  It was in Alexandria that the oldest
manuscript of the Old Testament we possess was transcribed.  It was a
translation of the whole of the Old Testament from Hebrew into Greek,
made, according to tradition, by a group of seventy Jewish scholars,
whence comes its name, the Septuagint.  These scholars were
encouraged to undertake this work by the King, who is said to have
provided the means for their support whilst they were engaged on the
translation, and who gave them a special quarter of the city in which
to live.


{404}

III. SCIENCE IN THE HELLENISTIC AGE

Greek science had been born in Ionia, and during the Hellenic Period
of Greek civilization, it had gone hand in hand with philosophy.  The
earliest days of pure science came in the Hellenistic Age, and its
home was in Alexandria.  Amongst the many names of men of this time
who contributed something of value to science, there are two which
must be remembered: those of Euclid and Archimedes.

Euclid lived in Alexandria.  He was a mathematician and wrote a great
work on geometry.  No scientific work in the world has lived in quite
the same way as has this book of Euclid, for since the time that the
Elements of Euclid were written, it was used as a school text book
without interruption until a very few years ago.

Archimedes was probably the greatest of the Greek scientific thinkers
of the third century B.C.  He did not live in Alexandria; he was a
native of Syracuse in Sicily, but he was in close touch with all the
scientific work that was being done there.  He was a great scientific
investigator, the inventor of many practical and ingenious devices
and discovered the principle of moving heavy bodies by means of
pulleys and levers.  An extraordinarily large ship was made for the
King of Syracuse, a ship of marvel to that age.  It contained a
gymnasium, gardens of most wonderful beauty and full of rich plants,
a temple to Aphrodite, a drawing-room with its walls and doors of
boxwood, having a bookcase in it, a bath-room with three brazen
vessels for {405} holding hot water, and a fish-pond.  All the
furnishings were of the most exquisite craftsmanship, and all the
rooms had floors of mosaic, in which the whole story of the Iliad was
depicted in a most marvellous manner.  There were doors of ivory,
beautiful couches, and it was full of pictures and statues, goblets
and vases of every form and shape imaginable.  But the ship was so
large that no one could move it.  Archimedes, however, we are told,
launched it by himself with the aid of only a few people.  For having
prepared a helix (probably some mechanical contrivance with pulleys),
he drew this vessel, enormous as it was, down to the sea.  And it was
said that Archimedes was the first person who ever invented this
helix.[1]

Archimedes believed it possible to move greater bodies even than the
ship, and he is said to have boasted: "Give me a place to stand on,
and I will move the earth."

This great inventor did other things which struck the imagination of
the men amongst whom he lived, for of some of them they had never
seen the like before.  During the siege of Syracuse by the Romans, in
212 B.C., Archimedes invented marvellous war-engines: strange
grappling hooks which, it was said, could seize an enemy's ship and
overturn it in the sea, and he showed the Syracusans how to set up a
water pump in their ships, so that should water get into the hold, it
could be pumped out and the ship saved from sinking.  He is also said
to have made some arrangement of mirrors and burning {406} glass by
means of which the Roman ships were set on fire.  But in spite of all
these inventions, the Romans took the city, and Archimedes was
killed.  He was found by a Roman soldier, sitting in his house and
paying no heed to any danger, but intent on drawing mathematical
diagrams on the ground.  Looking up and seeing the enemy, all he said
was: "Stand away, fellow, from my diagram."  The soldier, not knowing
who he was, killed him.



IV. THE END OF GREEK INDEPENDENCE AND THE POWER FROM THE WEST

It is said that on his deathbed Alexander bequeathed his empire "to
the strongest," but there was no one general able enough or strong
enough to succeed him, and for about fifty years after his death, his
empire was torn by strife and bloodshed.  At last some kind of peace
and order was restored, but the one great empire of Alexander had
disappeared, and the civilized world was broken up into a number of
independent states, of which the most important were the Kingdoms of
Syria, Egypt and Macedonia.  During the long wars which had preceded
this settlement, many battles had been fought on Greek soil.  The
Greeks were not strong enough to prevent this and neither were they
able to maintain their independence when Macedonia became a kingdom.
She was too powerful and strong a neighbour and Greece fell under her
rule.  Tyrants were established in the Greek cities, a deep
humiliation to the freedom-loving Greek.

{407}

But once more the old Greek spirit flared up and the tyrants were
driven out.  From time to time in the history of Greece, states had
joined together in various leagues and alliances, but the inability
of the Greeks to combine for long, even when their very life demanded
it, had prevented such leagues from lasting any great length of time.
But in 281 B.C. when once again the independence of Greece was
threatened, one of these old leagues was revived, the Achaean League.
It lasted for nearly a century and is of the greatest interest to
modern times, for until the union of the American states, about two
thousand years later, there was nothing in the history of the world
like it again.

The Achaean League was not an alliance, but a real federation of
states, with one central government.  Each separate state kept its
own sovereign rights over all its domestic affairs, but questions of
war and peace, the support of the army, and all relations with
foreign states were controlled by the federal government.  It was the
only experiment in ancient times of real federal government.

The head of the League was called the General, and it was under the
general Aratus that it became very powerful.  Almost all the more
important of the Greek states entered the League, with the exception
of Athens and Sparta.  Neither by persuasion, nor by force, unless
she might be recognized as head of the League, would Sparta consent
to become a member, and so powerful was she in the Peloponnesus that
Aratus begged the aid of Macedonia to subdue her.  Sparta was
conquered, but Macedonia {408} regained her supremacy in Greece, and
the power of the Achaean League was broken.

The old Greece of history no longer existed.  Greek civilization had
spread over the Mediterranean world, but the free and independent
city-state had disappeared and nothing lasting had taken its place.
Alexander himself, and still more his successors, had failed to
create an empire which gave to those who belonged to it any sense of
citizenship in it.  The Hellenistic world was a Greek civilization,
but it failed to arouse in men of Greek birth that patriotism which
the city-state had inspired.

The creation of a world state of which men were to be proud to call
themselves citizens and for which they would gladly die, was to be
the work of another great power, which even as the old Greece was
passing, was growing strong in the West.  Rome was steadily
conquering the civilized world.  Already she ruled over Italy and was
extending her power over the Eastern Mediterranean.  She conquered
Macedonia, and one by one the old free states of Greece and those of
the Achaean League lost their independence, until in 146 B.C.
Corinth, rich, commercial, gay Corinth, was taken by Rome, and Greece
became a Roman province.  The citizens of this great state, which was
to include, not only Greece and the Levant, but the whole
Mediterranean and lands far beyond its shores, were to be proud of
the name of Roman.  Yet Rome, destined to be the Mistress of the
World, and in political power an empire, succeeding where Greece
{409} had failed, owed all that was most worth while in the things of
the higher intellectual life of the mind to Greece.  The Greek spirit
was never to die.



[1] From _Athenaeus_.




{410}

SUGGESTIONS ABOUT BOOKS FOR FURTHER READING

This book has been intended for those who were reading about Greece
for the first time.  The following list is for those _older_ readers
of the book who would like to know more about this great
civilization.  It only contains suggestions as to how to _begin_, and
is therefore not in any way a complete bibliography.


I.  _Books about Greece_

GROTE.  _History of Greece_.  This book was written some time ago,
but it is still the most famous history of Greece.

C. H. and H. B. HAWES.   _Crete the Forerunner of Greece_.

BAIKIE.  _The Sea Kings of Crete_.

R. W. LIVINGSTONE.  The Greek Genius and its Meaning to Us.

R. W. LIVINGSTONE.  (Edited by)  _The Pageant of Greece_.

R. W. LIVINGSTONE.  (Edited by)  _The Legacy of Greece_.

GILBERT MURRAY.  _The Rise of the Greek Epic_.

A. E. ZIMMERN.  _The Greek Commonwealth_.

E. N. GARDINER.  _Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals_.

ETHEL B. ABRAHAMS.  _Greek Dress_.

EMILY JAMES PUTNAM.  _The Lady_.

{411}

E. POTTIER.  _Douris and the Painters of Greek Vases_.

G. M. A. RICHTER.  _The Craft of Athenian Pottery_.

G. M. A. RICHTER.  _Handbook to the Classical Collection in the
Metropolitan Museum, New York_.  An excellent introduction to the
study of Greek Art.

KENNETH J. FREEMAN.  _The Schools of Hellas_.

A. E. HAIGH.  _The Attic Theatre_.

E. A. GARDNER.  _A Handbook of Greek Sculpture_.

D. G. HOGARTH.  _Philip and Alexander_.

PUTNAM.  _Authors and their Public in Ancient Times_.

MAHAFFY.  _Social Life in Greece_.

MAHAFFY.  _Alexander's Empire_.



II. _Greek Writers_

No reading _about_ Greece can take the place of reading what the
Greeks themselves wrote.  References to Greek writers will have been
found all through this book and in the list of acknowledgments at the
beginning.  The following list of the more important writers and
their works referred to in this book has been put together for the
purpose of easier reference.


HOMER.  _The Iliad_, translated by Lang, Leaf and Myers.

HOMER.  _The Odyssey_, translated by Butcher and Lang.

HOMER.  _The Homeric Hymns_, translated by Andrew Lang.

{412}

AESCHYLUS.  Translated by A. S. Way and also by E. M. Cookson.

AESCHYLUS.  _The Agamemnon_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

SOPHOCLES.  Translated by R. C. Jebb.

SOPHOCLES.  _Oedipus, King of Thebes_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

EURIPIDES.  Translated by Gilbert Murray.

ARISTOPHANES.  Translated by B. B. Rogers.

_The Frogs_, translated by Gilbert Murray.

PLATO.  Translated by Benjamin Jowett.

PLATO.  _The Republic_, translated by Davies and Vaughan.

PLATO.  _Trial and Death of Socrates_, translated by F. J. Church.

ARISTOTLE.  _Politics_, translated by Benjamin Jowett and also by J.
E. C. Welldon.

HERODOTUS.  Translated by G. C. Macaulay.

THUCYDIDES.  Translated by Benjamin Jowett.

XENOPHON.  Translated by H. G. Dakyns.

PLUTARCH.  Translated by Dryden, revised by A. H. Clough.

DEMOSTHENES.  _Public Orations_, translated by A. W.
Pickard-Cambridge.


_The Claim of Antiquity_, an excellent pamphlet published by the
Oxford University Press, gives a much fuller and more complete list
of books and translations for those who would like further
suggestions.



III. _Greek Sculpture and Architecture_

Not every one can go to Greece or even to Sicily, but most museums
have good collections of casts and {413} models.  Greek sculpture is
not all found in one place, but scattered through the museums of the
world.  Those who can go to London, Paris, Rome and Naples, if
nowhere else, can get first-hand knowledge of some of the greatest
things the Greeks produced.  For the sculptures from the Parthenon
are in the _British Museum_; most beautiful things are in the _Museo
delle Terme_ in _Rome_ (to see the other half of the Throne of
Aphrodite one must go to the _Museum of Fine Arts in Boston,
Massachusetts_), and Sophocles is in the _Museum of the Lateran_.
From Naples one can go to _Paestum_, once the Greek colony of
Poseidonia, famous in ancient times for its roses, and see the Temple
of Poseidon.  It has never been restored, and is one of the best
preserved Greek temples to be seen anywhere out of Attica.  There it
stands, as it has stood for over two thousand years, looking out
towards the sea, solitary, now, and desolate, yet in its loneliness
most beautiful.

All these things are merely suggestions as to one way of beginning.
Those who begin will find no difficulty in going on.




{415}

INDEX


A

Academy, 194, 211, 381

Achaean League, 407

Acropolis, 91, 190, 194; temples on, 278 ff.; later history of 284 ff.

Aegean civilization, 5

Aeschylus, 107, 163, 390, 395, 402, 412

Aethiopians, 44

_Agamemnon_ of Aeschylus, 391, 395, 412

Agamemnon, Tomb of, 6, 25, 26

Agora, 191, 207

Alaric the Goth, 284

_Alcestis_ of Euripides, 393, 412

Alcibiades; early life of, 302 ff.; Sicilian expedition, 305 ff.;
summoned to Athens, 309; the traitor, 310 ff.; recalled to Athens,
314; exiled, 315

Alcmaeonids, 104

Alexander; youth and education, 342 ff.; policy, 345; conquests of
347 ff.; death of, 356; empire of, 398, 406

Alexandria, 400 ff.; Museum at, 401; Library, 401; book-publishing
in, 402; science in 404 ff.

Alexandrian editions, 403

Amphipolis, 301

Amphora, 203

_Anabasis_ of Xenophon, 318, 320, 412

Anaximander, 112

_Antigone_ of Sophocles, 392, 412

Aphrodite, 51

Apollo, 48, 52, 53

_Apology of Socrates_, 371, 373, 374

Aratus, 407

Archimedes, 404

Architecture, 277 ff.

Archon, 94

Ariadne, 7

Aristeides; character of, 156; rivalry with Themistocles, 156;
ostracism of, 158; return of, 162; forms Delian League, 180

Aristophanes; comedies of, 209, 300, 393, 412

Aristotle; _Politics_ of, 72, 384, 412; views on education, 227, 384;
tutor to Alexander the Great, 344; at the Lyceum, 383; will of, 383;
"Father of Natural Science," 383

Artaxerxes, 317

Artemis, 49, 217

Artemisium, 149

Athena, 47, 48, 50; birth of, 280; contest with Poseidon, 92, 281;
symbol of Athens, 283

Athenian Dress, 195 ff.

Athenian Education, 221 ff.

Athenian Government; rule of one man, 91 ff.; oligarchy, rule of the
few, 94 ff.; rule of the many, 96 ff.

Athenian House, 198

Athenian Life, 190 ff.

Athenian Pottery, 203 ff.

Athenian Trade, 201

Athens; situation and appearance, 190 ff.; classes of people, 194;
burnt by Xerxes, 161; burnt by Mardonius, 168; during Persian War,
144; Long Walls, 173, 298; fortifications of, 172; becomes an empire,
183; enemies of, 291 ff.; during Peloponnesian War, 296 ff.; downfall
of, 315

Athos, Mount, 126

Arrian, 334, 349, 351, 353

Assembly; Spartan, 79; Athenian, 210, 299



B

_Banquet_ of Xenophon, 225, 412

Bema, 210

Brasidas, 301

Byzantium, 110, 175



C

Cadmus, 324

Callimachus, 403

Caryatid, 280

Cecrops, 91

Cerameicus, 204

Chaeronea, 332

Chios, 112, 125, 202

Chiton, 195

Chlamys, 196

Cimon, 93

Citizenship, Greek ideals of, 73 ff.

City-State, 70 ff.

Cleon, 301

Clio, 49

_Clouds_ of Aristophanes, 300, 412

Colonies, 108 ff.; Ionian, 110 ff.; in Italy, 113; in Sicily, 113; in
Egypt, 113

_Constitution of the Lacedaemonians_ of Xenophon, 88

Corinth; council at, 145; urges Sparta to make war on Athens, 291;
fall of, 408

Crete, 6 ff.; legends of, 7 ff.; dress, 11; writing, 15; religion,
13; life in, 16 ff.; amusements, 18

Crito, 374

Croesus, 100 ff.; conquers Ionian colonies, 115; war with Cyrus, 116

Cunaxa, 319

Cylon, 103

Cyrus the Great, 115; conquers Sardis, 116; conquers Ionian colonies,
117

Cyrus the Younger, 318 ff.



D

Daedalus, 8

Darius, 118 ff.; Scythian expedition of, 118 ff.; determines to
invade Greece, 124, 126

Delos, 128; Confederacy of, 180

Delphi, 43; oracle at, 57 ff.; Treasury of Athenians at, 134

Demeter, 54 ff.

Demosthenes, 335 ff.; 412

Deucalion, 42

Diogenes, 346

Dionysus, 232

Dodona, 57

Dorians, 75

Draco, 98

Drama, 233

Dramatists; Aeschylus, 390; Aristophanes, 393; Euripides, 392;
Sophocles, 392

Dress; Athenian, 195; Cretan, 11; Homeric, 28



E

_Economist_ of Xenophon, 198, 215, 216, 412

Education; Athenian, 221 ff.; Spartan, 84 ff.

_Electra_ of Euripides, 393, 412

Eleusis, 54, 220

Elysian Fields, 44

Empire; Athenian, 183, 282; Alexander's, 398, 406

Epaminondas, 325 ff.

Ephors, 80

Erechtheum, 279

Eretria; joins Ionian revolt, 123; burnt by Persians, 128

Euclid, 404

Euripides, 39, 109, 226, 234, 238, 300, 392 ff., 402, 412

Evans, Sir Arthur, 12



F

_Funeral Speech_, 187



G

Games; Isthmian, 61; Olympic, 60 ff.; Pythian, 61

Gordian Knot, 347

Greece; divisions of, 37; trees of, 37; products of, 38; climate of,
39

Greek Art, 394 ff.

Greek Characteristics, 40

Greek Spirit, 102, 358



H

Hades, 54 ff.

Hecataeus, 112

Hellenic Period, 399

_Hellenica_ of Xenophon, 315,316, 327, 412

Hellespont, 141

Hellenistic Age, 398 ff.

Helots, 76

Hephaestus, 50

Hera, 47

Hermes, 49, 106

_Hermes_ of Praxiteles, 222, 395

Herodas, translation from Mime III, 228 ff.

Herodotus, 39, 78, 111, 115, 117, 118 ff., 136 ff., 174, 282, 385
ff., 412

Hestia, 51, 52, 199

Himation, 196

Hipparchus, 106

Hippias, 106, 128

_Hippolytus_ of Euripides, 234, 412

Historians; Herodotus, 385 ff.; Plutarch, 389; Thucydides, 386 ff.;
Xenophon, 388

Homer, 22, 58, 112, 225, 411

Homeric Age, 27 ff.; dress, 28; palaces, 28 ff.; furniture, 30 ff.

_Homeric Hymns_, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 58, 281, 411

Houses; Athenian, 198 ff.; Cretan, 16; Homeric, 28

Hydria, 203

Hyperboreans, 43



I

_Iliad_, 6, 8, 19, 20, 22, 46, 68, 106, 402, 411

Ionian Colonies, 110, 202; conquered by Croesus, 115; conquered by
Cyrus, 117; appeal to Athens for help, 174

Ionian Revolt, 122

_Iphigenia in Tauris_ of Euripides, 238 ff.; 393, 412

Isthmian Games, 61



K

King's Peace, 317

_Knights_ of Aristophanes, 300, 412

Knossos, 8; palace of, 10; destruction of, 20

Krater, 203



L

Lacedaemonians, 75

Laconia, 75

Lade, 124

Laurium, 156

Lawgivers; Draco, 98; Lycurgus, 76 ff.; Solon, 96 ff.

Lekythos, 203

Leonidas, 148

Lesbos, 112

Leuctra, 327

Long Walls, 173, 298, 316

Lyceum, 383

Lycurgus, 76 ff.; travels of, 77; at Delphi, 78; government of, 76
ff.; death of, 90

Lydia, 114



M

Macedonians, 329

Magna Graecia, 113

Mantinea, 327

Map-makers, 112

Marathon, 130 ff.

Mardonius, 125, 137, 166, 168

Mediterranean, 3 ff.

_Memorabilia_ of Xenophon, 278, 373

Metopes, 282

Minoan Civilization, 8

Minos, 7

Miletus, 111, 202; siege of by Lydia, 114; revolt against Darius,
122; fall of, 124

Militiades, 131

Muses, 49

Music, 227

Mycenae, 25 ff.; 32

Mycenaean Civilization, 5



N

Naucratis, 113

Naxos, 122, 127

Nicias, 302



O

_Odyssey_, 7, 8, 19, 22, 29, 30, 50, 402, 411

_Oedipus at Colonus_ of Sophocles, 392, 412

_Oedipus the King_ of Sophocles, 392, 412

Oligarchy, 94

Olympia; oracle at, 57; statue of Zeus at, 64

Olympic Games, 60 ff.

Olympus, 43, 46

Oracle; origin of, 56; oracles of Zeus, 57; of Apollo, 57

Oracles; about Homer, 58; given to Lycurgus, 78; to Cylon, 103; to
Spartans, 107; "deceitful answer" to Croesus, 115; of the wooden
walls, 159

Orations; _Funeral Speech_ of Pericles, 187 ff.; of Demosthenes, from
_Third Philippic_, 338; from _Second Olynthiac_, 339; _On the Crown_,
339 ff.

Ostracism, 157



P

Palaestra, 227

Pan, 51, 129, 134

Panathenaic Festival, 204, 217, 283

Parnassus, 42, 49

Parthenon, 280 ff.

Pausanias, Spartan General; at Plataea, 168 ff.; at Byzantium, 175;
suspicious conduct of, 175; death of, 176

Pausanias the Traveller, 25, 64, 69

Pedagogue, 223

Pediment, 277

Peiraeus, 173, 202

Peisistratus, 104 ff.

Pelopidas, 326

Peloponnesian War; causes, 291 ff.; course of war, 296 ff.; Sicilian
Expedition, 305 ff.; defeat of Athens, 315 ff.

Pentathlon, 67

Pericles, 53; early life of, 183; leader of Athens, 185; _Funeral
Speech_ of, 187 ff.; beautifies Athens, 289; policy during
Peloponnesian War, 297; death of, 298; imperial policy of, 298 ff.

Persephone, 54 ff.

_Persians_ of Aeschylus, 163, 412

Persian Wars, 118 ff.; invasion under Mardonius, 125; Marathon, 125
ff.; invasion under Xerxes, 136 ff.; Thermopylae, 148 ff.; Salamis,
161 ff.

_Phaedo_ of Plato, 375, 377

_Phaedrus_ of Plato, 382, 412

Pheidias, 46, 64, 279, 395

Pheidippides, 129, 132

Philip of Macedon, 328; King of Macedonia, 330; policy of, 330;
conflict with Greek states, 331 ff.; destroys Thebes, 332; death of,
333

_Philippics_ of Demosthenes, 338, 412

Philosophers; Aristotle, 72, 227, 383 ff., 412; Plato, 380 ff., 412;
Pythagoras, 379; Socrates, 361 ff; Thales, 111, 379

Philosophy, Greek, 378

Pindar, 69, 323

Plague in Athens, 297

Plataea; aids Athens before Marathon, 131; battle of, 168

Plato, 57, 194, 225, 226, 228, 363, 367, 371, 373, 374, 375, 377, 380
ff., 412

Plutarch, 75, 90, 93, 96, 154, 156, 158, 172, 177, 178, 180, 181,
185, 186, 284, 298, 304, 309, 310, 314, 336, 337, 345, 346, 389, 412

Pnyx, 210

Polemarch, 94

_Politics_ of Aristotle, 72, 384, 412

Poseidon, 47, 92, 281

Praxiteles, 222, 395

Propylaea, 278

_Protagoras_ of Plato, 225, 412

Ptolemy Philadelphia, 401

Ptolemy Soter, 401

Pyrrha, 42

Pythagoras, 379

Pythian Games, 60



R

Religion; Cretan, 13; Greek, 44 ff.

_Republic_ of Plato, 226, 381, 412



S

Sacred Mysteries, 54 ff., 220

Salamis, 97; battle of, 163 ff.

Sappho, 112

Sardis; taken by Cyrus, 116; burnt by Ionians, 123; Persian army at,
138

Schliemann, 23 ff.

Science; in Ionia, 111; in Alexandria, 404 ff.

Scythia, 118

Senate, Spartan, 78

_Septuagint_, 403

Sicily, 113

Sicilian Expedition, 305 ff.

Socrates, 278, 303, 396; early life, 361 ff.; Socrates and the
Sophists, 364; Socratic method of teaching, 366; accusations against,
368; trial off 368; _Apology_ of, 368 ff.; death of, 374 ff.

Solon; early life of, 96; war over Salamis, 97; Archon, 98; reforms
of, 98 ff.; travels of 100; Solon and Croesus, 100 ff.

Sophists, 364

Sophocles, 392, 395, 402, 412

Sparta; situation of, 75; government of, 76 ff.; customs, 81 ff.;
education, 845.; position of women, 89; aids Athens in expelling
Hippias, 107; refusal to join Ionian revolt, 123; refuses immediate
help before Marathon, 129; at Thermopylae, 148 ff.; jealousy of
Athens, 172 ff.; policy towards Ionian colonies, 174; during
Peloponnesian War, 287 ff.; supremacy of, 316

Sphacteria, 301

Statues; _Zeus_ at Olympia, 64; _Hermes_ of Praxiteles, 222; _Athena
Promachos_, 279, 284; _Athena Polias_, 280; _Athena Parthenos_, 283;
_Sophocles_, 413

Stoa, 193

Strabo, 4

Symposium, 213

_Symposium_ of Plato, 363, 367, 412

Syracuse, 113, 226, 405; battle in harbour of, 312



T

Temples, 14, 276 ff.; Athena Nike, 279; Erechtheum, 279; Parthenon,
280 ff.; Paestum, 413

Ten Thousand, March of the, 318

Thales, 111, 379

Theatre, 232 ff.

Thebes, 153, 317; early history of, 322; legends of, 324; supremacy
of, 325 ff.; defeated by Philip of Macedon, 332; destroyed by
Alexander, 346

Themistocles; early life and character, 153; at Artemisium, 150;
builds a navy, 155; rivalry with Aristeides, 156; at Salamis, 161
ff.; popularity of, 171 ff.; fortifies Athens, 172; accusations
against, 176; ostracized, 177; at the Persian court, 177; death of,
178

Theocritus, 216

Therma, 143

Thermopylae, 148 ff.

Theseus, 7, 92, 93; ship of, 9, 374

Thucydides, 7, 155, 181, 189, 297, 302, 308, 309, 314, 360, 386 ff.,
412

Tiryns, 27

Trojan War, 22, 347

_Trojan Women_ of Euripides, 39, 300, 412

Troy, discovery of, 24

Tyrants, 102 ff.; Cylon, 103; Peisistratus, 104 ff.



W

_Wasps_ of Aristophanes, 209, 300, 412

Women, position of; in Athens, 214 ff.; in Sparta, 89

Writing, Cretan, 15



X

Xanthippe, 363

Xenophon, 88, 198, 214, 215, 216, 225, 278, 314, 315, 318, 327, 373,
388, 412

Xerxes, 136 ff.



Z

Zeus, 7, 46, 52, 53, 199, 231






