




                              AUTOBIOGRAPHY.


                              =A Collection=

                                  OF THE

                       MOST INSTRUCTIVE AND AMUSING

                                  LIVES

                             EVER PUBLISHED,

                    WRITTEN BY THE PARTIES THEMSELVES.

 WITH BRIEF INTRODUCTIONS, AND COMPENDIOUS SEQUELS CARRYING ON THE COURSE
                  OF EVENTS TO THE DEATH OF EACH WRITER.


                         VOLUME V.—ROBERT DRURY.


                                 LONDON:
                       PRINTED FOR HUNT AND CLARKE,
                     TAVISTOCK-STREET, COVENT-GARDEN.




                                LONDON:
                         Printed by W. CLOWES,
                            Stamford-street.




                                  THE
                        PLEASANT AND SURPRISING
                               ADVENTURES
                                   OF
                             ROBERT DRURY,
                               DURING HIS
                        FIFTEEN YEARS’ CAPTIVITY
                                 ON THE
                         ISLAND OF MADAGASCAR.

                          WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.


                             LONDON:—1826.
                      PRINTED FOR HUNT AND CLARKE,
                    TAVISTOCK-STREET, COVENT-GARDEN.




                                LONDON:
                       Printed by WILLIAM CLOWES,
                            Stamford-street.




                            EDITOR’S PREFACE


Among the various attractions of “Autobiography,” that of singular and
extraordinary personal adventure, when faithfully related by the person
to whom it has occurred, is by no means the least alluring. The
shipwreck of Robert Drury, at the age of sixteen, in the Degrave East
Indiaman, on the southern coast of the island of Madagascar, in the year
1702, supplied a remarkable opportunity for one of those accurate
delineations of an isolated and barbarous people, which are at once so
amusing for their novelty, and instructive for the additional lights
which they throw upon the innumerable varieties of human situation and
character. The following volume affords a plain and unsophisticated
account of a fifteen years’ captivity or detention of the author (the
only one spared in consequence of his youth out of many murdered
shipmates) in an island, the interior of which, at that time, was little
known; but which, happily, at present seems likely to enter slowly into
the career of civilization. Obliged to conform to the usages of the
natives, and rendered to all intents and purposes a member of their
community, he necessarily became intimately acquainted with their
manners, customs, and proceedings; which, together with his own
adventures among them, he narrates in that plain and unpretending
manner, which in a writer of his class advances the strongest claims to
confidence. The veracity of Drury is, indeed, corroborated by the
journal, as far as it went, of Mr Bembo, son of the celebrated admiral
of that name, who was first mate of the Degrave, and who, by inducing a
part of the crew to refuse putting that trust in the islanders, which
was unfortunately placed in them by the murdered companions of Drury,
escaped their fate, and was enabled to get back to England. Our brief
sequel will also show that Drury was a steady man, and that he
maintained a very respectable character after his return. To conclude:
his book has been deemed so curious and interesting, not only for the
mention of the facts but the manner of detailing them, that the present
will form the _fourth_ edition; the first appearing in 1729, and the
second and third in 1743 and 1808. Thus much as to its merits; as to the
rest, works of this nature falling directly within the plan of the
proposed series, no apology is necessary for having an early recourse to
one of them in aid of the contrast and variety which is desirable in the
way of support and relief of so comprehensive an undertaking.




                                PREFACE
                                   TO
          _The Edition of Seventeen Hundred and Forty-three_.


As nothing is of a more amiable nature, so nothing makes a stronger and
more lasting impression on the mind, than truth; and whatever regard
some may pay to a wittily-contrived and ingenious tale, the best that
can be said of it is, that it is a gay delusion, and an idle amusement
exposed to view in the fairest and most advantageous light.

The following historical narrative needs no such disguise or ornament to
recommend it; for captain W. Macket, (who, by his certificate, has
assured the public that he believed the account our author has given of
his surprising adventures to be just and true,) was not only a gentleman
of an unblemished character in regard to his honour and veracity, but
well known to be a man of too great a fortune and good sense to
countenance and give a public sanction to a trivial fable, or
imposition. Without doubt this gentleman, as well as the captains of
other ships, informed himself of a case so singular and surprising, for
at Yong-old, where he took the author on board, William Purser, a native
of Feraingher, was their linguist for some months; he spoke English
well, and knew Mr Drury there, and was an eye-witness to many of the
most doubtful adventures here related for several years together.

The captain after this went to Munnongaro, or Masseleege; there he saw
Nicholas Dove, who was one of the boys shipwrecked in the Degrave, and
saved in the massacre in Anterndroea; besides the opportunity he had of
conversing with Mr Drury in their voyage to the West Indies, and after
to England. To this we may add, the second voyage Mr Drury made was also
in captain Macket’s service, though not in the ship under his command,
he being a principal proprietor in captain White’s ship and cargo, as
well as of his own and others. These circumstances were confirmed by the
captain, who added, that he had seen others in his last voyage there, as
well natives who spoke English, and knew Drury, as some who were saved
by flight with captain Drummond and others, with this particular
account, that this very captain Drummond was the man Mr Drury supposes
him to be, and that he was killed at Tullea, seven leagues to the
northward of Augustine-bay, by one Lewes, a Jamaica negro. Besides all
this, and the captain’s continued friendship to him to the last, even
our author himself, though in a lower station of life, was well known to
many persons of probity and worth now in London, who frequently
conversed with him while living, and who always esteemed him an
innocent, inoffensive man, free from all artifice and design. As this
was the character he had amongst his friends and acquaintance, we think
it would be needless, if not impertinent, to doubt of his veracity in
the relation of any one of his adventures, more especially after such
substantial proofs for the truth hereof.

It is probable that the account here given of the religion of the
natives of Madagascar, may by some be thought a mere fiction, and
inserted with no other view than to advance some latitudinarian
principles; but so widely distant is this from the real case, that the
most to be suspected part of the conversation between deaan Murnanzack
and Mr Drury, on divine topics, is real fact as here related; and the
deaan’s ludicrous reflections on Adam’s rib, God’s converse with
mankind, and his creation of the world in six days, and his resting the
seventh, &c. his taking these things for Drury’s childish notions, and
saying they were old women’s stories, were delivered in that prince’s
own words. And if we consider the then circumstances of our author, that
he was but fourteen years of age when he set out on this unfortunate
voyage, his education at a grammar-school, and in the principles of the
established church; and that ever since his arrival in England, and
settlement in London, he has been firmly attached thereto, even to
bigotry; it would be very weak and absurd to suppose him capable, or
inclined to advance an imaginary conference with the deaan upon so
serious a topic, with no other motive than to favour free-thinking, or
natural religion, in opposition to that which was revealed, especially
as they are points about which he scarcely ever concerned himself.

In all those places where religion, or the origin of governments are
casually mentioned, there are interspersed some occasional reflections,
which are not, properly speaking, the author’s, which is all the
artifice made use of throughout the whole. It must be owned that topics
so entertaining could not well be passed over, without making some
proper and useful applications: yet no motive, how tempting soever,
could prevail on the editor to alter any real fact, or add any one
single fiction of his own. Every transaction here related, as likewise
the character and conversation of every person introduced, are properly
Mr Drury’s own.

The religion of the natives of Madagascar, some authors will have to be
Mahometanism; but without any manner of grounds for such a conclusion,
since it has no resemblance of it in any other particulars, than in
circumcision, and abstaining from their women at certain times, which
were common to some eastern nations long before the Jews had it; or,
indeed, where there is no reason to imagine that the name of the Jews
was once so much as heard of.

There are good grounds, on the other hand, to conjecture, that the Jews
derived several of their religious ceremonies from them. For that their
religion is much more ancient, is plain from several reasons. First,
from their regard to dreams, and divining by them, which, by the Mosaic
law, the Israelites were expressly forbidden. Secondly, from their
shaving off their hair in mourning for their dead; whereas among the
Jews the growth of it is strictly commanded, and as superstitiously
observed to this day. Thirdly, from their sacrifices; as Moses commanded
none but males to be sacrificed; so, on the contrary, cows are the
greatest part of the Madagascar sacrifices, and are thought by these
people to be the most acceptable oblations to their Supreme Deity. They
have no burnt offerings but near their sepulchres, when occasionally
opened, which, with the gums burnt with them, serve for a defence
against all ill scents. Fourthly; but the most notable reason of all is,
that the owley, which these Madagascar people make use of for their
divinations, and procure their unusual or extraordinary dreams with, is
manifestly the ephod and teraphim, made use of by the Levite who lodged
in Micah’s house, as we read Judges xvii. and from which the Israelites
could never be wholly brought off, though directly repugnant to the law
of Moses, concerning which there seems to be no occasion for enlarging
farther in this place.

That the people of Madagascar did not derive their religion from any
learned or polite nation, is evident by their retaining no idea or
remembrance of letters; nor their having a horse, or so necessary a
machine as a wheel of any kind, either for carriage or use, which could
never have been forgotten had they ever had them. That these Madagascar
people came first from Africa, seems most probable by their colour; and
perhaps from the Abyssines, or even from Egypt. The Virzimbers, indeed,
by their woolly heads, must come from the more southern part of Africa.
Deaan Toke-offu told captain Macket they had a tradition of their coming
on the island many years ago in large canoes. But from wheresoever they
came, it is manifest that their religion is the most ancient in the
world, and not far from pure natural religion.

We may reflect with pleasure on the devotion of these people, who
address the Supreme Being on every occasion for his aid and assistance
when in necessity or distress; and with true piety and hearts full of
gratitude return him their humble and unfeigned thanks for those
blessings and benefits he confers upon them; yet have they no temples,
no tabernacles, or groves for the public performance of their divine
worship; neither have they solemn fasts, or festivals, or set days, or
times, or priests to do it for them. But we may here observe, that as
Melchizedeck was a king, and styled the priest of the most high God, (a
phrase strictly correspondent to that of deaan Unghorray, the highest
God,) so it is the practice of the Madagascar kings, or lords, to be
themselves the performers of all religious offices. Their umossees or
prophets, indeed, directed the making their owleys of particular roots,
or woods, having, as they tell them, magical properties agreeing to the
spirits; as also that they must be made at proper times.

There are two things in this history highly worthy of observation: one
is, that there is a law among them against cursing a man’s parents. What
a reproach is this to countries called christian, where there is no law
or punishment against even those who have the impudence and impiety not
only of cursing others, but their own parents. The other is, that such
is their regard and reverence to the most high God, that they swear not
profanely: but such is the profaneness of even our christian nation,
that a man can hardly pass the streets (as archbishop Tillotson
observes) without having his ears grated and pierced with horrid and
blasphemous oaths and curses, as are enough, if we were guilty of no
other sin, to sink a nation. These give reputation to the general
character of these people, that where the Europeans or Mahometans have
not corrupted them, they are very innocent, moral, and courteous; and
more so, with shame be it spoken, than most nations, who have all the
advantages of a liberal and christian education.

There is yet one observation more, which, we hope, will not be thought
improper here; which is, that our author’s many deliverances are
glorious and wonderful displays of the goodness and power of Divine
Providence; and gave him, no doubt, an awakening sense of his obstinate
disobedience to the will and entreaties of his tender parents and
friends, who so much and often pressed him to lay aside those wilful
resolutions of his first voyage to the East Indies; wherein we may see
the marks both of divine displeasure and goodness, the first in his
shipwreck and slavery, the other in his delivery or release from thence.
All which may serve as a lesson to the youth of future generations to
beware, lest by their disobedience and obstinate forcing of themselves
from the care of their parents or friends, they bring upon themselves
those miseries and misfortunes which occasion a too late repentance.

Much more might have been said on this occasion, but as we have not
room, we refer our readers to the perusal of the book itself; in which,
we presume, they will not only find an entertaining, but profitable
amusement.

                  *       *       *       *       *

This is to certify, that Robert Drury, fifteen years a slave in
Madagascar, now living in London, was redeemed from thence, and brought
into England, his native country, by myself. I esteem him an honest,
industrious man, of good reputation, and do firmly believe that the
account he gives of his strange and surprising adventures is genuine and
authentic.

                                                        WILLIAM MACKETT.

_May 7, 1728._




                                  THE
                               ADVENTURES
                                   OF
                             ROBERT DRURY.


As my design in the ensuing narrative, is to give a plain and honest
account of matters of fact, I shall make use of no artful inventions, or
borrowed phrases, to lengthen or embellish it; nor shall I introduce any
other reflections, than what were the natural result of my many uncommon
and surprising adventures. And,

Here, I hope, it will be no ways improper to inform my readers, that I
was not fourteen years of age when these heavy misfortunes first befell
me; so that my youth, as well as want of knowledge in the Madagascar
language, rendered me incapable of making such curious observations, as
one of a riper age, better judgment, and freed from slavery, might have
done to much greater advantage. For,

I, Robert Drury, was born on the 24th of July, in the year 1687, in
Crutched-friars, London, where my father then lived; but soon after he
removed to the Old Jury, near Cheapside, where he kept for several years
afterwards that noted house, called the King’s-head, or otherwise
distinguished by the name of the Beef-steak-house; and to which there
was, all his time, a great resort of merchants, and other gentlemen of
the best rank and character.

Notwithstanding the education my father bestowed on me, I could not be
prevailed on to think of any business but going to sea, to which course
of life my genius wholly inclined me. And I well remember, that from
eleven years of age, my mind was so intent on the profession of a
sailor, that it grew up with me, and at length became such an obstinate
resolution, that not all the entreaties of my dear and indulgent mother,
(though she once begged me on her knees,) nor the persuasions of my
father, or any other friends, could make the least impression upon me.

When they found their endeavours were ineffectual, they then formed a
new scheme, and by a seeming compliance with my inclination, proposed to
procure a short voyage for me, hoping that the many dangers and
hardships to which I should naturally be exposed, and should see others
undergo, would deter me from persevering in that course of life.

But, as wilful persons never want woe, such was my obstinacy, that
nothing would content me, but what contributed to my ruin; and
Providence justly frustrated all my hopes, by indulging me in the choice
I had so foolishly and ungratefully made, in direct opposition to my
duty, and the repeated solicitations of my most affectionate friends:
thus did this perverseness of mine bring with it its own punishment.
Nothing but an East India voyage would please me; for no other reason
that I can think of, but because I had a cousin at Bengal, whose name
was John Steel, in the New East India Company’s service; the companies
at that time not being united.

My father showed a due care and concern for my welfare, by the manner in
which he fitted me out; and by plentifully supplying me with provisions,
clothes, and other necessaries for the voyage; besides which, I had a
cargo to the value of a hundred pounds, which was a large trust for a
boy of my age. I went as a passenger, well recommended to captain
William Younge, with whom my passage and the freight of my cargo were
agreed for, and we soon after embarked.

The ship captain Younge commanded in this unfortunate voyage, was the
Degrave, of seven hundred tons burthen, with fifty-two guns. I shall not
here enter into a long detail of any of the common occurrences of the
voyage, or take notice of any other accidents, than what are absolutely
necessary to my present purpose; which is a true and impartial narrative
of our hard fate at Madagascar in our return homeward; together with my
own miseries, and the various turns of fortune, during my residence for
near fifteen years, in that scarce known, though extensive country.

We passed through the Downs on February 19, 1701, when admiral Bembo,
(whose son, Mr John Bembo, was fourth mate of our ship,) lay there with
the squadron of ships under his command, bound to the West Indies, and
we arrived at Fort St. George in the East Indies, in three months and
twenty days from the Downs, having stopped in our passage one week at
the Canaries, and came to an anchor in the evening.

We had on board Monsieur Lapie, a jeweller, and his son, who set out
with design to settle there; and one would have thought, being so near
the end of his voyage, he had great reason to hope, or rather to be
morally assured, that he had obtained his desire; the ship being safe at
anchor within half a dozen miles, and in sight of the place. But how
soon does Providence disappoint us, and interrupt our designs! What an
adverse fate directed, and accompanied this unhappy ship, and all who
were concerned in it, though so near the accomplishment of their wishes!

The barge was hoisted out the next morning, in order to put these
unfortunate persons on shore; the ship riding about two leagues
distance. They put off, and we did not expect their return till the next
day; but about eight o’clock at night we heard somebody hail the ship;
it surprised our people, but some of them soon knew it to be the voice
of Joseph Chamberlain, one of the barge’s crew. They thereupon hoisted
out the pinnace, and rowing towards the voice, found him swimming on an
oar; he told us, that as soon as they came to the bar, a great sea
struck them on the larboard gunnel, and overset them; he knew not what
became of the rest of the company, and therefore supposed they were all
drowned, for the current set to seaward; but he being an experienced
swimmer, and with the help of one of the boat’s oars, which he
providentially found, he made shift to reach within call of the ship. We
immediately hung a light on the top-mast head to guide others, if
happily any had been like him alive swimming; but not one of them was
ever seen, or heard of more. Mr John Lapie, his son, and their cook, the
cockswain, and nine of the boat’s crew, all perished through this sad
disaster. They had also with them very considerable effects in goods,
silver, &c. to the value of some thousands of pounds.

Two days after we weighed anchor, and sailed to Maslapatan, where we
stayed a month, and from thence proceeded to Bengal. My cousin hearing
of my arrival, came on board to see me, and take me and my effects on
shore with him; but my father had a more prudent regard for my welfare,
than I could be capable of at those tender years; my cousin being only a
pilot, my father desired captain Younge privately to inquire into his
circumstances, and the character he bore, and in case he found him not
of sufficient ability, or honesty, to be intrusted with me, and my
effects, not to let me go on shore to him.

The captain performed the trust my father reposed in him with honour and
integrity, and would not permit me to go with my kinsman, but took my
cargo, disposed of it himself, and bought me a just return in the
commodities of the country, and would have carried me back again
according to his contract with my father, had Providence so thought fit.
My cousin soon after our arrival, died, and we had a great mortality
among our ship’s crew; for in nine months’ time, we buried above forty
of our people. The chief mate was the first of note, and about a month
after him, captain Younge himself died of a fever; happy at least in
this, that he died in peace, and lived not to bear his share in the
miseries which his son and we afterwards underwent; for this son being
second mate, and the chief mate being already dead, as also the captain
his father, he became captain of course, so that there was still a
captain Younge.

The only art I attained at Bengal, and which proved of any considerable
service to me afterwards, was, that I here learnt to swim, which has two
or three times since saved my life and liberty. I attained to so great a
proficiency in that art, by the assistance of my companions, that it was
a common practice for half a dozen of us to tie a rupee apiece (which is
about the value of two shillings and sixpence English,) in a
handkerchief round our middles, and swim four or five miles up or down
the river for our diversion; and when we came on shore, the Gentees, or
Moors, would lend us clothes to put on while we stayed; thus we used to
sit and regale ourselves for a few hours with arrack punch, and a
dinner, and then swim back again.

Our business being at length finished at Bengal, we sailed from thence,
and had at that time about one hundred and twenty hands on board,
besides two women and myself, and a few other passengers. As we were
going down the river, our ship ran aground and stuck fast; but there
being a very strong tide, it turned her round, and we got off the next
high water without any damage, as we imagined; but when we came out to
sea, she proved so very leaky, that we were obliged to keep two
chain-pumps continually at work. We were two months in this sad
condition; at length we reached Mauritius, which is an island in the
latitude of 16½° south, and to the eastward of Madagascar, inhabited by
the Dutch, who treated us with abundance of humanity, and assisted us
with whatever was in their power. We made a tent on shore, in which we
stowed great part of our cargo to search for the leak—but to no purpose.

Captain Boon, a pirate, had been here about two months before, having
just then plundered a very rich Moorish ship, and taken out of her fifty
Lascars. (For that is the name by which our English seamen distinguish
these Moorish people.) Boon lost his own ship on this island, and the
pirates were glad to make a small sloop of their long-boat to get off
the island with, and were therefore glad to leave the Lascars behind
them. These people we took with us, thinking they would be of service,
and save our hands from returning so often to the pump; they having for
two months before but little rest.

We found here plenty of good fish, turtle, and goats, with some beef; we
stayed about a month, and then shaped our course directly for the Cape
of Good Hope.

Our leak gained upon us more and more, and it was with great difficulty
we kept her above water. Our men were all spent with continual labour,
pumping and bailing night and day; when according to our reckoning we
were one hundred leagues to the southward of Madagascar. We heaved
overboard several of our guns and heavy goods to lighten her. The
captain was for continuing his course to the Cape, but the ship’s
company in general opposed it; being of opinion that they could not keep
her above water long enough, imagining they were at that time about six
hundred leagues from it, and but one hundred from Madagascar, which was
the nearest land.

At length they prevailed on the captain, though with much difficulty, to
put back to Madagascar. The wind favouring us, the third day in the
morning they sent me and the captain’s boy up to the mast-head to look
out for land, since nobody else could so well be spared. In such
apparent danger, my being a passenger was no excuse; and, accordingly, I
went up and sat there two hours and a half before I could discern any
thing like land; and when I first saw it I told my comrade, but not
being certain, I would not call out, for the case was of such
importance, that they were not to be trifled with, or flattered into
vain hopes. However, at length, I plainly discovered a white cliff and a
smoke at a distance from it, whereupon I boldly cried out land! land!

Several immediately ran up the shrouds, and even the captain himself to
make his observations. One among them knew the land, and said it was
Port Dauphine; and that the king of that part of the island was an enemy
to all white men, and treated all the Europeans in a most barbarous
manner. The reason whereof, and a succinct history of king Samuel, (for
that was his name,) I shall have occasion to mention hereafter. This
information put us into the utmost confusion and despair, and proved,
indeed, our utter ruin. The man who made this report, spoke his real
sentiments; for they were, indeed, enemies to the French, and had
murdered all they could find on the island, in revenge for an affront
some of that country had formerly given to king Samuel, but to no other
white men; so that had we put in there, we had at least saved our lives,
and some of our cargo; but our fate was fixed, and we were destined to
be destroyed in the most tragical manner, and all our endeavours to save
our lives served only to prolong our misery.

We durst not put into Port Dauphine, for fear of falling immediately
into the hands of these revengeful and bloody murderers, as we then
concluded them to be. We could not get to the northward, the wind being
north-east; neither was there any harbour or port to the westward, but
what was a week’s sail, at least, to it! Besides the western shore is
very steep.

Hereupon the captain resolved to steer along the western coast, and see
if he could find a proper place to run her into, or put ashore with
safety of our lives. At length we drew near the shore, but no place
could be found; and our hold being now half full of water, the men went
to the captain and asked him what he proposed to do, for the ship could
swim no longer. He went into the round-house for a few minutes, and when
he came out, he asked them if they approved of his running the ship on
shore at all adventures; to which they all unanimously agreed, and cried
out, “Any thing to save our lives.” Now here was a sand which ran along
for two leagues; we came within a quarter of a mile of the shore, and
let go an anchor first without the breakers, and then cut down our masts
and rigging, and threw our guns and heaviest goods overboard, and tried
all means to keep her up till we could get on shore. Having lost our
long-boat and pinnace at Bengal, we had but one small boat left, for
which reason we made a raft with some planks and yards.

At that time some of the natives were fishing, who, seeing us in
distress, made a smoke to guide and invite us to shore; but we had
entertained such a bad idea of them, that we could not tell presently
how to determine, though we were informed these were another prince’s
dominions.

We finished the raft that night, and in the morning sent Mr Pratt, our
chief mate, and four men in the boat with a long rope for a warp, to
fasten on the land. A great sea constantly runs here upon the rocks, and
before they got to land their boat was staved in pieces; however, being
pretty near it, by the help of some of the natives, who were negroes,
they saved that part of the boat to which the rope was fastened. We had
two English women on board, one of them would not venture on the raft,
nor would the captain, but the other woman, and about forty or fifty of
us did. I stript off all my clothes, but took two purses of money and a
silver cup, and tied them fast round my middle; we hauled by the rope
towards the shore, but were no sooner among the breakers, than the first
sea turned the raft topsy turvy, and washed us off; some swam to the
raft again, but were soon washed off, and though the woman was drowning
just by me, yet I could not save her. I sunk under every wave, and with
great difficulty got on shore, as did every one else that were on the
raft, but the woman. There was such a surf ran, and the sea broke so
high, that we durst not venture out with the raft again; which the
captain perceiving, ordered the cable to be cut, and let the ship drive
nearer the land, where she soon beat to pieces. The captain got on shore
with his father’s heart in his hand, which, according to his request,
when dying, was put into a bottle in order to be brought to England, and
buried at Dover.

At length they all got on shore on pieces of the ship, planks, &c. two
men only excepted, who were drowned, and the woman before-mentioned. The
other woman escaped, though she was so full of water as well as some
others, that we were obliged to roll and rub them well, to make them
disgorge the water; we laid them also before a great fire made for that
purpose, and in a little time they revived. We were, in all, above one
hundred and sixty, including the Lascars.

The country began now to be alarmed, and we had already two or three
hundred negroes flocking round us, picking up several pieces of silk and
fine calicoes; the muslin they had little or no regard for. Our goods
were driven ashore in whole bales, for what with saltpetre and other
things, we reckoned there might be three hundred tons left, after all
that was thrown overboard at sundry times before.

One of the negroes brought an ox to us, and intimated, by signs, that we
should kill him; but we made signs to them again to shoot him for us, we
having no ammunition; when one of them perceived this, he lent us his
gun ready charged, and with it one of our men shot the bullock dead on
the spot.

It was extremely shocking to see the negroes cut the beast, skin, and
flesh together, and sometimes the guts too, then toss them into the
fire, or ashes, as it happened, and eat them half roasted. I shuddered
for fear they should devour us in like manner, for they seemed to me to
be a kind of cannibals, of whom I had heard very dreadful stories. Every
thing, in short, appeared horrible to nature, and excited in us the most
dismal apprehensions.

If I here discovered some greater concern than became a man, I hope my
tender years, my little knowledge, and less experience, will plead in my
behalf. This tragical scene made such a deep impression on me, that as
often as it occurs to my mind, I start, and am shocked with the
frightful remembrance. If my observations are not so many, or so just
and judicious as they should be, they must be considered as the
reflections of a youth, and not of a man; for as I grew in years, it
will appear I increased in knowledge and courage, was capable of making
more solid remarks, and also of engaging in more bold and hazardous
adventures.

While the negroes were busy in opening our bales and taking what they
liked best, I observed several of them regarded the iron they found,
much more than all those goods we looked upon as valuable, and took a
great deal of pains to break all such pieces of timber as had iron in
them. I broke open my chest and took out only one suit of clothes,
leaving the rest to those who had most mind to them.

We remained thus two days and nights without coming to any final
resolution, not knowing what to do. We were told Port Dauphine was but
sixty miles from us, but the idea we had entertained of their being such
a barbarous people, prevented our going thither; but this debate was
soon put an end to by the deaan (or as our English sailors call him
king) of that part of the country.

For the next evening about nine o’clock, we heard a man call out
“Halloo,” at a great distance, like an Englishman, as he proved to be,
who, being immediately answered, came nearer, and asked who we were. We
told him the crew of an English East India ship, which proved so leaky,
that we were obliged to run her in here, as the first land we could make
for the preservation of our lives. Hereupon he came to us, and at our
request sat down with us by our fire, and told the captain that the king
had sent him to inform us we had no reason to be under any fearful
apprehensions, though we were in a strange country, and that he would
come down himself the next day to pay us a visit. The captain desired
him to give us what account he could of the country and the natives, and
also to inform us how he came there. We all crowded about him, not so
much out of a spirit of curiosity as to be able, by his relation, to
form a better judgment of our happy or unhappy situation. The
circumstances of his story were so very remarkable, and of so great
importance to us, that I dare say I can repeat them almost in his own
words, which were as follows:—

“I am an Englishman, born in the county of Middlesex; my parents, and
every body who should have taken care of me, being dead, I went to sea
very young. My first voyage was to the West Indies, but as I found
little or no encouragement there, I resolved to take a trip to the East
Indies, and in my passage thither, our ship was taken by a pirate about
a hundred leagues to the eastward of this island; they plundered her of
all her rigging, ammunition, and provisions; they took me and nine more
out of her, and then left the ship. During the time I was with them,
they took several rich prizes, and since there was no possibility of
avoiding it, I seemingly approved of all they did, and made one amongst
them. Whenever we wanted refreshments, we resorted to this island, where
we seldom failed of a supply. However, I soon grew weary of these
piratical proceedings, and being at anchor in Mattatan Road, where the
canoes came off as usual to sell us rice, plantains, milk, and honey,
&c., for our boat could not go ashore, such a great sea breaking upon
the strand; I took this favourable opportunity to feign myself very sick
and weak, and accordingly sent word to the captain, (whose name I must
not divulge, being sworn to the contrary,) of my ill state of health;
and thereupon, I entreated him to let me go on shore, in hope the land
air might refresh me, to which request he readily consented. I dressed
myself, and took with me as much gold and other valuable things as I
could possibly put into my pockets; but intrusted no one with my secret
resolution, since there was not a man on board who showed the least
inclination to leave their dangerous and villainous engagements. I
stepped into the canoe with all the satisfaction imaginable, thinking
myself much more happy in this country, barbarous and savage as it is,
than with my former wicked companions. The captain, indeed, sent a canoe
for me, but as I sent word that I was not capable of going to sea any
more, he never sent again.”

After I had been here about three months, captain Drummond, a Scotchman,
came in a merchant ship, to trade about the island; but in less than
three days after his arrival, a pirate took him as he rode at anchor:
however, he gave captain Drummond his own long-boat, and a few
necessaries. One captain Steward being with captain Drummond, the pirate
permitted him and three or four more hands to go ashore; and as the sea,
at that time, was very calm, they all landed very safe. Here was at the
same time another Englishman and his wife, who came from Sancta Maria,
who were companions for me. When we saw the long-boat come on shore, and
the ship sail away, we guessed how the case stood, and went to meet
them, and gave them a friendly invitation to our cottages, which were a
mile from the seaside. My companion and his wife were, I own, better
provided to entertain them than myself. However, as we could all speak
enough of the country language to deal with the natives for what we
wanted, we were very serviceable to our new comers.

Captain Drummond being very much dejected at the loss of his ship, and
his melancholy situation, resolved, if possible, to get to St
Augustine’s Bay, which is a place where ships frequently come to get
water and fresh provisions. He asked us if we were willing to go with
him, to which proposition we readily assented. In a week’s time we had
got provisions enough, such as beef, rice, water, and fuel; and got our
long-boat in good repair. We were nine in all with my companion’s wife,
and a negro.

For three or four days we sailed along the shore, and got to the
southward of Port Dauphine, but at last the wind shifted, and blowed so
hard we could sail no longer; so that in short, we drove on shore within
three or four leagues of the place where we are at present. We saved all
our lives, with our money, guns, powder, shot, &c. but the long-boat was
staved in pieces.

The natives, who lived near the sea, perceiving our distressed
condition, came down to succour us, and carried us up to their town; for
they found we had a smattering of their language; and as we had a negro
with us they were no way afraid, though they never saw any white men
before: nay, they were so civil, that we wanted for nothing with which
they could assist us. However, they soon sent up into the country to
inform their deaan, or king, of our arrival; who sent his son, and a
commanding officer with fifty men to bring us up before him. Though they
were all armed with guns and lances, yet we refused to go with them, and
were as resolute as we durst be in opposing them: but they soon made
themselves masters of our ammunition.

Captain Drummond was for defending ourselves to the last extremity, and
not to deliver up our arms; but being fully persuaded, that it was
impossible to get off from them by force, on account of their number, I
advised him to comply; and see if we could not obtain our desires by
softer measures. We told them we desired to go to Port Dauphine, (St
Augustine’s Bay being too far for us to travel by land,) but in short,
we could not prevail; for they obliged us to go with them.

We made it three days’ journey to the place of their king’s residence:
when we came there, and were carried before him, he was drinking toake,
(which is made of honey and water like mead;) his sons and generals were
with him, and all perfectly merry. He asked captain Drummond to drink,
but the captain, pretending to be sick, refused it. I was their
interpreter; the king bid me tell him, he should want for nothing the
country afforded. The captain desired I would return for answer, that as
he wanted to be in his own country, he begged he might be permitted to
go where we might get shipping.

On this the king, with a stern aspect, replied, let the captain be
informed, if he does not know when he is well used, I do; there are
several kings on this island, who have white men among them, and why
shall not I? Since our gods have been so good as to send you here, you
shall never go with my consent, as long as I govern here.

Upon this, captain Drummond’s colour rose, and looking sternly at the
king, let him know (said he to me) that had I suspected this beforehand,
he should never have seen my face alive; I would have sent some of their
black souls to hell. It is not their gods but fortune that has put me
into his power, and the same fortune may again deliver me out of it.
Hereupon he got up without taking his leave, and went to our cottage. I
stayed long enough to tell the king what he had said, and without
waiting for an answer, got up, and followed the captain.

The king seeing captain Drummond go away in a passion, in order to
appease him, sent one of his generals with an ox for us to kill; and
desired the captain to make himself easy, since both he and his friends
should be well provided for; if we could eat an ox every day we should
be welcome to it. The captain sent my companion’s wife, whose name was
Deude, with a compliment to the king, and to return him thanks for the
care he took to provide so plentifully for our support; but withal to
tell him, we did not think life worth preserving without the freedom of
enjoying it; and if we were not permitted to go home to our native
country, no indulgence whatsoever could make us easy.

In this state we continued about a fortnight, before we made any attempt
to escape; but at last, considering we were about five days’ journey
from Port Dauphine, we agreed to go thither; to steal away by night, and
get what provision we thought proper: as to ammunition, or arms, we had
none, nor could we get any: except that my companion had two pocket
pistols, which the natives had not discovered when they plundered us;
and the country being woody, we thought we should be able to conceal
ourselves well enough.

According to this resolution, on a moonlight night, we got out of the
town undiscovered; and were soon among the thickets. By daylight,
however, they missed us; and the news being carried to the king, he
ordered us to be pursued. They soon tracked us, for our shoes
distinguished our footing, and came up with us before night; but as they
knew we had nothing to defend ourselves, they did not offer any violence
to us; but only told us we must go back with them to their king. Captain
Drummond peremptorily declared, that we would not go back. When they saw
our resolution, and that fair words were ineffectual, they then took
hold of us. My companion, not having his hands secured, took out his
pistols, and wounded one of them. They seemed enraged at this action,
however they did nothing more than bind us, till they had made a strict
search for more pistols; but finding no more, they marched back with us
to their king. As soon as he saw us, he looked upon us with a frowning
and menacing aspect, and having but one eye and thin jaws, his
countenance seemed still more terrible. He bid me tell the captain and
all of them, that if ever we offered to run away again, he would make us
dearly repent it. As to the man who was wounded, though we were
apprehensive of being called to account for it, neither he nor any one
else said any thing about the matter.

This was about two months ago; since that time nothing remarkable has
happened, till yesterday news came of your being cast away; and the king
immediately ordered me down with the message I have delivered to you
from him. My friends are guarded for fear they should make their escape,
and come to you; as for my own part, I endeavour to sooth him and tell
him I will remain with him as long as I live; and he puts some
confidence in me. This, sir, is a short, but true narrative of the
miseries and misfortunes we are under; and which, I am afraid, will be
more now our numbers are increased.

Sam having made an end of his story, to which every body listened with
the utmost attention, we parted and went with heavy hearts to our
respective quarters, which were under the bushes. It was very late, and
we endeavoured to repose ourselves as well as we could; the pieces of
muslin served us to spread on the ground for beds; but as for my own
part, I could not close my eyes to rest. I now began to reflect on my
former obstinacy and perverseness; the thought of my tender mother’s
begging me on her knees not to go to sea, gave me the most distracting
torture. I could now see my error and repent; but who could I blame but
myself? Here were many poor men, who had no other way to live; but I was
reduced to no such necessity: I ran headlong into misery, and severely
felt the effects of it. Tears I shed in plenty; but could not with any
justice, complain of fate or Providence; for my punishment was but the
natural result of my own ill conduct.

We were all up by daylight, and most of my fellow-sufferers got as
little rest as I; for the man’s relation had made us give over all hopes
of relief, and nothing but sorrow, distress, and despair appeared in all
its dismal forms in each man’s face, according to his different
constitution. We could save neither arms nor ammunition, the want of
which completed our ruin; for near one hundred and seventy of us would
have made our way through that part of the country we wanted to travel,
had we but wherewithal to defend ourselves; but fate had ordained it
otherwise, which was in all respects as bad as bad could be. So that we
had only our lives left us, for no other purpose than to be conscious of
pain, misery, and perpetual slavery; which was no more than we could
reasonably expect.

About one o’clock in the afternoon, the king came down with about two
hundred negroes. They brought no fire-arms with them, lest we should
seize them by force; but they were armed with lances. As soon as we saw
them approaching us, we all stood together in a body, with our captain
at the head of us. When they drew near, he called Sam, which was the
man’s name he sent to us, and asked him, who was our captain? As soon as
he was informed, he came up to him and took him by the hand, and said in
a familiar manner, “salamonger, captain;” which is a term of salutation,
much like our saying “your servant, sir.” The captain returned the
compliment; Sam having informed him before in what manner he should
behave himself to the king. His majesty brought with him four large
bullocks, six calabashes of toake, ten baskets of potatoes, and ten pots
of honey; all which he presented to our captain, and gave us moreover
two or three earthen pots to dress our victuals in: we immediately
roasted the potatoes. He stayed two hours with us, before he withdrew to
the cottage, where he proposed to lodge that night; and asked several
questions about our ship, and the manner of her being lost. He told the
captain he was heartily sorry for his misfortunes, though in my opinion
that was nothing but a compliment; for as I found afterwards, he was
more brutish and dishonest, than most of the other kings on the island;
and his whole nation was clothed for many years out of the effects they
saved from our wreck. At this time he took no notice to our captain of
carrying us up to his own residence.

The next morning he paid us another visit, and then he told us that he
expected we should prepare to go along with him to his town; and there
we should want for nothing the country could afford us. Captain Younge
ordered the interpreter to acquaint the king, that he returned him a
thousand thanks for the civilities he had already received; and that he
was not only unable to make him satisfaction, but very unwilling to put
him to further trouble, and charge of maintaining so great a number of
people. The king replied, that if we were as many more he should not
think us either a burthen or a charge; since he should look upon it as
an honour to have so many white men in his dominions.

The captain, by this last artful speech, perceived his whole intention;
which shocked him to that degree, that he could scarce tell what to say
to him; but after a little reflection, and looking wishfully on Sam, he
directed him to say that we have wives, children, and relations, who are
impatient to see us, and we are as desirous of seeing them; that it was
impossible for us to live here always; and for that reason, we begged he
would permit us to go to some port where we might meet with ships and
return to our native country. The king paused awhile before he made any
reply; but at length he ordered Sam to tell us, that we should stay in
his country till some ships should come there to trade; and that then we
should go home. The captain knowing there was no port in his dominions,
nor any harbour for a ship to put into, took it to be artifice all, and
a mere compliment, for we might stay for ever before a ship came there
with the view he proposed. He therefore desired Sam to tell him he would
think of it, and return an answer the next day; upon this the king
departed and gave us no farther trouble at that time.

As soon as he was gone the captain called us all together, and in a very
pathetic speech addressed himself to us in the following manner:—“I am
now on an equality with the meanest man here present, my fortune is as
low and my life is as little to be regarded: I do not pretend,
therefore, to command, but to consult with you what is most expedient to
be done in the present unhappy situation of our affairs. However,” said
he, “I am happy in this, that though my life and liberty are lost as
well as yours, yet this misfortune is not any ways chargeable on me, for
I would rather have kept on my course to the Cape of Good Hope, and
relied on Providence in a leaky ship, than put in here, but you
strenuously opposed it; for death, in my opinion, is to be preferred to
our present slavery, and the consequences that will naturally attend it.
In death our sorrows will have an end, but now, who can tell the
troubles and torments we shall yet undergo; (at this the tears stood in
his eyes.) Consider, gentlemen,” said he, “we have neither arms nor
ammunition wherewith to defend ourselves; and I have endeavoured to
prevail on the king to give us a passage through his country to a
seaport, but in vain; think of it, therefore,” says he, “and consult
your own safety as well as you can; be but of one mind, and I am ready
to comply with any thing you would have me: as for my own life, I set no
value upon it; it would not now be worth preserving, but for the hopes I
have of being serviceable to my friends. Remember I must return an
answer to-morrow morning, and I will advise nothing, nor do any thing
without your concurrence.”

We went together and consulted, as the captain advised, and came soon to
an agreement; for the matter in debate lay within a small compass; the
king had refused to give us leave to go to a seaport, and we had no arms
to fight and force our way, if we could have found it; we therefore
determined to go quietly up the country with the king, to the place of
his residence, where we were in hopes of seeing and conversing with
captain Drummond, captain Steward, and the other people, who (being
gallant and courageous men, and by this time somewhat acquainted with
the natives) might probably be capable of giving us more proper and
seasonable advice.

We then acquainted the captain with our resolution, and he seemed to be
very well contented with it; for indeed, he was not over solicitous what
became of himself since he had in so unhappy a manner lost his ship and
fortune, and despaired of ever getting off the island.

Next morning the king paid the captain a visit; they saluted each other
in their usual manner, and sat down together upon the sand, whilst we
all stood round them; soon after the king ordered Sam to ask the captain
if he was ready to go, for it would be best to walk in the cool of the
morning and rest at noon. The captain observed that he did not ask
whether he was inclined to go or not, as might reasonably be expected
since he pretended to give him time to consider of it, but peremptorily
asked, if he was ready to go.

As the captain saw there was no avoiding it, and having our consent, it
signified nothing to dispute it; so he told him we were ready to wait on
him when he pleased. At this the king seemed fully satisfied, and
ordered Sam to tell us he would breakfast first and advised us to do so
too, that we might be the better enabled to perform our journey.

We had little satisfaction, however, in eating and drinking, especially
since the hour was come in which we were obliged to leave the seaside;
and it galled us severely to think how we were forced up the country
like a flock of sheep, at the pleasure of a parcel of barbarous negroes,
without any power to make terms for ourselves like men. Some cursed and
others bewailed their hard fortune, nor were reflections wanting; for my
own part, though I could not, at that time, see any reason for
complaint, yet I have since thought that our captain was young, and had
not so much experience as his father, who would not have put to sea from
Mauritius in a leaky vessel, but have taken out the company’s cargo and
left it there, till another ship had been sent for it, and saved all our
lives; however Providence ordained it otherwise.

The king sent, and the word was given to march. I was ready in an
instant, for I carried nothing with me but what I brought ashore; but
many of our people took pieces of silk and fine calico. We assembled
together, and went to see the place where the king’s tent was pitched.
We were no sooner come, than he was for marching. We left the sea with
heavy hearts, looking very wishfully back as long as we could discern
it; and as oft as we did, we observed the negroes hard at work, breaking
up our bales, and enriching themselves with the plunder of our goods; in
short, they were so busy that but few went back with the king.

Our people were but ill-disposed for travelling, since every body was
tired with working, and want of rest; many were lamed with hurts
received in getting on shore; some were also without shoes, and most of
us had but bad ones; then again, the country near the seaside and some
few miles further, is full of short underwood and thorny shrubs, which
tore our clothes to rags, for the path was very narrow, and before this
accident but little frequented; the ground also was sandy, so that when
the sun was advanced pretty high, it scorched our feet to that degree
that we were scarcely able to walk.

About noon we came to one of their small mean villages, consisting of
about eight or ten houses, or rather huts, for they were not above six
or seven feet high, and about eight or nine feet in length, and their
doors not above three or four feet high; our people crept into these
hovels to rest, and to see what they could meet with to refresh
themselves. Some found honey, others milk, and others beef, for the king
had given us free permission to take what eatables soever came to hand.
The inhabitants were all absent, the men at the seaside making advantage
of our wreck, and the women and children fled into the woods at our
approach. We passed several of these poor villages, but saw few of the
people. Here we reposed ourselves till the heat abated, when we made
ourselves but a poor compensation by robbing them of their trifles,
while they were enriching themselves with our most valuable commodities;
however, I observed some of our people found a secret pleasure in
gratifying their resentment.

In the cool of the evening we marched again, and in a little time came
to a more open and better road. As we were now some miles from the sea
the king left us, and went before to his seat, leaving us to march at
our leisure; having before taken care that we should not want
provisions, and left his chief officer (whom I shall call his general)
strict orders to supply us with whatever we wanted, and what the country
would afford.

At night we came to another of these little villages, where we killed a
bullock, and got a few earthen pots to cook our meat in; the water was
very thick and nasty, they having none but what they fetched at a great
distance out of holes and pits in the woods, and kept in calabashes, or
long tubs, which hold about four or five gallons each; however it served
our purpose, for at that time we were not very curious. We reposed
ourselves on the ground in the best manner we could, and rose the next
morning by daylight. We had beef for our breakfast without any bread or
roots in the room of it, and our meat was full of sand; however, eating
and drinking was the least of our concern at that time. We passed this
day much after the same manner as the day before, with this difference
only, that those who wanted shoes were sadly harassed in the woods.

On the third day of our march we came to our journey’s end; we were
obliged to walk much faster than either of the two former, having more
ground to traverse and less time to do it in, for we were ordered to be
at the king’s town before sunset. I missed one of my purses in this
day’s journey, but the loss of it was not of any great importance to me
at that time, for it would have been of little service to me had I kept
it; but the loss of a medal afterwards which my dear mother had
presented me as a testimony of her love, and a token to remember her,
was no small addition to my other misfortunes.

The residence of this king is about fifty miles from the seaside, for I
reckon we might travel sixteen or seventeen miles a day. It stands in a
wood secured with trees all round it, which seem to have been planted
there when very young; they grow very regular and tall, and so close
together, that a small dog cannot pass between them. They are likewise
armed with large strong thorns, so that there is no breaking through or
climbing over them. There are but two passages or gates, which are so
narrow that two only can go abreast; one of these is to the northward,
and the other to the southward; the whole is about a mile in
circumference.

When we came near our journey’s end we halted, whilst Sam went to inform
the king of our arrival. We were ordered to wait till he was ready for
our reception; our captain too put us into the best form he could,
ordering all our baggage and such things as our people brought with
them, to be lodged under a tamarind tree, and three or four Lascars to
look after them. He soon sent for us, and we marched in order by fours.
The king was sitting on a mat, cross-legged, in the open air, just
before the door of his palace, with a gun leaning on his shoulder, and a
brace of pistols lying by his side; his sons and kinsman sat in the same
manner on the ground on each hand of him, armed with guns and lances;
the natives joined them on both sides, and formed together a semicircle;
most of these were likewise furnished with guns and lances. There were
mats spread from one end of the people to the other for us to sit on, so
that when we had joined them, the assembly was almost a circular form.
We were somewhat concerned to see them all thus in arms, till Sam
informed us, that they never go from one house to another without them.

As soon as we were seated, the king (by Sam) assured the captain he was
welcome, and sent for ten calabashes of toake, six he gave to our
people, three to his own, and one he reserved for our captain and
himself. He also sent for captain Drummond, captain Steward, and the
rest of their company. Captain Younge arose to salute them, and after
the usual compliments were passed, the captains sat down together. The
king ordered a servant to pour out some toake into a clean earthen cup
which he kept for his own use, and drank it up without drinking to any
body, but ordered some more to be poured out for our captain in another
cup, but as it was dirty he refused it. The king asked Sam the reason of
it, who told him the truth, so the king sent a man immediately to wash
it. The captain, indeed, expected to be served out of the king’s cup,
but Sam informed him, that neither black nor white, nor even his wives
or children, ever drank out of his cup; and this is the general custom
of the country.

When I saw the servant returning with the cup our captain had refused, I
took out my silver one, and presented it to him; after we had all drank
out of it, the king desired to see it, and was so wonderfully pleased
with it that he desired to keep it. But the captain informed him that it
was none of his, but belonged to a lad that was behind him. I called to
Sam and desired him to acquaint the king, that since so many people had
drank out of it, I humbly conceived it could not be fit for his use. At
this he and the people round him laughed heartily. He ordered me to
stand up that he might see me; however I saved my cup this time. Night
drawing on he withdrew, ordering us a bullock for our supper.
Notwithstanding his courteous reception of us, he would not trust us all
to lie within the gates of the town; our captain, Mr Prat, our chief
mate, Mr Bembo, our second mate, and myself, were the only persons that
were so far indulged. We had a hutch ordered us next to captain Drummond
and his companions, but the rest of the people lay without the gates
under the trees.

In this manner we lived for some few days; what particular amusements
some of our people found out to pass away their tedious hours I know
not, but there occurred to me an affair of a most agreeable and
surprising nature, which some would have improved, and made use of to
advantage.

This king had a daughter about thirteen or fourteen years of age who
would talk to me sometimes an hour or two together, though I did not
comprehend one word she said. Though she seemed to be very desirous I
should know her meaning, yet she was very modest, and used no indecent
gestures to intimate any vicious inclinations, neither did I entertain
any idea of an intrigue, so that our conversation on my side aimed at
nothing; this she at length perceived, and sent Sam to me one day to
desire I would come to her nurse’s house where she was educated, and
partake of a small entertainment. I went along with him, and as soon as
we entered I found a mat spread on one side of the house, on which she
desired us to seat ourselves, and ordered one of her attendants to boil
some guinea corn and milk and roast some beef. She sat down over against
me, and though I had no notion of love, yet I could not help observing a
particular softness in the tone of her voice; and when she inquired of
Sam about our misfortunes, she showed abundance of concern for us; and
looked at me with a more than common pleasure, as people of taste do at
pictures which please them; and, in short, stared me almost out of
countenance. I imagined she was resolved to know me again, by her narrow
observance of every motion. She was extremely courteous and obliging,
and often sighed with pity at the sense she seemed to have of our
deplorable condition. I looked upon her as a good-natured creature, and
that curiosity more than love had made her fond of conversing with a
white man, which is a novelty in their country.

We were just entering into the best part of the conversation, and our
interpreter had begun, at her request, to acquaint me with the reason of
her extraordinary complaisance and observance of me, when her mother
came to the door, and desired her to take a walk with her without the
gates to see the white men. I was a little nettled at this interruption,
and she seemed much more concerned at it herself; however it would have
been an act of the highest disobedience in her to have refused her
mother’s request; so she complied with a seeming readiness, and we
returned.

Sam told me he had private orders from her to inform me, that she was in
love with me; but laid her commands upon him to say nothing of it to any
person whomsoever, either white or black. I was strangely startled at
this open declaration, and that this was the private motive that induced
her to be fond of my company and conversation. Since I came to be a man,
I have stood astonished at my own stupidity in putting a modest young
lady of her birth and character to the mortification of acquainting me
with her love, and exposing herself to the censures of another man. I
have nothing to plead in my excuse, but that being a lad scarce sixteen
years of age, the discovery of so important a secret created in me more
fear than affection; lest the consequences of so dangerous an affair
might prove fatal to me. She sent again for me that very night, and I
attended her accordingly; and behaved myself with all the decency and
good manners, as common prudence and gratitude for her civilities
obliged me to. I knew she was the king’s darling, and therefore dreaded
to disoblige her, lest she might tell her father what story she thought
proper and destroy me in a moment. At length I perceived she was equally
afraid of her father’s knowledge of her passion; so that I looked upon
myself in danger on both sides: for which reason, when Sam informed me
that she desired my company again the next night, I pretended to be very
sick and unable to go abroad; so that this affair, which might have
proved highly agreeable to some warmer persons, proved to me, in the
circumstances I was then, a matter of vexation and fatigue; but two days
after, our amour, if I may call it so, was totally disconcerted.

Every morning we went, as was expected, in a body to visit the king; but
one morning he ordered Sam to inform us, that he had an inveterate enemy
to the westward, who had hitherto proved too powerful for him; but since
his gods had been so indulgent as to send some white men into his
dominions, he would embrace so favourable an opportunity once more to
try his strength with our assistance; but in the mean time he should be
obliged to distribute us among his sons, who lived at distant towns, not
only for the convenience of providing for such a number of us, (there
not being room enough in this town,) but to ease himself of a charge
which was too great and burthensome for him to support alone. He also
sent to me this night to beg the silver cup before-mentioned, with which
request (knowing it was in his power to take it by force if he thought
fit) I readily complied. This unexpected separation was a terrible blow
to us, and we returned to our cottages with heavy hearts, well knowing,
if we could not find out some way to prevent it, there were no hopes of
ever getting off the island.

Hereupon the three captains, viz. Drummond, Steward, and Younge, with
some of the chief of our people, entered immediately into a consultation
about what was proper to be done in this emergency; and to make some
bold attempt for our lives and liberty. Captain Drummond, as I heard
afterwards, was the man who proposed to take the king prisoner; and by
that means to make their own terms with the natives. Now captain
Drummond and some others were men of experience and undaunted
resolution: our captain, indeed, had courage enough, but he was too
young. However, the proposition was universally approved of, and the
time and manner of the execution was fixed. I was too young to be
admitted as one of the council; therefore I shall not pretend to relate
what reasons were produced either for, or against the proposal; though I
was told afterwards: that night, however, I was wholly ignorant. I
observed captain Younge and Mr Bembo to talk with great earnestness, but
in whispers, and with the utmost precaution. As I was then a stranger to
that design I slept soundly, till I was roused in the morning by a great
and sudden noise in the town, occasioned by the plot being put into
execution. Our people went, as usual, betimes in the morning to pay
their compliments to the king; and whilst some of them were at the
prince’s house the signal was given by one of captain Drummond’s men
firing a pistol; at which the king was seized, and his son at the same
instant.

This instantly alarmed the whole town. I started up without my shoes,
being frighted at the sudden outcry. Not knowing what was the matter,
and seeing the negroes flocking out of the town, I ran with them, till I
was taken notice of by one of our men, who called me back; and I was as
much amazed as the natives to see the king, his consort, and one of his
sons, with their hands tied behind them, under the guard of our people.
They soon plundered the king’s mansion-house, and every other place
where they could find any agreeable plunder. We happened to find about
thirty small arms, a small quantity of powder and shot, and a few
lances. The natives (as I observed before) ran out of the town, but they
did it with no other view than to procure assistance; for they soon
alarmed the country, and returned with great numbers from all the
adjacent towns; and immediately besieged us. They fired in upon us, and
wounded one of our men in the groin; on which captain Younge ordered Sam
to tell the king if they fired any more they would kill him that very
moment. The king hearing their resolution, called to his men, and
desired them to desist if they had a mind to save his life.

This attempt, indeed, was bold and hazardous, and some perhaps may
censure it as criminal; I shall not say much in its defence: but since I
have arrived to years of maturity, I cannot forbear reflecting that if
nature, even in a christian country, will rebel against principle, what
will it not do for life and liberty under the tyranny and oppression of
a barbarous and savage nation!

However, at length we put ourselves in a posture of defence and marched
out of the town. Six men under arms marched in the front, and in the
body where the king was, six went armed before him and six behind; three
before his son and three behind him; and six brought up the rear, in
which were the Lascars. Captain Younge, out of compassion, would have
released the queen, and let her go wherever she pleased, but she would
not abandon her husband.

We had not gone above four miles on our march, before our wounded
companion fainted; and not being able to carry him off, we were forced
to leave him by the side of a pond of water; where, as I was afterwards
informed, they soon put him out of his pain, by striking their lances
into several parts of his body. Having marched about two or three miles
farther, we got out of the woods, and found ourselves in a spacious,
open plain, where we could see all around us; and soon found that our
enemies were not only near, but numerous, and threatened immediately to
attack us. We faced towards them, our armed men being in the front, with
the king bound before them. Sam was ordered at the same time to tell
him, that our design was not to hurt either him or his son, nor to carry
them into their enemies’ country, but only to detain them as hostages
for our safeguard while we passed through his dominions; and that as
soon as we came to the borders of Port Dauphine, we would let them go
again, and give them back the arms and ammunition we had taken from
them; but if the least violence were offered to us we would sacrifice
them both; and this we desired him to tell his people.

Hereupon he called one of his generals to him, assuring him that he
should receive no harm. Accordingly he left his gun and lance behind him
and came to us, where he was informed, both by us and the king, of our
resolution; upon which he told us there should not be a gun fired whilst
we preserved the king alive, and gave him civil treatment.

This parley being over, we continued our march through the plain till
near evening; many of us without shoes as well as myself, and some sick;
which obliged us to take up our quarters sooner than we would otherwise
have done; so that every one was almost faint and glad of rest. The king
ordered Sam to tell us that an ox should be sent to us forthwith. We
made a trench, like a ring, in the midst whereof we planted the black
king and his son; our captain, and some few others were appointed as a
guard over them: our armed men were divided into four parts, in order to
secure us in the best manner they could. We had just finished our camp,
when the officer, who had been with us before, and three other men
brought us a bullock. He brought likewise some roasted meat in his hand,
and a horn of water for the king; so we loosed our royal prisoners’
hands that they might feed themselves. They eat some small matter, and
gave the remainders to captain Younge.

Whilst we were employed in killing the ox, we desired the king to send
some of his people into the woods for some fuel to dress it; which he
readily did, and they soon brought us sufficient for our purpose. But
all this time we wanted water, and complained thereof to the king; who
assured us that there was none to be got near that place by several
miles; and that what small quantity was given him in the horn was
brought from that very pond where we left the wounded man; which could
not be less than about ten miles’ distance. This very much disheartened
us; for we were parched with thirst, which was the more increased by the
fatigue of our long march, and the heat of the country. However, there
was no help for us, and patience was the only remedy. When the king and
his son had supped, we bound their hands before them that they might
sleep as easily as they could; so after we had cut up our bullock, and
divided it amongst us, broiled and eat it, though with but little
satisfaction, for want of water; and when we had made as good a supper
as our unhappy circumstances would admit of, we also used our best
endeavours to repose ourselves. The three captains, however, agreed to
watch alternately, and divided our people into three parts for that
purpose. The king entreated his wife to go home and to comfort his
children; but more particularly recommended his beloved daughter to her
care. She went at his request, but shed tears at her departure; as did
also the king and his son. Such of us as were not on the watch lay down,
but we had a wretched night; for the ground was stony, and there was but
little grass; and what was a still greater affliction, we were excessive
dry, and had nothing to quench our thirst.

At dawn of day we arose, which was the second day of our travel, and the
better to support ourselves under the fatigue of it, we eat part of the
remains of our beef; but it was a miserable repast, as we had nothing to
drink. However, we put ourselves in the same order as we had done the
day before, and went forwards; the natives perceiving us in motion,
moved too, but kept at a greater distance, and went into our camp after
we had quitted it to see what they could find, and their labour was not
altogether lost; for many of our people thought proper to leave half
those India goods they had brought out of the town behind them, that
they might travel with less fatigue. We walked with more ease half this
day than we did the day before, it proving cloudy weather and cool.
About noon the general who had been with us before, came with some roast
meat, and a horn of water for the king and his son. As we did not loose
their hands, we were forced to feed them. The general ordered Sam to ask
the captains if they would release the king for six guns. I perceived
there was a debate between them and Mr Bembo: some thinking the six guns
would be of great service to us, especially as we should still have the
king’s son. Others were of opinion that it would be more for our safety
to keep the king; however it was agreed at last that he should be
dismissed. We informed the general that if they would give us six very
good guns, and promise on their honour not to follow us, but return with
their king, we would let him go; and that as soon as we came to the
river Manderra, which divided his dominions from those of Port Dauphine,
we would release the king’s son, and leave all their arms behind us.

The general was startled at this unexpected condescension of our people,
and despatched away one of his attendants to the king’s other sons, who
were not far off with their army, to acquaint them with our proposal;
and in half an hour’s time returned to us with six of the best guns.
They made the more haste lest our minds should alter. We kept them no
longer in suspense than while we took the guns to pieces, to see whether
they were in good condition or not; and finding them better than we
could reasonably have expected in such a country, we released their
king, and sent him away with the general. He took his leave of the
prince, and went directly to his army. We were so near as to see the
ceremony of his sons meeting him, who fell down and embraced his knees,
and with all the earnestness imaginable, shedding tears for joy. After
they had kissed and licked his knees and legs for about five or six
minutes, they arose to give his head officers an opportunity of paying
the like homage; and after them, some others of an inferior station;
who, in general, expressed a most sincere and passionate affection to
his person, and showed all the demonstrations of joy imaginable on
account of his return. This ceremonial over, they all hallooed and fired
their guns as a public testimony of their general joy and satisfaction.

We could not help halting to observe this scene, but before it was
perfectly concluded we marched forwards as well as we could, though with
no small difficulty: for notwithstanding it continued cloudy, yet the
afternoon was sultry hot, and our thirst increasing, we began to grow
sensibly weaker and weaker; our captains, however, walked slowly on,
which made our journey something easier. We asked the prince if there
was no water near at hand; he informed us that there was none to be got
till we came to Manderra river, which we should not be able to reach
that night. Though it was not easy for us to miss our way, yet we made
him our guide. The natives had told us before, that the plain we were in
was long, and of no great breadth in proportion to the length; but
extended itself near east and west to the river. As soon as we came to a
sandy place, we halted and formed our camp, it being then near sunset.
This was somewhat softer for us to lie on than our situation the night
before. The natives perceiving that we began to encamp, followed our
example. They divided themselves accordingly into six parties, and so
ordered their matters that they almost surrounded us; which did not a
little surprise us. However we appointed our watch as before; but here
to our misfortune we could find neither victuals nor water; and were
almost parched with thirst. In short, we were reduced to so great an
extremity, that we crawled on the ground to lick the dew; and this was
all the refreshment we could then meet with.

On the third day of our march we rose early, and put forward as well as
we could. The negroes, who strictly observed our motions, were as ready
as we; but we placed our armed men in the front, determining to make a
bold push for it, if they attempted to obstruct our passage. They
divided, and let us proceed without molestation; and though we travelled
all the morning yet we met with nothing remarkable, till we arrived at a
little round hill, whereon there stood a prodigiously large tub, about
six feet high, which held near a hundred gallons, and was full of toake.
Our people were going immediately to drain it dry, but Sam threw it down
and spilt all the liquor; asking us with some warmth, if we were so
blind as not to see the plot that was laid for our destruction: for it
was planted there to tempt us to drink, with no other intention than to
poison us all; or at least to intoxicate us to that degree, that they
might rescue their prince without opposition, and murder us at their
pleasure.

While we were reflecting on this extraordinary action, the general and
two or three more came up to us, and asked Sam what reason he could
offer for spilling the toake. To which he made no regular reply, but bid
him begone about his business. The general desired to speak with the
young prince, and after a little discourse with him, directed Sam to
acquaint captain Younge that if he should think fit to release the
prince, they would give him three of the head-men of the country in
exchange. The captain told him, if he would consent to be one of them,
they would agree to it. He excused himself on account of his family,
who, as he pretended, would be inconsolable should he leave them;
however, he would engage that his own brother, who had no children,
should be one of the hostages.

Captain Younge, who imagined that they followed us on account of their
prince only, and that if we should release him they would return back,
complied with the general’s proposition. Upon this he posted away to the
army, and acquainted the other princes with the agreement he had made;
for the king went directly home as soon as he left us. We marched on,
determining to lose no time, and the general returned in less than an
hour with three men; and informed us, that he had brought his brother
and two more of the chief of their people in exchange for the prince;
and as to the arms then in our possession which belonged to their king,
we might, when we had no further occasion for them, leave them according
to our promise with these three men, who would take care to send them
home.

We took the three men, and having tied their hands behind them,
delivered up the prince. He shook hands with our captains, and went to
the army; as soon as his brethren saw him at a distance they ran to meet
him, as did also many others, who seemed to be more transported with joy
for his deliverance, than they were before for his father’s.

We proceeded on our journey as well as men could without provisions, and
were too soon convinced of captain Younge’s mistake; for the negroes
instead of retiring approached nearer to us, and some marched before us;
so that we expected every minute when they would attack us. We had a
young lad in our company who lost his leg at Bengal. Notwithstanding he
was well recovered, and supplied with a wooden one well fitted, yet it
cannot be imagined that he should be able to keep up with us; for being
now surprised by their surrounding us, we doubled our pace; and, in
short, were obliged to leave this poor lad behind us. We saw the
barbarians come up with him, take off his wooden leg, and first insult
him; then they thrust their lances into his body, and left him wallowing
in his blood. Being eye-witnesses of this act of inhumanity, and
apprehensive of the like treatment, we hurried on as fast as our feeble
limbs could carry us till sunset; when we came to a large tamarind tree,
the leaves whereof, as they were sour, we chewed to moisten our mouths.
The fruit itself was not then in season.

The three negroes whom we had taken as hostages, observing what had
passed, and thinking their lives in danger, called to Sam and the
captains, and told them they had a scheme to propose which would be for
the safety of us all, which was this:—that as soon as it was dark we
should keep marching on as silently as possible all the night. The
captains approved of this proposal, and ordered none of us to sleep, but
to be ready as soon as the watchword was given. This was very grievous
considering how tired we were the day before; but we submitted
cheerfully to any thing which gave us hopes of escaping from the violent
hands of those bloodthirsty barbarians. As soon as it was dark enough to
conceal our flight we assembled together, and took a considerable
quantity of muslins and calicoes and hung them upon the bushes, that the
spies, who we knew watched us, might not any ways mistrust our sudden
removal.

We walked off accordingly undiscovered by them. Captain Drummond,
however, being taken so ill that he could not walk at all, none of us
being strong enough to carry him, we resolved to make the three negroes
perform that office by turns. After we had thus travelled most part of
the night, we came to a thicket among some cotton trees, where the man
who had the charge of captain Drummond, pretending to ease himself,
threw the captain upon the ground, ran away into the wood, and we never
saw him more. Upon this we had a more watchful eye over the other two
and led him whose turn it was to carry the captain with a rope about his
neck.

Weak as we were, we travelled a great many miles that night, and were
glad when the day broke in upon us; for the negroes had told us before,
that if we walked hard all night we should be at Manderra river betimes
in the morning. And their information was just; for as soon as we came
to a little hill, the sun then just rising, we had a prospect of the
river, though at a considerable distance; however, the hopes we had of
coming to it in a short time, and of getting water to quench our thirst,
gave us no small pleasure, and our spirits began to revive at the very
sight of it. It was some comfort to us likewise to think that the king’s
dominions extended no farther; notwithstanding there were no inhabitants
to protect us within several miles on the other side. Some of our
people, who were more tired than the rest, took liberty to sit down to
refresh themselves; as taking it for granted, that the negro army would
never come in sight of us again.

But this vain notion of being safe and secure too quickly vanished; for
as soon as they missed us in the morning, they pursued us like so many
greyhounds; and before we got within a mile of Manderra river overtook
us. Thereupon they began to butcher our men then resting under the
trees, striking their lances into their sides and throats. Though I was
one of those who could not travel well, yet there were twenty behind me;
the woman, whose life was preserved in our ship, was next to me. I
seeing them kill our people in this barbarous manner, threw off my coat
and waistcoat, and trusted to my heels, for the foremost of our people
having passed the river, and I not being far off took courage; but
hearing the report of a gun, I looked back, and saw the poor woman fall,
and the negroes sticking their lances in her sides. My turn was next,
for the same negroes pursued me, and before I was got to the brink of
the river they fired a gun at me; but I jumped in. Our men who had got
safely over, made a stand, in order to defend those who were behind; and
notwithstanding the negroes followed me so close, I could not refrain
from drinking two or three times out of my hat, let the consequence
prove what it would.

However I got over safely, and whilst we were on the bank and faced
them, they never attempted to follow us. Our captains asked me, if I
thought there were any of our companions still behind us? I answered, I
believed that there were none alive. We waited a while, and then marched
forwards. We had a wood to pass through, and the negroes as soon as they
saw us quit the banks, immediately pursued us. They got into the woods,
and firing behind the trees every now and then, they killed three or
four of our men. We had not travelled above two miles in this wood,
before we came to a large sandy plain, to which we could see no end, and
here they determined to stop our progress; since if we went much
farther, we should be within hearing of king Samuel’s subjects, who were
their mortal enemies, and would readily assist us. They divided
themselves, therefore, into several bodies, in order to break in upon us
on all sides; and we being apprized of their designs, were resolved to
sell our lives and liberties as dearly as possible. Hereupon our
captains put us in as good a posture of defence as they could, and
divided our men who bore arms into four classes: one under the command
of each of our three captains, and the other under Mr John Bembo; such
as had no arms or were disabled, were covered in a little valley; and
with them were the two negro hostages.

We had not above six and thirty fire-arms amongst us all, and not many
more persons fit to fight; so that we were a poor handful to withstand
an army of two or three thousand. When they found we made a stand, they
did so too; and according to their wonted manner (where it could be
done) three or four of them in a place threw up the sand before them,
and being also beneath us, we could see only their heads: their shot
flew very fast over us, and we kept them in play from noon till six in
the evening; by which time all our ammunition was spent. Those of us who
had money made slugs of it; their next shift was to take the middle
screws out of their guns, and charge their pieces with them. When they
had used all these means, they knew not what to do farther: now we began
to reflect on those who advised us to deliver up first the king, and
afterwards his son; since the keeping of them would have been our
principal safeguard. The two negroes in our custody expected, no doubt,
every minute to be killed, as very justly they might; but as their death
would be of no service to us, we did them no injury.

At length it was unanimously agreed, that Dudey and her husband should
be sent to them with a flag of truce, not only to prolong the time, but
to know what they farther wanted: so we tied a piece of red silk to a
lance, and despatched them away. They kept firing at us all this time,
not knowing what we meant by not returning it. They shot at those who
carried the flag, but perceiving that they were not armed, the prince
ordered them to cease. Dudey was interpreter, and told them that our
captain was inclined to make peace with them, and to deliver up the two
hostages with the guns and ammunition we took with us, as soon as we
were advanced a little farther into the country. They said they would
suffer us to go in the morning, in case we would deliver up our arms and
the men; but not that evening, because it was dark. Their true reason
was this, they knew if we got away that night, we should send some of
king Samuel’s people, who were their utter enemies, to be revenged on
them for the ill treatment we had met with.

We were at a loss what determination to come to: we were willing,
indeed, to let the two men (whom they called generals) go; but loath to
part with our arms: most of us, as well as our captain, were of opinion,
that they followed us for nothing else, and were for delivering them up;
but captain Drummond, captain Steward, and their people, with Mr Bembo,
and some of our men, opposed it. Captain Drummond, in particular,
expressed a great concern to see us so easy to be imposed upon; and told
us that it was too visible their words were not to be relied on: most
voices, however, carried it, and captain Younge being of the opinion it
was best to resign them, it was agreed; and in short, soon actually
performed; for Dudey having orders to acquaint them with such
resolution, they sent proper messengers immediately to receive them.

Captain Drummond, however, and his companions claimed theirs as their
own right and property, and therefore would not deliver them; nor would
Dudey’s husband part with his. The negroes well knew we had but few
left, and went away to all outward appearance well contented for that
night. Dudey returned, and assured us that they would let us go in the
morning; and as night was coming on, we laid down upon the sand, to
repose ourselves as well as our distressed circumstances would admit of;
for besides the hunger and fatigue we had already suffered, we reflected
a thousand times on the barbarities we had seen committed the day
before; and that it was now in their power to treat us as they pleased.

The next morning as soon as we could see, we missed captain Drummond,
captain Steward, Mr Bembo, Dudey, and her husband, and four or five
more, who deserted us in the night, without communicating their
intentions to us. Now we plainly saw destruction before us, and the end
of this miserable journey; which, after so bold an attempt, we undertook
for the preservation of our lives and liberty; and a tragical one it
was. For,

No sooner was it broad daylight, than the negroes came up to us, and the
prince had a short conference with Sam. Captain Younge asked him the
purport of their discourse. He answered, they wanted to know what was
become of captain Drummond, and the rest. The words were no sooner out
of his mouth, than one of the princes took hold of me, and delivered me
to one of his attendants; there were three or four lads like myself and
much about my age, who were seized at the same time and delivered to
their people in the same manner; who bound our hands with cords.

The same prince who ordered my hands to be thus tied, stuck his lance
into captain Younge’s throat, and afterwards into his sides. Having
killed him, he went on to another; and the rest of his barbarous train
immediately following his example, they soon murdered every man
belonging to our company; they then stripped off their clothes, and like
inhuman butchers, ripped open several of their bellies. As for my part,
I expected death every moment, but in what shape I could not tell; for
one of the generals lifted up his lance, with an intention to pierce me
through, but was prevented by the man who had me in custody, for some
reasons I could not then rightly understand; but as I heard afterwards,
he informed him I was reserved to wait on the king’s grandson. Though
this saved my life, yet it would not hinder the officer from rifling me
of what I had valuable about me; for he feeling my purse in my breeches
pocket, and not readily finding it, in a fury, with his lance cut away
my breeches, and narrowly missed my flesh.

When they had concluded this bloody scene, and clothed themselves with
the spoils of the slain, they marched away in very great haste, for fear
of the natives of Port Dauphine; whom they imagined captain Drummond and
the rest had by that time alarmed, and prevailed on them to send some
forces down to our rescue. Now whether the negroes might not think we
had sent them away on purpose to get such assistance, and thereby
provoked them to murder us, I cannot say; but certain it is, we were the
most unfortunate wretches in the universe: for I was afterwards
informed, before our murdered people were well cold, two thousand of
king Samuel’s men came down to rescue us out of their merciless hands.

Perhaps the reader will say, why did we not send two or three of our
people as soon as we had passed the river? To which I can only answer, I
think we were all infatuated, for with ease it might have been done;
especially since we had the woman Dudey to go with them as an
interpreter; and we might have kept Sam with us. But none of these
reasons at that time occurred to me; for I was but a raw, inexperienced
youth. And what motives could induce captain Younge to release both the
king and his son, is what I cannot pretend to account for. The plot was
doubtless well concerted, and as duly executed at first, but most
shamefully conducted afterwards; and, indeed, it is scarcely credible,
that such a number of us could be so stupid as we then were; and since I
have attained to a mature age, and been capable of any reflection, it is
what I have been surprised at.

The only reason that can be offered I now think, is, that as all of us
had a great affection for our captain’s father, so it caused us to be
too partial, and to entertain too good an opinion of the son. But I
since found to my great concern that our captain wanted not only
judgment, but experience in the world; for captain Drummond, as I very
well remember, frequently opposed him; but by whatsoever ill conduct or
folly we might contribute towards our ruin, so it was; and I am relating
a real fact, and not inventing a fiction, or telling the reader what
might or ought to have been done in the unhappy situation of our affairs
at that time; however, through his imprudence were my friends massacred,
and myself with three more made perpetual slaves: the eldest of us was
not above sixteen years of age, and we were immediately parted, for they
marched directly off the spot. As for Sam, I do not reckon him as one of
us, because he went off with the negroes. I never saw him afterwards,
but was informed, that he lived a freeman under deaan Crindo; and
whether he was so faithful to us as in justice and gratitude he ought to
have been, is somewhat dubious.

All the way we went I had the shocking prospect of our men’s mangled
bodies, as we passed through the woods to the river. I was not so
thirsty now, as when I passed it first; but so faint for want of
victuals, that I could scarcely stand upon my legs, having had no
sustenance for three days together. Though my master expressed some
little concern for me, yet he would not wait till he was past the river;
however, he ordered his people to stop at the first commodious place,
and make a fire. And now I was in hopes of some agreeable refreshment;
for some of his servants had carried beef on their backs for that
purpose. Though they cut it into long pieces, (like ropes,) with the
hide, and dressed and eat it half roasted according to their custom, and
gave it me in the same manner, yet I thought this contemptible food, and
what a beggar in England would not have touched, the most delicious
entertainment I ever met with. We rested here about an hour, when he, to
whose care I was intrusted, made signs to know if I could walk; and as I
was a little refreshed, I got up, and travelled the remainder of the day
with more ease than I expected; since they walked but slowly, as I
perceived on purpose to indulge me.

At night we came to a wood, the place appointed for our lodging; and
there we met with three or four men, whom my master had sent out a
foraging, and they brought in with them two bullocks; one of which my
master sent to his brother, for the use of him and his people, and the
other was killed for us; for the army was now disbanded, and each party
was marching home with their respective chiefs to their own habitations.
Here my master came to me and gave me a lance, intimating that I might
cut out as much as I thought proper. I cut about a pound without any
part of the hide, which he perceiving, imputed it to my ignorance, and
so cut a slice with the hide and dressed it for me; which I ate with
seeming thankfulness, not daring to refuse it. As soon as supper was
over, each man pulled up as much grass as was sufficient for himself to
lie on; my guardian, however, provided enough for himself and me. I then
reposed myself accordingly, and he lay by me; but his back skin smelled
so rank, that I was forced to turn my back on him all night long. I had
very little rest, for the ghastly spectacle of my massacred friends was
ever before me, and made me start from sleep as soon as I closed my
eyes.

At break of day we arose, and after a short repast marched on till noon,
when we baited among some shady trees near a pond of water; which very
pond we had passed by three days before, or at least within two hundred
yards of it, when we were dying with thirst, and the negroes told us
there was no water near us.

Whilst some employed themselves in kindling a fire, others were busy in
digging up and down amongst the grass. I could not conceive what they
were doing at first; but I soon observed one of them pulling out of the
ground a long white root, which I found was a yam, having seen many of
them at Bengal; they soon furnished themselves with a sufficient
quantity. I perceived they grew wild without any cultivation: some of
them were a yard long at least, and about six or seven inches in
circumference; they obliged me with some of them, which I roasted, and
eat with a great deal of pleasure, instead of bread, with my beef: they
are very agreeable to the taste, as well as wholesome food.

We arrived that evening at a small town, which we no sooner entered than
the women and children flocked round about me, pinched me, struck me on
the back with their fists, and showed several other tokens of their
derision and contempt; at which I could not forbear weeping, as it was
not in my power to express my resentment any other way; but when my
guardian observed it, he came to my assistance and freed me from my
persecutors. All the houses that were empty were taken up by my master,
his brother, and other head-men; so that my guardian and I lay exposed
to the open air. The ill treatment I met with from the women and
children, put a thousand distracting thoughts into my head. Sometimes I
imagined that I might be preserved alive for no other purpose, than to
be carried to the king and his son, who would, in all probability, be
fired with resentment at our late seizing of them, and making them
prisoners; then, again, I thought that to gratify their pleasure and
revenge, they would order me to be put to death before their faces by
slow degrees, and the most exquisite torments. Such melancholy
reflections as these so disordered me that when once through weariness I
fell into a slumber I had a dream which so terrified me that I started
upright, and trembled every joint of me; in short, I could not get one
wink of sleep all the night long.

When it was broad daylight we marched homeward (for now I must call it
so) and in three or four hours’ time we arrived at a considerable town,
with three or four tamarind trees before it. One of the negroes carried
a large shell, which, when he blew, sounded like a post-boy’s horn. This
brought the women to a spacious house in the middle of the town, about
twelve feet high, which I soon perceived was my master’s. No sooner had
he seated himself at the door, than his wife came out crawling on her
hands and knees till she came to him, and then licked his feet; and when
she had thus testified her duty and respects, his mother paid him the
like compliment, and all the women in the town saluted their husbands in
the same manner: then each man went to his respective habitation, my
master’s brother only excepted; who though he had a house, had no wife
to receive him, and so he stayed behind.

My mistress intimated by her motions that she would have me go in and
sit down. A great deal of serious discourse passed between my master and
her, and though I knew nothing of what they said, yet by her looking so
earnestly at me whilst he was talking, I conjectured he was relating to
her our tragical tale, and I perceived that the tears frequently stood
in her eyes. This conference over, she ordered some carravances to be
boiled for our dinner; a kind of pulse, much like our grey pease: she
gave me some, but as they had been boiled in dirty water, I could not
eat them. She, perceiving I did not like them, strained them off the
water and put some milk to them, and after that I made a tolerable meal
of them. She gave me not only a mat to lie down upon, but a piece of
calico likewise about two yards in length to cover me. She intimated
that she wanted to know my name, which I told her was Robin. Having
received so much civility from my mistress, I began to be much better
satisfied than I was at first; and then laid me down and slept without
any fear or concern about four hours, as near as I could guess by the
sun. When I waked my mistress called me by my name, and gave me some
milk to drink. She talked for some considerable time to me, but I could
not understand one word she said. My master was all this time with his
brother at the door regaling themselves with toake.

When night came on I perceived that I was to lie with them, for there
was no other room. My master and mistress lay in the middle, and the
whole house was not above fourteen feet in length, and twelve in
breadth, so that I lay crosswise close to his feet: in this odd manner
we lay three or four nights successively. At last he called me by my
name several times to know, I presume, whether I was awake or not; but
as I answered him whenever he called, I imagined he would have been
better pleased if I had slept soundly, and had not heard him at all; for
the next evening he carried me to his aunt’s house, where he told me I
must lie for the future. There I remained both day and night, and did
little but walk out with her and her daughter to visit the plantations
which had been lately sown with Guinea corn and potatoes. In the evening
I used to visit my master and mistress, and for supper I generally had
milk, which was sometimes fresh and sometimes sour. They were not over
fond of putting me to work, as I could do them but little service, being
altogether a stranger to what was said to me, and more especially as he
had above two hundred slaves always ready to answer his occasions.

My master, whose name was deaan Mevarrow, was grandson to deaan Crindo,
who was absolute lord of this country, and his wife was the daughter of
a northern king whom they had conquered in battle, and she was one of my
master’s captives. For this reason I presume it was that she took so
much compassion upon me; considering herself a slave in a strange
country, and only preferred to my master’s bed by courtesy.

In a short time I began to reconcile myself to their manner of eating,
since no better provision I found was to be had, only I would strip off
some of the hair from the hide of the beef, whenever I could do it
without being observed. I used often to reflect on my brother and
sister’s more agreeable manner of living at my father’s table; being
conscious that even some beggars in England fared much better than I did
here. However as I found nobody lived better, I made myself as easy as I
could; I was now under no apprehensions of being killed till an accident
happened soon after, which put me into a violent panic for about an
hour. My master, attended by several of his slaves, took me with him one
evening into the woods; I observed great preparations made for killing
and dressing a bullock or some such thing, but there being none to kill,
and it being then dark, I perceived that they walked about with great
circumspection, talked softly, and testified all the symptoms of some
secret design; upon this the tears stood in my eyes, imagining that they
intended to cut me up and make a meal of me, but my fright was soon over
when I saw two slaves hauling along a bullock by a rope fastened to his
horns, and my master sticking his lance into his throat in order to
despatch him. They immediately cut up his carcass and dressed the
entrails after their own manner. The booty was equally divided, and I
observed that each man took care to hide his portion in some private
place, from whence he might convey it away by night. As soon as our
business was over we parted, some one way and some another, for fear of
being taken notice of. I now plainly perceived that we were all this
time plundering of our neighbours. I often wondered indeed that the aunt
with whom I lived, dressed meat so often in the nighttime, but this
unravelled the mystery; this was not the only time I was forced to
assist in this clandestine practice.

In about four months’ time I began to have some tolerable notion of
their language; I knew the names of most common things, and could
express myself so as to be understood. My master and mistress took me
one day into the plantations, where the slaves were hoeing the weeds
from the carravances, that were just shooting up. They gave me a hoe,
but I had no inclination to work; I pretended to be very ignorant and
hoed up plants and weeds together, at which they laughed heartily, and
took away my hoe to prevent more mischief.

This artifice, however, proved of but little service to me, for my
master perceiving that I either could not or would not work in the
plantations, was determined to employ me some other way, and about such
business as I could not well do amiss. Accordingly the next day he
showed me his cattle, and told me I must take care of them, drive them
to water, and see that they did not break either his own or any other
neighbour’s plantations. This business I liked much better than the
other, because there were three or four lads more of this town about my
age, who had cattle to attend to as well as myself. What I disliked most
was, that we had a very considerable way to drive them to water, and at
night to drive them back again; besides I was obliged to drag home a
long tub which held about three gallons; for all the water we used in
the house was fetched from this watering place. However we had no just
cause of complaint, for we joined our herds together, and in the heat of
the day, when the cattle would lie down in the shade, we had three or
four hours’ time to ramble through the woods and gather yams. I had been
thus long in the country, yet I never knew how they struck fire, till
wanting to roast some of my yams, I asked my comrades where their fire
was; they showed me their hands and laughing, said, here it is, but one
of them soon informed me how to do it. He took one short round stick
about half the length of a gun rammer, and another considerably thicker,
but both of one sort of wood, and rubbed the former upon the latter till
there came a dust from it first, then a smoke, and soon fire after.

We sometimes traversed the woods and stole people’s honey, and eat it
just as we found it. When we could spare time, we used to look for a
creature which I call a ground-hog, and which in their language is
called tondruck; it is about the size of a cat, snout, eyes, and ears
are like an English hog’s, it has bristles on its back but no tail, the
feet of it are like a rabbit’s; its principal food is beetles and young
snails, which they grub up with their snouts; they are very prolific,
and have above twenty young ones at a litter, to all which they give
suck. In the cold season of the year (for though there is no time which
can properly be called winter, yet one part of the year is sensibly much
colder than the other) these creatures hide themselves in the ground in
a most surprising manner. They first dig a hole about two feet deep
directly in the earth, and after that they work obliquely two or three
feet one way, and as much another, making angles; though they throw the
earth up with their fore feet, yet they make it as firm with their hind
feet as if no passage had been ever made. When they have worked in this
manner for some time, they then work aslant, upwards, till they get
within half a foot of the surface: there they make a kind of lodgment,
just big enough for them to turn themselves round in, where they lie for
four or five months successively without any sustenance whatsoever; and
what is still more strange, they are as fat at the expiration of that
term as when they first went in. It is no small difficulty to catch
them, for when we have discovered some marks of the place where we
imagine they began to burrow, we are often disappointed in digging after
them; they work so artfully, that we know not which way to find out
their secret recesses; but we spare no pains to take them, for they are
excellent food, and their skin when dressed is as brown and crisp as a
pig’s. Their hedgehogs too are agreeable enough, but nothing near so
delicious as their tondrucks; these conceal themselves all the cold
winter in holes of trees, where they remain for some months without any
visible support.

This employment of attending the cattle was agreeable to me, except in
excessively hot weather, when it was a great fatigue to drive them
several miles to water, at least every other day; but in the colder
season we had no occasion to observe that practice, for the dew falls so
plentifully in the night, that we find it sufficient to drive them into
the grass about break of day; and even the inhabitants of this part of
the country of Anterndroea, who have no water near them, go into the
fields in a morning with two wooden platters and a tub, and in less than
an hour will collect about eight or ten gallons of dew-water, which is
very good while fresh, but will turn sour in a day or two, and
disagreeable to the taste.

I had not followed this employment above a year, when my master went to
war, or rather (as I understood afterwards) to plunder a people to the
westward whom they pursued with the most implacable hatred, they having
surprised deaan Crindo’s father in his own town by night, and murdered
him in a most barbarous manner.

My master informed me that I must look after the cattle no more, for he
was going to war, and had other business for me of much greater
importance. I offered my service to wait on him, but he answered, we
shall travel night and day; it is a long and tedious journey, and you
cannot, I believe, be able to undergo the fatigue, but your principal
business must be to look after my wife, and act as her guardian. He gave
me a strict charge to lie in the same house with her, and never to let
her stir out without me. After he had given her instructions to the same
effect, he took his leave, and accompanied by most of his people, went
on his intended expedition.

I now lived at perfect ease, and my mistress was very kind and indulgent
to me. I went abroad wherever she went, partook of every thing she had
for herself, and lay in the same house with her, both of us strictly
observing our master’s orders; neither could I perceive that her
compliance therewith was any way repugnant to her inclinations. I was
not, it is true, absolutely easy myself; for the thoughts of my friends
and native country, and the improbability of ever seeing them again,
made me very melancholy, and dejected me to that degree that sometimes I
could not forbear indulging my grief in private, and bursting into a
flood of tears.

My mistress would frequently ask me whether I was indisposed, or wanted
any thing; I could not prevail on myself to reveal the real cause of my
anxiety; however one day I took the liberty to tell her, I should be
very glad of an opportunity to see the other three lads, whose lives
were preserved, and who were taken prisoners when I was. She desired me
not to afflict myself on that account, for she would go with me, and
should be highly delighted to hear us converse together in our own
language. Accordingly she made inquiry amongst her neighbours where they
were, who informed us that they were at some distance from one another;
but that the nearest to be met with was about four or five miles off. So
the next morning we set out and inquired for the white boy: we were told
that he was gone to carry his fellow-servants some provisions to the
plantation, but as soon as a messenger was sent to him he returned
immediately, being as desirous of seeing me in particular as I was of
him; we embraced each other in a very passionate manner, and expressed
ourselves at first rather in tears than words. We had been very intimate
on shipboard, and I used to treat him frequently with punch, being
delighted with his company as he had a taste for music, and could play
extremely well on the violin. We condoled with each other, and observed
how wretchedly we looked, all naked, except a small clout about our
middles, and our skins spotted like a leopard’s; for neither of us being
ever before so exposed to the sun, we were scorched, and flead as it
were, and our skins often rose up in blisters. After our mutual
condolence we came to an agreement, that if either of us got safe to
England, we would give the other’s friends a particular account of all
our misfortunes. We inquired of each other after our other comrades, but
were equally strangers to their particular places of abode. My mistress
seemed very attentive to our discourse, and showed a compassionate
regard for our afflictions; but with great reluctance, and many a tear,
we were obliged at last to part.

We had not been at home above two hours, before an express arrived from
my master with news of his success; and that he would be at home in a
fortnight. My mistress, and all the women who had husbands abroad,
expressed their general joy in large bowls of toake. In the mean time I
was very much indisposed, but tolerably well recovered before my
master’s return.

He made his public entry in a very triumphant manner; the trumpet-shells
blowing, and crowds of people dancing before him all the way with their
guns in their hands. On his first approach, the foremost men fired their
guns towards the ground; which with them is the signal of a victorious
return. Deaan Mevarrow, and his brother deaan Sambo, came after them
with their attendants; next followed the cattle, which he had taken from
the enemy, and the prisoners of war brought up the rear. After they were
seated in form before my master deaan Mevarrow’s house, not only his
consort, attended by the other women of the town, came as usual, and
licked his feet, but the men too, whom he left behind him when he went
to war.

I stood all this time as a spectator, till he seeing me at a distance,
called me to him. I approached him in the usual form of the country on
such a public occasion; that is, with my hands lifted up, and in a
praying posture. When I came near him, I paid him the compliment of
_salamonger umba_; but did not kneel down as all the others did, having
a kind of conscientious reluctance to such an act, as thinking it an
adoration that I ought to pay to no one but the Supreme Being; but he
seemed to resent my being so over religious; for he asked me, “If I
thought it beneath me to pay him the same respect that his own wife,
(who was a king’s daughter,) and his own mother too, so readily
condescended to?” However, I peremptorily refused, and told him, “I
would obey all his lawful commands, and do whatever work he thought
proper to employ me in; but this act of divine homage I could never
comply with.”

On this he fell into a violent passion, and upbraided me with being
ungrateful, and insensible of his saving me from being killed among my
countrymen; and urged, moreover, that I was his slave, &c.; but
notwithstanding all this, I still continued resolute and firm to my
purpose. Whereupon he rose from his seat, and with his lance made a
stroke at me with all his might; but his brother, by a sudden push on
one side, prevented the mischief he intended. He was going to repeat his
blow, but his brother interposed, and entreated him to excuse me; but he
absolutely, and in the warmest terms, refused to forgive me unless I
would lick his feet. His brother begged he would give him a little time
to talk with me in private, which he did; and after he had told me the
danger of not doing it, and that in submitting to it, I did no more than
what many great princes were obliged to do when taken prisoners, I
found, at length, it was prudence to comply; so I went in, asked pardon,
and performed the ceremony as others had done before me. He told me he
readily forgave me, but would make me sensible I was a slave. I did not
much regard his menaces, for as I had no prospect of ever returning to
England, I set but little value on my life. The next day I incurred his
displeasure again, and never expected to escape from feeling the weight
of his resentment.

My master then performed the ceremony of thanksgiving to God, for his
happy deliverance from all the hazards of war, and for the success of
his arms; which is performed in the following manner:—The inhabitants
have in all their houses a small portable utensil, which is devoted to
religious uses, and is a kind of household altar, which they call the
owley. It is made of a peculiar wood, in small pieces neatly joined, and
making almost the form of a half-moon with the horns downwards, between
which are placed two alligator’s teeth; this is adorned with various
kinds of beads, and such a sash fastened to it behind as a man ties
about his waist when he goes to war. [I shall not here pretend to give
an exact account of their religious worship, for I had not been long
enough in the country to be a perfect master of the true meaning of what
they either did or said.] However, I observed that they brought two
forks from the woods, and fixed them in the ground, on which was laid a
beam, slender at each end, and about six feet long, with two or three
pegs in it, and upon this they hung the owley. Behind it was a long
pole, to which a bullock was fastened with a cord. They had a pan full
of live coals, on which they threw an aromatic gum, and planted it under
the owley. Then they took a small quantity of hair from the tail, chin,
and eyebrows of the ox, and put them on the owley. Then deaan Mevarrow,
my master, used some particular gestures with a large knife in his hand,
and made a formal prayer, in which the people joined. In the next place
they threw the ox on the ground with his legs tied fast together, and
the deaan cut his throat; for as there are no priests among them, the
chief man, whether of the country, town, or family, performs all divine
offices himself. As soon as the people were all seated on mats in a
circular form, my master ordered me to sit down too, and say as the
people said, which I absolutely refused. However he pursued his
devotion, and when the service was over, took the owley in one hand and
his lance in the other, and came directly to me, asking me with a frown,
which I rather chose, either to assist in their solemn and public
thanksgiving, or to a fall a sacrifice to his just resentment? At first
I was startled, but as I thought this sort of worship to be downright
idolatry, and that they paid their adorations to the owley, I resolutely
told him that I would sooner die than pay divine homage to any false
deity whatsoever. Upon this, as soon as he had put the owley in its
place, he came to me again, and taking me by the hand was determined to
lead me out of the town and kill me; but his brother and all the people
round about him pleaded for me, and used their utmost endeavours to
persuade him against so rash an action, but to no purpose; till his
brother at last very warmly told him, he would that minute depart and
see his face no more, if he offered to be guilty of such an act of
inhumanity, and rose up to be gone accordingly. When my master saw his
brother was going in good earnest, he called him back, and promised to
spare my life; but assured him he would punish me very severely for my
contempt of his orders. Deaan Sambo told him, he should submit that to
his own discretion; all he begged of him was not to kill me. Upon this,
by a secret sign, he advised me to kneel down and lick his feet, which I
readily complied with, and asked his pardon. When I got up, I kneeled
down to deaan Sambo of my own accord, and licked his feet as a testimony
of my gratitude and respect for thus saving my life a second time.

As soon as this storm was blown over, I was remanded to my former post
of cow-keeper. I had a great deal of trouble sometimes with these
cattle, for they are very unruly; and notwithstanding they are larger
beasts than any I ever saw elsewhere of the kind, they are so nimble
that they will leap over high fences like a greyhound. They have an
excrescence between their shoulders, somewhat like that of camels, all
fat and flesh; some of which will weigh about three or four score
pounds; they are also beautifully coloured, some are streaked like a
tiger, others, like a leopard, are marked with various spots. They do
not give so much milk as our cows in England, nor will they ever suffer
themselves to be milked till their calves have first sucked; so that
they keep one calf for every cow all the year, or till the cow is
pregnant again, and they seldom miss a season. Here are also some sheep
with large heavy tails, like Turkey sheep; they are not woolly as ours,
but more like a goat. Here are also a small number of goats, like those
in other countries. They bring up no hogs, though there are enough in
the country; for they are so mischievous to the plantations, that we are
forced to set traps to catch them; but in this country of Anterndroea
nobody eats them, except the very refuse of the people.

Whilst I was peaceably tending my cattle, and all things seemed
perfectly quiet and easy, the scene of our affairs was changed at once
by some sudden news, and my master was summoned to war in good earnest.

It is a common practice for parties to stroll out and surprise their
enemies by night, when least they expect them: on these expeditions it
is customary for every man to carry a piece of meat in his hand, and
when they have entered a town in the dead of night they throw the meat
to the dogs, in order to prevent their barking. When they are all got
in, one fires a musket, but makes no other noise; the inhabitants
thereupon being alarmed, and hastily creeping out of the doors of their
low huts in a stooping posture, are stabbed with lances: as to the women
and children they take them captive, and drive away with them all the
cattle they can find, set the town on fire, and return home by private
unpractised ways. In this manner did my master, his brother, and some
others belonging to deaan Crindo, enter several of the king of
Mefaughla’s remote and defenceless towns; whereupon, in order to
retaliate the indignity offered him, the injured king mustered up an
army of three thousand men, and entered Anterndroea, with a firm
resolution either to fight the deaan in the field, or attack him in his
own town, called Fennoarevo; and by fire to lay it level with the
ground: accordingly he sent a messenger to deaan Crindo, to tell him
that he should soon feel the weight of his just resentment. To which he
answered, he would not stir out of the town but wait for him there; and
defied him to put his purpose in execution.

Deaan Crindo, therefore, summoned all his people to his assistance, and
to be ready at hand in Fennoarevo, or the adjacent villages. He had four
sons who were chiefs of towns, besides nephews and grandsons. His sons
were deaan Mundumber, deaan Frukey, deaan Trodaughe, but deaan Chahary
was unfortunately gone with five hundred able men to traffic into
Feraignher; which is Augustine-bay country.

It is a constant custom amongst them in time of war to conceal their
wives, children, and cattle in remote and secret places in the woods,
that the enemy when they plunder the country may not be able to find
them; but the women and children are never with the cattle, lest their
bellowing should discover them. The women for the most part secure
themselves, by trailing a bough after them as they go to their recess;
which prevents their track from being followed. Thus did my master and
his people secure their wives, children, and cattle. I was left with the
latter; for that reason am incapable of giving an exact account of this
war, knowing no more of it than what was told me at their return; which
in general was to the following effect.

That deaan Woozington, the king, and his son Chemermaundy, with Ryopheck
his nephew, a gallant man who commanded the army of Merfaughla, entered
the country without the least opposition; for deaan Crindo having
received his menacing message, took care in the first place to secure
the families and cattle belonging to his people, and then drew up all
his armed men in the town, resolving to wait for his coming; but deaan
Mundumber, Frukey, and the younger chiefs, had not patience to hear of
his passing without resistance; so they prevailed on the king, though
against his will, to let them go out with two thousand men and obstruct
his march. Deaan Crindo, however, was resolute and would not stir out of
the town. This army was commanded in chief by deaan Mundumber and
Frukey; who behaved themselves with great courage and conduct, first
sending word to deaan Woozington, that they were come by their father’s
command to give him a suitable reception into their country, and hoped
he would not fail to meet them. To which he answered, he would most
assuredly pay them a visit and make himself welcome; and was as good as
his word. They joined battle, and Mundumber was obliged to retire, which
he did in good order after a sharp and obstinate fight; in which deaan
Woozington’s son was dangerously wounded. Deaan Mundumber returned to
his father with eight hundred men, and used his utmost endeavours to
prevail on him to go out with his forces, and give deaan Woozington
battle; but the old king persisted in his first resolution. So Mundumber
continued at home with him, and fortified the town as well as the time
would admit.

After this, deaan Frukey and Trodaughe made themselves masters of a pass
between two hills, and cut down several large trees to defend them; by
which means they entirely stopped deaan Woozington’s progress,
notwithstanding he attacked them in the most vigorous manner, and was as
gallantly repulsed: at last, Ryopheck, by the direction of a man who was
well acquainted with the country, got behind them, and deaan Woozington,
at the same time, with Ryopheck charged them again. Frukey, however, and
his brethren, were obliged to retire, which they did with great
resolution, even through Ryopheck’s party. In this action Ryopheck, who
was always in the hottest place, with much difficulty escaped.

Though deaan Woozington at last arrived at Fennoarevo, and attacked it
in a vigorous manner, yet he was as bravely repulsed; deaan Crindo and
his sons resisting till they were overpowered, and when their enemies
were got within the town, they even disputed every inch of ground, till
deaan Crindo himself was obliged to cut down several trees, which are
their walls, to make a way for their escape. He so much depended on his
own courage and conduct, that he kept his wife and daughter in his own
house, notwithstanding all the other women and children were sent away
long before; these unhappily fell into the hands of deaan Woozington,
and were made his captives. The town was reduced to ashes, as soon as
they had plundered it of such trifles as their treasures consist in, the
principal of which are beads; these they often conceal in holes: so that
there is nothing to be got but iron shovels, hoes, earthen and wooden
dishes, spoons, &c. some cattle, indeed, they found, which were brought
into the town for their necessary subsistence during the siege; and in
such cases these cattle live well enough upon the thatches of their
houses. They had also filled a great many tubs with water.

Deaan Crindo was inconsolable for the loss of his wife and daughter, and
like a distracted man; when his sons told him if he would now join them,
as he should have done at first, they were yet able to deal with deaan
Woozington. And accordingly they mustered all their forces into one
army, and made a number equal to their enemies. Deaan Woozington having
no intelligence of this, was detaching a thousand men to plunder the
country, and bring in all the women, children, and cattle they could
find; which is their constant practice after a complete victory. Just at
this juncture deaan Crindo appeared with his potent army, and sent
messengers to acquaint him that he must either deliver up the queen and
princess with the other people and cattle he was possessed of, or
immediately decamp and give them battle. Deaan Woozington in answer
thereto, assured him he had no thoughts of detaining his wife and
daughter, neither did he come for slaves or cattle, he having plenty of
both; but since deaan Crindo had sent him a challenge boasting of his
superior strength, and bidding defiance to all the kings on the island,
on account of the number of white men that were his friends, he came to
see them; but as he could find none, he hoped that the proud deaan
Crindo was sufficiently mortified; so he was ready to send him his wife
and daughter again: but as to the few slaves and cattle which he had
taken, his people should detain them to make themselves some
compensation for the robberies which Mevarrow, and some others, had
committed in his country.

At last a peace was concluded, and sworn to by the generals on both
sides, with the usual formality of killing an ox, and eating a piece of
the liver from off the point of a lance; each general wishing at the
same time, that whoever first fired a gun might die upon the spot. The
ceremony being over, public rejoicings were made on both sides; deaan
Woozington returned into his own country, and deaan Crindo to rebuild
his shattered town, which was finished with the utmost expedition, and
all his chiefs with their people repaired to their respective homes.

As soon as we were well settled again, three boys who belonged to some
principal men of our town, and myself, were sent some miles off with
about two hundred head of cattle, to look after them and provide for
ourselves. There were not above five or six of them however, which gave
milk, so that we were at a short allowance: if we expected any other
diet, we must search for it in the woods, and get it where and when we
could find it. My mistress furnished me with an earthen pot to warm my
milk in, a calabash to drink out of, and a mat to lie upon. My master
gave me a hatchet to make fences with, and a lance to fight with if any
body came to steal my cattle: he also gave me a new clout, to wear after
their country fashion, my old one being worn out; the common people
seldom wear one broader than a napkin; they call it a lamber, and so
shall I for the future; the name of a—se-clout (by which our English
seamen distinguish it by way of derision) being too vulgar an
expression.

We drove our cattle to the proposed place, and the first thing we
employed ourselves about was, the erection of a house, which we
completed in about a day and a half. We finished our cow-pen next, and
made a small one for the calves, to keep them from sucking while we
milked the cows. Our house, however, was but a poor little hut, and but
badly thatched; and it being the rainy season, (which is their winter,
and sometimes very cold,) we had but a very indifferent lodging. We
kept, indeed, a fire, and happy was he who could lie nearest it; for we
had no other covering than our lambers, which we pulled off to lay over
us. Now I began to feel the weight of my slavery, being almost famished;
for all the food we could get, was a small fowl now and then, which
creeps upon the ground; and which we caught in traps.

We lived in this melancholy situation almost three months, but at last
we formed a project for killing one of our master’s beasts, and dressing
it in private. A great many schemes were offered, till at length I
proposed one, which was unanimously agreed to; namely, to kill a cow by
stabbing her in the side with a sharp pointed stick, and make the horn
of another cow, which belonged to the same man, all over bloody, that he
might imagine the misfortune came by goring. But then a debate arose,
whose beast should be killed; for every one was unwilling that his
master should be the sufferer. However, I soon determined that point, by
drawing lots with four sticks shorter than each other; and I so
contrived it, that I kept the longest in my hand, and by that means
secured my master’s.

When the job was done, away ran the boy to inform his master that one
heifer had killed another; he and his family came immediately upon the
news, and finding a cow with a bloody horn, they all concluded it was
done by her. Though the master was sadly nettled at the disaster, yet he
soon cut up the dead beast, and gave us a good large piece of it,
besides the legs and the entrails; and then went home again. Thus far
our scheme succeeded to our wish, but our principal aim was, under
colour of having meat given us by our masters, to despatch another
heifer privately; and if any person happened to see us (as we were not
far from strangers, though we were from our own homes) and ask how we
came by our beef, we could say our masters gave it us. But success made
us too bold, for one day having killed a beast that had strayed from
some other people amongst ours, our masters came to see their cattle,
which they found in the cow pens, but finding none of us near them, they
began to suspect us: whereupon they divided themselves, and made a more
narrow inquiry; one of them heard a noise in the wood, like the felling
of trees, where we were very busy; and following the sound, they soon
smelt roast meat: in short, our masters surprised us, and came at once
amongst us with their guns cocked, crying out, _vonne terach com boar_;
which in English is, kill the sons of bitches.

The reader may imagine we were frightened to the last degree, and
expected nothing but immediate death; and indeed it proved almost fatal
to the other three. They asked us whose beast it was? We answered, a
strange one. They told us, however, that the crime was the same; for if
we had practised the art of killing cattle privately, they were sensible
that theirs must some time or other be our prey, when no others offered;
and for that reason were resolved to punish us with the utmost severity.
Hereupon each of my comrades’ masters took his slave, and in an instant
castrated him. I, not relishing that sort of punishment, fell down at my
master’s feet, and endeavoured all I could to convince him that I had
been peculiarly careful of his cattle; and told him, moreover, that I
would stand the chance of being killed by submitting myself to be shot
at, provided he stood at any reasonable distance; or run any other
hazard he should think fit, rather than be deprived of my manhood. My
proposition was accepted, and accordingly he took me out of the wood and
tied my arms behind me round a tree, and placed himself at about
fourscore yards; then seeming to take good aim at me, fired, but missed
me: whether he did it on purpose I can’t say, but I presume he did;
imagining the terror was sufficient, having seen how severely the others
were punished. They went away, and told us if ever they found us at such
pranks again, nothing should save us from immediate death.

They were no sooner gone from us than I began to reflect on the
injustice of our masters, who, though they had cattle of their own,
would frequently oblige us to go with them on their thievish
expeditions; and yet so severely punish us for one poor crime to satisfy
our craving appetites. However, after all, I was forced to be doctor to
my comrades in distress, for their masters took no care of them; so I
warmed some water and washed off the blood, and dressed their wounds: I
was also forced while we remained there to look after all the cattle,
and milk them too; for they were not perfectly recovered, when orders
were brought us to return with our cattle. As my poor comrades could
scarce walk, I made the messenger who came to us assist me in driving
the cattle home.

When I came home, I was soon informed that deaan Tuley-Noro, king of
Antenosa, had given my master all this trouble by marching his people
into Anterndroea, and demanding satisfaction of deaan Crindo for the
murder of the white men. Now, though this was two years and a half
before (for so long I had been in the country) yet I soon heard that
captain Drummond, captain Steward, Mr Bembo, and the rest, who escaped
the night before the massacre, were with him; and that there had not
been, during all that time, a ship at Port Dauphine, for them to return
in; but that notwithstanding they lived free and entirely at their own
disposal. This deaan Tuley-Noro was king Samuel, whom I mentioned
before, and whose dominions were on the other side of the river
Manderra.

As soon as I got home I was taken from the cattle, and two men were
ordered to guard me and see that I did not run away to king Samuel. The
next day we heard the Antenosa people were within ten miles of our town,
which put them all into a great hurry and confusion. The cattle were
sent one way, and the women and children another; poor Robin, their
white slave, was along with them, but had his hands tied behind him. I
had not been long there before a messenger came to my mistress in great
haste, with order to send me to my master in the camp, for the white men
were to purchase me, and proposed to give two Buccaneer guns as a
valuable consideration. My mistress was loth to part with me; I
dissembled as much as I could, and showed a seeming reluctance at
parting since I had been so long amongst them; though at the same time I
struggled hard to conceal my joy. I kneeled down and licked her feet,
thanking her for all her favours, and away I went with the messenger, in
great hopes now of seeing some of my countrymen again, and getting a
passage to England. But see how fortune tantalized me! It was twenty
miles, or thereabouts, to the camp where my master was; and it might be
somewhat after midnight when we arrived there: my master set a watch
over me the remaining part of the night, and made me swear I would never
discover the hiding places of their wives and cattle; which I readily
complied with.

The next morning king Samuel sent to know if I was come, and desired
they would permit a hundred men to be sent down with me between the two
camps; and he would send the like number to meet them with the two
Buccaneer guns. This being agreed to, deaan Crindo ordered my master to
go with the party; and king Samuel seeing them approach, gave directions
for his men to meet them; among whom were captain Drummond, and the rest
of the white men. When we came near one another, captain Drummond, being
glad to see me, called me by my name; and asked me how I did. My master,
thereupon, clapped his hand upon my mouth, and vowed if I offered to
speak he would kill me; so that I durst not return any answer. Captain
Drummond finding I made no reply, imagined, as I suppose, that I could
not hear, whereupon he and the white men came nearer. My master, on
their approach, thought they came to take me by force, and cheat them of
the two guns; upon this he ordered his men to fire at them: so that
instead of a parley and an exchange of me for the two guns, a skirmish
ensued, and both armies advanced to support each other’s party. I was
immediately sent away under a strong guard to the woods, where I parted
with my mistress the night before: so that this pleasing prospect of
deliverance was nothing more than a short transitory dream of liberty,
which immediately vanished; and made me only feel the weight of slavery
much more sensibly than before. Which way I returned back I cannot tell;
but sure I am, I was in such a disorder of mind as a condemned criminal
is when going to execution. In a few hours, however, I found myself in
my former station; my legs in parra-pingo (a fastening almost like
fetters) for fear I should run away: my old companions stood round about
me, and my mistress and the women were glad to see me again. But I was
in too melancholy a mood to return them any compliments; nor could they
extract from me any thing but tears and exclamations at my hard fortune.
I wished for death, and was very near being gratified in my desire two
days after.

The next day news came that deaan Tuley-Noro was returning back to his
own country; he being (as they said) obliged to retire by deaan Crindo,
though the Antenosa army was twice their number. We were also ordered to
return home, and I was released from parra-pingo, and set at liberty; my
guard being also discharged.

The day following came deaan Mevarrow, deaan Sambo, and their little
army, entering the town with great pomp and grandeur, as if they had
gained some extraordinary victory; though I heard of nothing but a
little bush-fighting and ambuscades. The deaan, however, sat himself
down with his brother, the other chiefs, and the rest in the usual form
before his house: my mistress, according to custom, crept out to lick
her hero’s feet; when she had done, the rest of the women performed the
same ceremony; and after them the slaves, among whom I was one. As I was
getting up to depart, he ordered me to stay; I stood some time to hear
him tell his wife, how like a coward deaan Tuley-Noro behaved himself,
though he had twice their number of men. After he had told his tale, he
turned his head, and with an angry countenance asked me what the white
men said when they called me? Sir, said I, they only asked me how I did?
And nothing else, said he. I replied, no, sir. At this he rose up in a
rage, cocked his gun, and put the muzzle to my breast; saying, if I did
not tell him the truth he would shoot me that moment. I was not much
daunted, as I had little or no regard for my life in my then melancholy
humour; so with little concern I repeated what I said. At this he pulled
the trigger, but Providence being pleased to preserve me for some other
purpose, the cock snapped, and missed fire. Whether the prime was wet in
the pan, or by what other miracle it was I escaped his fury, I cannot
say; but that not succeeding to his wish, he took his lance to stab me;
when his brother and the rest of his chief men ran in between us and
told him it was cruel and inhuman, and that he had better have killed me
at first, than saved me only to terrify me with death on every slight
occasion; there being no reason at all for such severe treatment. With
much persuasion he returned to his seat and told them there were just
grounds to suspect the white men had formed a design to commit some
treacherous action, since they came nearer than they ought to have done.
And, indeed, their fears proceeded from a natural dread they have of
white men, ten of whom will drive fifty black men before them. Besides,
captain Drummond and the rest being completely armed with pistols in
their girdles, was an additional terror to them. What was the true
reason of king Samuel’s retiring I know not; but when this broil was
over, my curiosity led me to understand the whole affair; which was thus
related to me.

King Samuel’s intention was to have marched directly to Fennoarevo, and
fall upon deaan Crindo before he could be provided for him: his way lay
over a large plain called Ambovo, leading to a great wood; through which
they must also pass. Deaan Crindo having more timely notice than they
expected, laid an ambuscade in the wood; king Samuel being lame of the
gout was carried on men’s shoulders; they suffered him and great part of
his army to enter the wood, and then gave the signal: whereupon deaan
Crindo’s men arose and attacked them so vigorously and with so much
advantage, (knowing the wood which the others did not,) that king Samuel
himself was in danger of being taken; but was gallantly defended by the
white men, and others of his bravest people. They were obliged, however,
to retire into the plain, where they encamped, as did deaan Crindo’s
people close by the wood side, and even in it; by that means securing
themselves from the superior number of the Antenosa army, which, as they
were informed, consisted of six thousand men. Here they came to a
parley: king Samuel sent one of his chiefs to acquaint deaan Crindo,
that he had no intention to deprive him either of his cattle or his
slaves; but that as he had been brought up among white men, all such
were his friends; and he looked on himself obliged in duty and honour to
demand some satisfaction of deaan Crindo, for the white men he had so
inhumanly sacrificed to his resentment; and if there were any yet alive,
he desired to have them in order to send them to their native country.

Deaan Crindo gave good attention to the messenger, and then returned an
answer to this effect: that he wondered deaan Tuley-Noro should concern
himself with other people’s affairs; that as to the white men who were
shipwrecked on his coast, he looked upon it, that the great God had sent
them there for his assistance; and that as he had a potent enemy, and
was conscious of the white men’s courage, as well as superior skill in
war, he should not slight the help his gods had sent him. Accordingly he
treated them with the utmost civility as friends, and maintained them in
as handsome a manner as his country would afford; they wanting for
nothing he could procure them: and after all, though they had in so
violent a manner seized him, and prince Murnanzack, and made them
prisoners, he would condescend so far to Tuley-Noro to inform him
(though under no obligations to give him an account of his actions, or
frame any excuses) that neither he, nor prince Murnanzack was present,
or any way aiding or abetting in their deaths; but that action was done
by some of his sons and nephews to revenge the indignity offered to
himself and prince Murnanzack. And to convince him he did not tell him
this as a plea, through a mean spirited fear; since his sons thought fit
to do it, he would justify and defend them in it; and thought they did
the white men justice. That he knows but of one that was living out of
four boys, who were saved at that time, whom by inquiry he finds to be
in deaan Mevarrow’s hands: as to the other three, one died by sickness;
the second was killed by his master for his obstinacy and perverseness;
and the third ran away or was lost; for nobody knew what was become of
him: and as to him who was living, he should not have him without paying
such a ransom as his master required.

Now, by several circumstances, I am apt to imagine, that this answer
might seem highly reasonable to king Samuel; and that in my opinion
prevailed more on him to return to Antenosa, than all the force my
master boasted of, or than all that Crindo’s army was capable of
performing.

They told me, however, that king Samuel in his answer hereto, excused
the violence the white men offered to deaan Crindo, by asserting that
they did it only to secure their liberty; that they did not, nor ever
intended to hurt or injure him. However, as there was no raising the
dead to life, if he would send six hundred head of cattle, it should be
deemed a sufficient compensation; as for me, he was ready and willing to
purchase me, and desired to know what they demanded for my redemption.
Deaan Crindo sent word that with respect to me, they insisted on two
Buccaneer guns; but as to his demand of six hundred head of cattle, he
was not to have laws, or any arbitrary commands imposed on him by any
king whomsoever; that if they wanted provision he was ready to supply
him: for it should not be said that deaan Tuley-Noro came to see him,
and he would not give him a dinner; and for that reason he had ordered
his people to present him with six oxen and a bull.

King Samuel, as some would have it, resented this as an affront, and
would have attacked the Anterndroeans immediately upon it, but was
dissuaded by captain Drummond and the rest, there being no likelihood of
any engagement but bush-fighting; which must be to the advantage of the
Anterndroeans in their own country, who were in possession of the wood:
so finding that no other terms would be agreeable, they accepted of
deaan Crindo’s present, which his men wanted, indeed, and went on in
their parley about me; the success whereof you have already seen.
However,

I must not pass over a piece of superstition practised here. There are a
sort of people in this country who pretend to a profound knowledge in
the magical virtue of roots, trees, plants, and other products of the
like nature; and of their power to perform wondrous things by charms
composed of them. One of these conjurers, or Umossees (as the natives
call them) prevailed on deaan Crindo to take a certain powder which he
gave him, and to strip off a piece of the skin of the tail of a white
bull, because deaan Tuley-Noro was a whitish man, and to clap this
powder upon the wound; as also to mix some of it with water, and give it
to the bull to drink thereof, before it was given to the Antenosa men.
Now this was not done in order to make the creature unwholesome, and by
that means to procure deaths, or diseases among their enemies in the
common way; but with a view to work some witchcraft or supernatural
operation upon them. Now it happened that in two months after this king
Samuel died: at that time he was very infirm, and had been so long
before; which, with the fatigue of this journey, might hasten his end.
There was not wanting, however, people superstitious enough to think his
death was the effect of this incantation; though it is reasonable to
suppose he eat none of the bull, there being oxen at the same time; for
these negroes would make oxen no more than we white men, were they not
sensible that the flesh of them is in all respects more grateful to the
taste than that of bulls.

And since I have had an opportunity of saying thus much of king Samuel,
I suppose my reader will be so curious as to inquire who this king with
a christian name was? and what reason should induce him to assist us,
and revenge our wrongs? His living near the sea, and the immense
treasure he and his people amassed together by trading with the English,
may serve as a sufficient motive for the friendship this king showed to
our people: and indeed they are friends to the English all over the
island, except in some few places far distant from the sea. King
Samuel’s history, however, being very particular, I shall here relate it
as I had it at different times from the natives themselves. Whether any
of the French authors of voyages have written any memoirs concerning
him, I cannot positively affirm; nor have I had the opportunity of
seeing their histories of Madagascar, to compare them with my own; I
shall not, therefore, vary from the account I had of it, whether it be
agreeable to what others have said, or not.

This part of the country to which the French have given the name of Port
Dauphine, is called in the Madagascar language Antenosa. There came
hither about ninety years ago two French ships, on what account I cannot
learn; however they came to an anchor close under the land, in a very
good harbour. The captain observing that there were plenty of cattle,
and all provisions, as also a very good soil, determined that one of
them should stay here, and establish a settlement: hereupon they cast
lots who should continue on the island, and the person on whom the lot
fell was captain Mesmerrico. [I must here desire my reader to observe,
that this is the name by which the natives distinguish him; though in
all probability as they are unlearned they may pronounce it very
incorrectly: but, besides, as it is some considerable time since, and
they have no writings or records, so consequently, they can have no
other history than that of tradition, from father to son, and so on to
succeeding generations.] This captain Mesmerrico landed with two hundred
white men, well armed, and provided with store of ammunition and other
necessaries for the building of a fort, which they immediately began. No
sooner had the natives observed their intention, than they used their
utmost art and industry to prevent them: this created a war, in which
the French were the victors, who took at several times a great number of
prisoners. In this war the king of Antenosa and his brother were killed;
and amongst many other children that were made captives, the king’s son
was one. When the French had suppressed the natives and completed their
fort, the ships set sail for France, and carried this young prince and
several others of distinction with them.

In about a year after this expedition, the natives began to be better
reconciled to the French; notwithstanding they were secretly disgusted
at the indignity offered to their young prince, and could by no means
relish the government and direction of foreigners. However, the French,
by their artful and cunning deportment and insinuations, gained so much
friendship amongst them, that they married, and lived up and down in
several towns, at some distance from each other, and not above five or
six in a place. They occasionally assisted the natives in their wars
against a king that resides to the northward, whom they defeated, took a
great number of slaves and many cattle. In this manner they lived for
some years with great tranquility, neglecting their fort, and extending
themselves all over the whole country of Antenosa: but at last, as their
families grew numerous, the natives grew jealous; and recollecting how
inhumanly they had treated their prince, and perceiving them thus
scattered and dispersed, they thought this a favourable opportunity to
free themselves from a foreign yoke. Hereupon they formed a conspiracy
to cut off all the white men in one day; and the Wednesday following it
was put in execution, not leaving a white man alive in Antenosa.

Soon after a French ship came there as usual; the maurominters, or
slaves, who retained a respect for the French, got a canoe and went off
to them, and informed them that their countrymen were all massacred. The
captain was startled, and deeply concerned at this melancholy news, but
could not revenge their cause, being glad to steer another course
without making the least attempt to go on shore.

Having now nobody to interrupt them, they put their government into its
original form, and made choice of one for their king, who was the most
nearly related to the former; there being no other son than he whom the
French took captive. Under this new king’s direction they lived
peaceably and quietly for several years, no French ship ever presuming
to come near them; but now and then an English ship paid them a visit;
and they traded in a very fair and honest manner with the officers on
board.

Some years afterwards, a French ship, homeward-bound from India,
happened to be in great distress for want of water and provisions, and
could not compass the Cape. Port Dauphine lay very commodious for the
captain, but he knew that the natives were their implacable enemies,
neither was he ignorant of the real occasion; and therefore resolved to
make use of the following stratagem. Under a pretence of being sent
ambassador from the French king, he went on shore in great pomp, and
with proper attendants. The ship lay at anchor as near the shore as
possible, in order to be within reach of their guns in case any acts of
hostility should be shown them. The natives who came down to them, asked
if they were English or French? They replied, the latter; but they were
sent by express orders from the French king with some valuable presents,
and were inclined to make a treaty of peace. The king they had last
chosen, whom I mentioned before, died about a month before their
arrival, and no new one was then elected in his stead; but the old queen
(mother of the prince whom they had so clandestinely conveyed away some
years before) being then alive, gave directions that the ambassador
should be conducted to her house. His men carried a great many things of
no great value amongst them; but such, however, as they knew would be
highly agreeable in this country. These were formally presented in the
name of the French king, and the queen testified her satisfaction in the
reception of them, by entertaining the captain in the most elegant
manner she could devise. This day passed in compliments, mutual
presents, and such other ceremonies as were consistent with their ideas
of public grandeur; the next day she sent for the captain and informed
him, that she expected his men, as well as himself, should take the
oaths according to the custom of her country.

The captain having readily agreed to her proposition, the ceremony was
performed after the following manner:—the holy owley, of which we have
already given some account, was brought out and hung upon a piece of
wood laid crosswise on two forks, all which were cut down on this solemn
occasion; as was also a long pole, to which a bullock was fastened: this
was provided by the queen, and when killed, they took part of the tail,
and some of the hair of the nose and eyebrows, and put them on some live
coals that were under the owley; they then took some of the blood, which
they sprinkled upon it, and upon the beam whereon it hung; the liver
also was roasted, and a piece placed on it; two other pieces were put on
two lances, which were stuck in the ground betwixt the queen and the
ambassador; the queen swore first to this, or the like effect:—“I swear
by the great God above, by the four gods of the four quarters of the
world, by the spirits of my forefathers, and before this holy owley,
that neither I, nor any of my offspring, nor any of my people, who
assist at this solemnity, or their issue, shall or will wittingly, or
willingly, kill any Frenchman, unless he prove the first aggressor: and
if we, or any of us, mean any other than the plain and honest truth by
this protestation, may this liver, which I now eat, be converted into
poison, and destroy me on the spot.”

Having repeated this form of words, she took the piece of liver off the
lance and eat it, and when she had done, the sham-ambassador did the
same.

The captain, or quondam ambassador, stayed on shore about three or four
days after this solemn contract, and sent on board what provision his
people wanted. A firm friendship being now established between them,
they strove who should outvie the other in the arts of courtesy and
complaisance. The captain invited the queen to go on board his vessel,
and she very readily went with several of the chief of her people, who
were treated by the captain with great magnificence, and to her entire
satisfaction. She returned on shore in the ship’s boat, and stood
looking about her for some time after she was landed. The Frenchmen, not
regarding the presence of the black queen, stripped and swam about to
wash and cool themselves; the queen observing the whiteness of their
skins, indulged her curiosity in looking on them; at last, perceiving
one man whose skin was much darker than the rest of his companions, as
he came toward the shore, and was going to put on his clothes, she
espied a particular mole under his left breast; she went to him
immediately, and looking more wishfully on it, would not permit him to
put on his shirt, but claimed him as her son, who had been carried away,
when a child, many years before; and had not patience to contain
herself, but ran to him, (crying for joy that she had found her son,)
threw her arms about his neck, and almost stifled him with kisses. This
surprised all the people, as well blacks as whites, till having
recovered herself a little, she turned to them and told them this was
her son, and showed them the private mark. They who had known the young
prince drew near, viewed the mole, and acquiesced with her that it must
be he, and no other. The Frenchmen could not tell what to make of this
odd discovery, nor what might be the fatal consequences that might
possibly attend it.

The captain, therefore, taking the man aside, advised him to give as
artful answers as he could to what questions they should ask him for
their safety’s sake. Now there were several blacks who spoke French, and
by their means the Frenchmen as soon understood the queen as they did.
She desired they would ask him if he knew the country he was born in? He
answered, he could remember nothing of it, for he was carried from his
native place when a child. She asked him if he knew her? He said, he
could not pretend to say absolutely that he did, but he thought she bore
a great resemblance to somebody he was much used to when young.

This confirmed them more and more in their opinion. As to his being
white-skinned, they thought that might easily be from his wearing
clothes during the time he was absent from home; his hair was as black
as theirs, so that it was concluded it must be their prince. The old
queen was transported with joy at finding her son, and the natives were
for choosing him their king directly, he being the next heir. They asked
what was his name. He told them he never remembered that he was called
by any other name than that of Samuel; but they gave him what they
thought was his original name, compounded with Tuley, which denoted his
return, or arrival; so they called him deaan Tuley-Noro. Deaan, it may
be observed, is a universal title of honour, and signifies lord; and he
was also farther saluted immediately with the title of Panzacker, that
is, king of Antenosa.

The captain and other Frenchmen were surprised to find the man play his
part so dexterously; not perceiving, at first, that he was in earnest,
and was as fond of being their king as they were of electing him, though
it was in so heathenish a place. He had here twelve thousand fighting
men immediately under his command, and a fine, spacious, and plentiful
country to live in at his pleasure. The ship’s crew sailed away and left
him behind them; but as often as the French had occasion for what this
island afforded, they made it a constant practice to put into Port
Dauphine, and traffic with him.

About three or four years before we were cast away, a French ship
happening to be there, some of the men got drunk on shore, and in a
quarrel with some of the natives, told them that king Samuel was not
their lawful prince, but that he was still resident in France. This
might have proved of very fatal consequence to him, but he took such
care to prevent it, as no one could justly blame him for. He sent for
the man who made this public declaration, and ordered him to be shot to
death; he commanded, likewise, his companions to depart forthwith, and
assured them, that if ever they, or any of their countrymen presumed to
come within his territories again, they should feel the weight of his
resentment. And our man, who advised us from putting into Port Dauphine,
being informed of this last adventure, made him say he was barbarous to
all white people; but he had heard the story imperfectly, and from
thence arose the mistake which proved so fatal to us.

By this conference between deaan Crindo and king Samuel, I came to the
knowledge of what happened to the white boys, who were my fellow
captives, at least, so far as the natives knew themselves; as also, that
the prince whom we seized and made prisoner with deaan Crindo, their
king, was not, properly speaking, his son, but deaan Murnanzack, his
nephew, whose right deaan Crindo had usurped, as we find in the sequel
of this story; but a word in their language, signifying offspring, and
comprehending as well grandsons and nephews, as sons, was the cause of
our mistake. But,

To return to my own history: the contest between my master and me being
pretty well over, through the intercession of deaan Sambo and the other
chiefs, he ordered me to go and work in the plantations, and told me
with a stern countenance, that if I hoed the carravances and weeds
together, as I did before, he would hoe my —— out. I went away very well
satisfied, not caring where I was sent, so it was but out of his sight,
for he now became more my aversion than ever.

Our plantation was near five miles from home, and he seldom came above
once in a month to visit us. As to my maintenance, or that of the rest
of his slaves, we must provide for ourselves, or starve, for he never
concerned himself about us. However, each man had as much land as he
thought proper to cultivate for his own use, and one day in a week
without control. When I first came there, I thought I must have starved.
I was obliged on moonlight nights, after I had done my task, to go into
the woods and hunt out for wild yams for my sustenance, and too often I
found no more than was sufficient for one meal; which, however, I was
forced to husband to the best advantage.

My fellow-slaves were, indeed, as courteous to me as I could well
expect; and as they had plantations of their own, they gave me
carravances and such other victuals as they had; especially on dark
nights, and at such times as I could not shift for myself. I worked
sometimes two nights in a week in cleaning and burning down the weeds
and other things off the spot of ground I had allotted for my own
plantation; the best root, however, that I could plant to produce myself
food in a short time was potatoes. I lived in this miserable plight for
nearly three months successively, and it was a year before I was well
settled, and could say I had plenty.

Honey is one of the most profitable, as well as most useful things this
country produces; and they may have it in plenty, if they will but take
proper care. There is little trouble in the management of bees, which
are here very numerous; they will readily come to their hives, or
toakes, as the natives call them, and I took a particular delight in
making them. They are part of the body of a tree, called fontuoletch;
which is first cut off about a yard long, and then split right down.
After we have dug out the middle with our hatchets, in which operation
we are not over nice, we bind the two parts together in their natural
position, so that the hive is a hollow cylinder; we leave a hole at the
bottom for the bees to enter, and this is all the care that need be
taken.

I had a large stock of these hives, but my neighbours too often
plundered them. Once, however, I caught a young fellow; and about three
or four days after, I went to his father to demand satisfaction for the
honey he stole, and the destruction of my hives. The old man made very
few words with me, but gave me two hatchets, a hoe, and ten strings of
beads. I was very well satisfied with this compensation, and looked upon
myself as no inconsiderable person; but soon after, I found out a sure
method to preserve my honey; the relation whereof will give the reader
an adequate idea of almost the only superstition to which these people
are addicted.

I have made mention before of the Umossees who pretend to be magicians,
sorcerers, and fortune-tellers. One of these was on his travels from
Antenosa into our country, and took up his lodgings at my master’s town;
my master had been that day in the woods to visit his beehives, and
perceived several of them robbed of their store: he returned before
night in a very great passion, and threatened to shoot the person that
was found stealing his honey, let him be who he would. This Umossee
coming to pay his respects to him just at that time, and hearing his
complaint, told him he could give him a secret, or charm, that would
effectually prevent his honey from being stolen; but he was afraid to
communicate it, because it would infallibly kill the person who should
but taste of it. Deaan Mevarrow replied, he did not care if they were
all killed. Hereupon, it was agreed, that the Umossee should have two
cows and two calves, in case his project proved effectual, and should
stay to see the desired success.

Accordingly, the next morning, he went into the woods and singled out a
tree which the natives call roe-bouche; we have none like it in England,
nor is it very material, for any tree would have done his business, I
presume, as well. He went to the eastward of this tree and dug up a
piece of its root, and then turned to the westward, and dug up another
piece; after this, he took the eastern root, and ordered deaan Mevarrow
to rub it on a stone with a little water, and sprinkle the water among
the bees, and the honeycombs in the hives; and, if any one, said he,
shall steal the honey, and eat the least morsel of it in a quarter of a
day, (for they reckon not by hours, as we do,) they will swell and break
out in spots, like a leopard, from head to foot, and in three days they
will die. Deaan Mevarrow was highly pleased at this discovery, and said,
how shall I do when I want to make use of my honey for myself and
family? The Umossee replied, the remedy is here in my hand, which is no
other than a root of the same tree, but dug to the westward; and when
you take your honey, rub a little of this upon another stone with water,
and sprinkle the hives; this being done, your eastern root will have no
power. But if any one have stolen your honey, and feel the bad effects
of it, and you are inclined to be merciful and save his life, give him a
small quantity of this western root, which he called vauhovalumy, or
root of life, and it will take down all the swelling; the spots will all
vanish, and the person be restored to his former state of health.

All this was mighty well, but the principal point was to try the virtues
of it, and see if it would answer all these fine purposes of the
Umossee, which deaan Mevarrow was somewhat doubtful of, though very
eager to know; and therefore, having sprinkled his hives with the
eastern root according to directions, he proposed it to several to make
the experiment, and he would give them an ox as a reward, but nobody
would venture; Whereupon he ordered it to be published about the
country, and by this means I came to hear of it. Now I had before
observed the simplicity of the people on these occasions, and plainly
perceived that these artful Umossees took the advantage of their
ignorance to cheat and impose upon them. I was very sensible there was
nothing more in all this, and that it had already met with the effect
desired, by striking terror into the people; and having a considerable
quantity of honey myself, I imagined, if I gave out that I had the
secret, it would also preserve mine. I sent word, therefore, to my
master, that I would oblige him if he would communicate the secret to
me, in case I survived the experiment. He not only sent for me
immediately, and agreed to my proposal, but made me a promise of a
considerable reward besides.

I went, accordingly, with my master and several others to the hive,
which was sprinkled, as they call it, with the poison; and swallowed the
honey down by handfuls before them, asking them at the same time if they
would eat some with me? They would not touch it, they said, for ten
thousand cattle; making several grimaces in the mean time, and expecting
every moment some dismal calamity would befall me for my presumption.
When I had filled my belly, my master would have me home with him, in
order to have the cure at hand, but I chose rather to stay with my
comrades; by which means, I had time to contrive some way to deceive
them. As fortune would have it, being in the fields, I saw at some
distance a calf sucking a cow; and nobody being in sight, I tied up the
calf with my lamber, and milked the cow into my mouth as long as ever I
could. This, and the honey together, had the desired effect, for it
began to swell me immediately, and rumbled in my belly so loud that it
might be heard. Away went I to my comrades, who perceiving my belly
swelled, and hearing the unusual noise, advised me to run home, and cry
out I was poisoned. I pretended to step behind a hedge on some private
occasion, but it was only to whip myself with some nettles. The pimples
and redness raised from this stratagem terrified them still more and
more; for there appeared on me all the symptoms of poison which the
Umossee had before described; and to crown the deceit, you may be sure I
did not fail to comply, and cry out most heartily; thereupon, some ran
before me, and others helped me home.

My master, before I came, had prepared the water with the vauhovalumy,
or root of life; the people, terrified at the danger I was in, flocked
round the house; some pitied me, and stood astonished at the profound
learning of the Umossee, who did not, himself, perceive the cheat. Well,
I drank the medicine, and after reposing myself for three or four hours,
all the tokens of danger disappeared, and I was well. The vauhovalumy
was looked upon as a sovereign medicine, and the Umossee as a very great
and wise man, who did not a little value himself upon the success of his
secret, repenting that he had parted with it at so cheap a rate; saying,
he would have twenty cows for it of the next that wanted it. Deaan
Mevarrow, as a gratification, bid him choose any two cows and two calves
out of all his cattle in the cow-pen, which he did accordingly, and
departed. My master, on my promise of secrecy, discovered both the roots
to me, and showed me not only how to find them, but how to use them to
the best advantage; for the pain, he imagined, I had suffered, and the
hazard I underwent, he presented me with a cow and calf; I then thought
I had spent my time to a very good purpose.

When I returned to my plantation, my neighbours and fellow-slaves having
observed the sudden and terrible effects of this poison, begged of me to
put a mark upon all my hives, that when they went out a honey-stealing,
they might not be killed by eating any of mine. This was the very thing
I aimed at, and, accordingly, I put a white stick before every hive, and
never lost my honey afterwards. Nobody would go near my hives for fear
my bees should sting them, and the wounds should prove of more dangerous
consequence than those of others.

Having now a cow and a calf, I had milk of my own, and was as rich as my
fellow-slaves; besides the advantage I made of my honey, by selling
forty or fifty gallons a year for hatchets, beads, &c., to those who
make toake with it; more especially against their circumcision, and
other solemn festivals.

I lived in this manner about three years, which, with the two years and
a half I had spent before, made up almost an apprenticeship in this
country. One day my master came to survey our work, and taking peculiar
notice of the method I observed, he told me I must go home with him and
keep his cattle, which were near the town. This employment was not near
so laborious as digging and cultivating his plantation; however, I was
pretty well improved, but as he provided for me now, and my honey was
safe, I was not much concerned at my removal; so away I went, driving my
own cattle, which were considerably increased, having two heifers,
besides my cow and calf. My household furniture too was not so
cumbersome, but I was able to carry it all away at once; yet I was as
rich, and had as much as other people in my mean station, and much more
than many of them.

In less than two days I built me a house, and a cow-pen for my cattle.
Now was I in my former situation, and looking after my master’s cattle;
the hardest of my labour was, as I observed before, the bringing home
every other night, either a tub or a calabash, four or five miles, full
of water; but considering I was a slave, I lived in as much ease as I
could reasonably expect.

I had not continued long in this last station, before a general calamity
reduced us to the most deplorable circumstances. The epidemical evil of
this island is, their frequent animosities and open quarrels with one
another, which is the principal reason why such numbers of them are sold
to the Europeans for slaves. This is a dangerous and destructive
misfortune to a people, otherwise good-natured and well disposed; who
have wholesome laws for the determination of all disputes, and the
punishment of all crimes, of which I shall give an account in a more
proper place; but what I have to observe here is, that the sovereign
prince of any country has seldom force sufficient to oblige the lesser
chiefs in his dominions to answer, in a judicial way, to the wrongs they
do each other, or the mistakes and errors which they casually commit;
but they fight it out, making slaves of, impoverishing, and destroying
one another, after the manner I am now going to relate, in which I
myself was a severe sufferer.

All things appeared in a state of peace and tranquillity. No foreign
enemy for a long time molested us. But what I took particular notice of
when first a slave, was, my master and others clandestinely driving away
their neighbours’ cattle, and their neighbours being equally guilty of
the same practice, so that it was a very difficult point to determine
who was the aggressor in the present quarrel. But one day, as I and some
others went about five or six miles to water our cattle, having two men
armed with guns to guard us according to custom, it happened, on our
return home, that notwithstanding the greater number of them went on
slowly, grazing as they passed along, some of the milch cows, wanting to
be sucked by their calves, ran homewards before the rest. The man
knowing me to be very active and nimble, desired me to run forwards and
stop them, in order to keep them in a body; but they being got at a
great distance, it was some time before I could turn them. When I
wheeled about, I was surprised to see one of our men shooting amongst a
body of men, who were driving the cattle another way, and running from
them towards me; they soon espied us, and our cattle, and ran after us.
Hereupon I quitted my post, and fled as fast as I could home to my
master, and was the first messenger to relate our disaster. I puffed and
blowed, being frightened, and out of breath, and in imperfect
exclamations I told him, that an army had seized our cattle; and that
one of our men, named Roynsowra, had fired and killed somebody; but I
could not inform him who the enemy were, nor on what account they thus
attacked us. While my master and some others were discoursing with me,
in came two or three more, who informed them that deaan Chahary and his
brother deaan Frukey, two of deaan Crindo’s sons, were the parties
concerned. Our master, it seems, had been found guilty of stealing three
of deaan Frukey’s cattle, and this they did by way of retaliation. All
was in an uproar and confusion at once. Each man took up his arms in a
hurry. Deaan Mevarrow ordered them to follow him, which they were as
much inclined to do as he was to lead them, for the loss was general.
All the milch cows and home-kept cattle were gone, and now away went all
the men in pursuit of them, except such as were old and infirm. Amongst
others, I was demolished, having lost my cow and my two heifers; my
calf, indeed, was left at home, lowing for its dam, as did every body’s
else; between which vociferations, and the outcries of the women and
children, there was a most confused and hideous uproar.

Deaan Frukey, who then was, or at least pretended to be, the injured
person, lived within two or three miles of our watering place; but they
drove our cattle more to the northward, to deaan Chahary’s town, which
was better fortified, and much more capable of sustaining the assault,
which they justly imagined we should make against it. Though our people
were highly provoked, and very expeditious, yet they followed them with
all the circumspection imaginable; having spies who ran softly before,
by whom they found their enemies were entered the town with their booty.
Our people, not being provided with strength sufficient, and having no
time to call in their neighbours to their assistance, did not attempt to
assault deaan Chahary’s town, but turned off without being suspected,
and went about five miles farther, where they kept their breeding
cattle. As it was now late in the night, they took them all without any
opposition, the few keepers they had being at a distance, and fast
asleep; so that they drove away the beasts without any noise, and made
their way homewards as fast as possible. We looked out all the morning,
expecting every minute they would return; and, at length, we espied them
with a vast drove of cattle, containing as many at least, if not more
than our own, being above five hundred. All of us imagined they had
recovered their own; and for my own part, I was thinking how I should
kiss my cow for joy of seeing her again; but too soon we perceived they
were strangers, and as I was not with them, I had no share of the booty.

My master, and several others, after they had divided them, killed some
of the oxen; a jovial feast was made immediately, and our people sent me
part of the banquet. The day following my master despatched me to look
after the cattle as before, whilst he went to repair some breaches in
his town walls, by putting in several poles, which were cut down for
that purpose, and made preparations for a war. He had not patience,
however, to stay at home and see whether his enemies would come to
create him any new disturbance, though he might be very well satisfied
with the reprisals he had made on them, since he had taken away more
than he had lost. However, in two or three days’ time after, he was
resolutely bent to surprise the enemy’s town by night, though he left
his own unguarded, and met with such success as so precipitate a conduct
justly deserved; for the very next morning after their expedition, as I
and others were watering our cattle, and looking carefully after them,
lest they should run to their own home, which was considerably nearer to
the watering place than our town, about twenty men rushed out of a
thicket of bushes, and leaped upon us like so many tigers on their prey.
However, I and three or four more boys had time to start out of their
clutches and fly for it; but they soon overtook the rest, carrying them
back, and all the cattle and the other slaves that were with them; while
some followed me, hollaing out, and menacing to kill me if I did not
stop and surrender myself their captive. Thereupon I turned about, and
perceiving I had gained ground of them, I ran directly forwards for a
mile and a half at least, before I came to any proper shelter. At length
I came to a wood, with which I was well acquainted, where I soon lost
them. They returned back to their companions, and went off with their
prisoners and cattle. Perceiving them gone I hastened home; when I
entered the town the women immediately flocked round about me, for they
saw by my countenance and the confusion I was in that some misfortune
had attended our party. I soon acquainted them with the loss we had
sustained, and they as soon reflected on their husband’s ill conduct;
who, to gratify the dictates of a blind passion, and to avenge
themselves on their enemies, would leave all that was valuable to
themselves unguarded to become their prey; for they might be very well
assured that they had spies out to give notice of every opportunity
which might tend to their advantage.

Deaan Mevarrow returned about evening, when, for his welcome home, the
news of this morning’s expedition was related to him. I also understood
the project they went upon had proved fruitless and ineffectual; for
though they arrived at the enemy’s town an hour before daylight, yet so
cautious and vigilant were they in sending out their spies all ways both
night and day, that they discovered our people, and alarmed the
townfolks, who came out and met them. And all that was done, as I could
hear, was only a tongue-battle, and vollies of opprobrious language.
Deaan Mevarrow, indeed, fired at them at a distance, which they
returned, but no execution was done on either side. A kinsman coming
soon after daylight to deaan Frukey’s assistance, deaan Mevarrow thought
it most advisable to withdraw; but not without telling them, if his
kinsman and his people had not come in to his assistance, he would have
had all his cattle again in a few hours. To this they replied, that they
would not only keep the cattle they had of his, but that their own,
which had been lately carried away by surprise, were by this time in
their own hands again, as he would find at his return. And what they
asserted, indeed, proved too true: at this he was heartily nettled. We
had killed, however, a considerable number of them first, and stocked
ourselves with provisions. He vowed to be revenged on his uncles, and
accordingly made preparations for another enterprise, which was entered
upon in three days after. He asked me if I was willing to make one of
the party? I very readily embraced his offer, for there was safety
nowhere now; and being at home was as dangerous as being with them. So
he furnished me with a gun, cartouch box, and powder-horn, and thus
accoutred, I commenced soldier.

We sallied out of our town as soon as it was dark, for we had a great
way to go. Deaan Frukey, with all his people, having abandoned his own
town, not thinking it sufficiently fortified, and moved to his
brother’s, which was many miles farther to the northward, we marched
very briskly, but as silently as possible, never speaking to each other,
but in whispers. As my skin appeared white, they imagined it must be
discerned at a distance in the dark, and expose us by that means to our
enemy’s spies; they therefore made me besmear myself all over with mud.

We came near the town about two hours before daylight, and sent two men
who were perfectly acquainted with every part of it, in order to search
for breaches, or at least some weak places in the fortifications. They
succeeded as they could wish, and returned, having discovered not only
two breaches, but the private way too, which is always prepared for the
women and children, by which to make their escape into the woods in case
of a surprise. Near this place we laid an ambuscade of thirty men, who
were ordered not to fire, or make the least noise, and to seize the
women only in their flight. Our army was divided into three parts: deaan
Mevarrow, with his people, attacked the more difficult breach of the
two; a chief man of his the other; and deaan Sambo the gate, in whose
party I was; for my master would not take me with him, thinking I could
not well bear to tread upon the thorns in the fortification.

There were three gates, one within another. The signal for our attack
was the firing the first gun, which was not to be till the deaan
Mevarrow and the other chief had secured the outside of the breaches,
and it was a quarter of an hour before we had accomplished it. The
townsmen were by that time all in arms, and almost as well prepared as
we, for they secured the inner gate, at the same time we entered the
outer one, and came furiously towards us with warmth and resolution;
however, we drove them back. They maintained the other, indeed, a long
time, till deaan Mevarrow had, with much difficulty, gained a passage
through the breach; one of his principal men was shot in the belly just
before him, which so provoked him that he leaped down, and the rest
followed.

About the same time we pushed vigorously towards, and entered the town.
Immediately we heard the outcry of the women, who were surprised by our
ambuscade, and almost all of them taken. The men got off by a breach,
which they themselves made into the woods, and left us the town to
plunder and reduce to ashes, which was done accordingly. I got for my
share a small quantity of cotton, and a few wooden platters, and some
spoons. We found here several of our cattle, and among the rest I espied
my cow, and did not question then but I should soon have her again: but
see the fatal effects of an ill-grounded security! We had now a great
booty of slaves and cattle; the latter we drove out of the town before
us, without any guard before them, thinking we had gained an entire
victory and dispersed all our enemies; when, in fact, the number of them
was greatly increased. They kept in a body in the woods, observed our
motions, and only waited for a favourable opportunity to show their
resentment. They soon perceived that the cattle were left defenceless,
and that they had little more to do than to drive them into the woods,
where we lost them all almost as soon as we had got them. For on our
march, in order to recover them, the enemy appeared in a formidable
body, firing at us, and even giving us battle. In this action one of our
men was killed. Several of our people were missing before, even whilst
we were in the town; and upon strict inquiry, we found three wounded,
and four of our principal and bravest men cut off. Deaan Mevarrow and
all the rest seemed very much concerned at this unexpected misfortune;
and were not near so active or sanguine as they were before, so that now
they thought of nothing but making a retreat with the slaves they had
taken, and getting out of the reach of the enemy as soon as possible.
Accordingly they left the plain open road by which we came, and went
through the woods, a most uncomfortable way, for ten miles or more,
overrun with thorns and briars, and in perpetual fear of ambuscades. We
stopped, however, to make a bier to carry away our men who were wounded,
and then marched on with the utmost circumspection, thinking every bird
that stirred an enemy in ambush. Notwithstanding we got through this
long wood very safely, we still went by unbeaten ways, so that it was
almost dark before we got home. It is a constant custom, be the success
of their engagements good or bad, for the chief to sit down with his
people before his own door; the women soon flocked round him to hear the
news, and though we brought with us a considerable number of slaves, yet
there was no room for rejoicing; for the wives, relations, and friends
who were killed made a most hideous outcry. However, a few calves were
killed, and we refreshed ourselves as well as we could after our long
fatigue; every man retired to his own apartment, and being weary, lay
down to rest; but before daylight we were alarmed by the firing of a
gun. The enemy, by our conduct the day before, perceived we were
dispirited, and determined to give us no time to recruit; so they
pursued us and attacked our town, as we had before done theirs; but I
cannot say their judgment or conduct was equal to ours. For the first
thing we did upon the alarm was, to have a party ready to secure the
wives, children, and other valuable slaves, in which we succeeded to our
wish, and conveyed them safely out of the town to their proper recesses.
Though we defended ourselves as long as we could, yet we did not show so
much courage and resolution as we should have done at another time;
however, we retreated with but a trivial loss, and left them the town to
plunder. There was nothing of value for them, since the women had
carried off what their haste would admit of; and as for cattle, there
was none but a few calves, whose dams they had seized at first; and such
was their precipitation, that they could not drive even them away; so
they killed them, and carried as much of their carcasses away for
provision as they conveniently could. They never once offered to go in
search for the women, but called to us, and vowed we should have no rest
till they recovered their wives and children. We told them on the other
hand, that we would have our cattle again, and not restore them their
wives neither. They seemed pleased with thus showing their resentment;
it was no small satisfaction to our people, though defeated this time,
to find that notwithstanding all the disadvantages they then lay under,
they were still able to cope with them.

But deaan Crindo, our king, by this time was apprized of all that had
happened, who immediately undertook to reconcile all differences between
us; and accordingly sent messengers to both parties to know the grounds
of our quarrel, and the demands on both sides. Deaan Mevarrow sent word
he was ready to oblige the king, and would live in peace with his uncles
in case they would send him all his cattle again; and as deaan Frukey
and Chahary wanted their wives again, they said, they were ready and
willing to return what cattle were left alive of ours; but having killed
a third part, they would never be accountable on that score. So that the
king could not persuade deaan Frukey to make up the number of our
cattle; nor on the other hand could he prevail on us to send them their
wives unless they made restitution. Our master boldly sent the king
word, that all the force he had, united with that of his sons, should
not oblige him to restore their wives and children on any other terms.

Deaan Crindo resented this insolent answer, and was determined at all
adventures to reduce them to a compliance; and in order thereto,
mustered up an army of a thousand men, and was resolutely bent to come
to deaan Mevarrow first. Now deaan Crindo could not on these occasions
raise any considerable army, because there was a dispute always
subsisting between him and his nephew Murnanzack, whose father was deaan
Crindo’s elder brother; who dying when his son was an infant, and his
country invaded, this uncle took upon him the charge of the government;
and when possessed of it would never resign it. Deaan Murnanzack was not
only an intrepid warrior, but a prince as well accomplished as ever
appeared in this illiterate country. He was just, honourable, generous,
and of a courteous disposition; he had three brothers, who were lords,
judges, and chiefs of towns, who together could raise an army not much
inferior to their uncle’s; besides, he was universally beloved. Now, in
case of a foreign war, all were ready to oppose the common enemy, as we
have seen them withstand the kings of Merfaughla and Antenosa; but they
were ever jealous and watchful of each other. For which reason deaan
Crindo could bring no greater an army against us than was consistent
with the safety of his own town, and those belonging to his sons.

Deaan Mevarrow had notice of this design against him, by a particular
friend of his in Fennoarevo, who ran from thence to our town by night,
and returned before daylight undiscovered. My master had a cousin with
whom he had contracted an intimate friendship, and whose father was as
powerful a lord as any in deaan Crindo’s dominions; to this uncle, whose
name was Mephontey, he fled with his people for protection. We soon
packed up our little all which we had left. My whole stock of provision
and household furniture consisted of no more than about a gallon of
carravances, a mat to lie upon, a hatchet, and a little spade to dig up
wild yams. We wanted no hoes now, for that work was put an end to in
this country. All our plantations, and most of the produce which was
laid up in little storehouses, were now left to the enemy’s disposal. In
half a day we arrived at deaan Mephontey’s town, who treated my master
with all due respect, and assured him, that he would defend both him and
his people to the utmost of his power. The chiefs had houses given them,
but we common people were obliged to build huts for ourselves in any
part of the town where we could find room. As for my own part, I erected
but a small one, not knowing how soon it might be burnt.

Deaan Crindo, in three days’ time, encamped before the town. He sent to
deaan Mephontey, desiring him to deliver up deaan Mevarrow, and all his
people, and bid him detain them at his peril. To this deaan Mephontey
sent a resolute answer, that he would protect any strangers, who were in
his opinion honest people, and fled to him for succour in distress; and
much more should he be sanguine for the interest of his friends and
relations; and if deaan Crindo would have them, he must take them away
by force, for he would defend them to the last extremity.

Deaan Crindo prepared to attack the town the next morning, and we to
defend it. In order thereto, the women and children were that night sent
away into the woods, not all into one place, but at proper distances,
and in small companies. I was ordered with a guard to take care of my
mistress, and some other women and slaves who were with her, which I
accordingly did. After I had marked the place, in order to find it again
with ease, I returned to the town, where we lived as well as we could
wish that night, dressing and eating beef in plenty, &c. for we had some
cattle of our own, such as I was sent to keep at first, which were at a
great distance, when deaan Frukey seized the milch cows; but we wanted
water, which was a great misfortune to us, since our enemies were so
near that we could fetch none all the day before.

The next morning we were all up by break of day, and every man at his
station, according to appointment the day before. I was posted behind my
master, who had two guns, one of which I was to load, while he fired
with the other. It was broad day before the enemy began the attack; they
fired so briskly upon us, that for nearly a quarter of an hour together
we could not see them for smoke; but as soon as their fire abated, we
returned it as hotly upon them. On the second onset they drew nearer,
and the lances flew briskly at one another; one of which went through my
lamber, and scratched me. I was a little surprised at first, but soon
recovering my spirits, I returned them the lance over the fortification,
in the same manner as it came to me. The cattle were very troublesome to
us; for several of them being wounded, they ran up and down and put the
rest into confusion. We fought thus for four hours successively, with
great warmth on both sides, till deaan Crindo perceiving he could not
enter the town, recalled his forces and withdrew to his camp. Deaan
Mephontey and deaan Mevarrow were for sallying out; but deaan
Mephontey’s son, Batoengha, with much difficulty persuaded them to
desist, suspecting an ambuscade. Several were killed on both sides, and
some wounded, whom we conveyed out of the town when the engagement was
over to their wives. We buried our dead under the fortification, and
sent out spies to observe the motions of the enemy, who brought us
intelligence that they were very quiet, and that their whole time was
spent in killing cattle, and fetching wood to dress provisions. When
this news was confirmed, and we were well assured that they would give
us no more trouble for that day, our people killed and dressed beef
likewise, but we were parched up with thirst. You might here have seen
men with their tongues lolling out of their mouths through excessive
heat. This want of water is the most intolerable of all calamities, and
a misery too great for words to express. I have before observed, that
when I first came into this country, I felt the anguish of it for almost
four days; and found by woful experience, that there was no comparison
between hunger and thirst. I had relief, however, sooner than my
neighbours; for my master sent me and two slaves with provisions for our
mistress, and those who accompanied her, where, by the way, we found a
little water.

I had some difficulty, notwithstanding all my precaution, to find the
place where I left her the night before; however, I got there at last.
She seemed in great concern for our welfare, and drowned in tears; for
hearing the guns firing, and, at length, ceasing all at once, she
imagined the town was taken and her husband killed; but the sight of me
dispelled all those melancholy clouds. I cut down several boughs with
large leaves upon them, which served very well for dishes and plates;
and cutting the roast meat I brought with me into pieces, I served it up
to my mistress: and though she had not, as some may probably remark, so
much delicacy as some of our fine ladies of her birth and distinction in
Europe, yet she enjoyed as grateful a repast, and I may venture to say
was as well satisfied as they would have been in her then circumstances.
When she was served, I divided the remainder amongst my fellow-servants,
her women, who were her attendants. My orders being to stay with her, I
sent the two men away who had brought a very considerable quantity of
raw meat; and in the night I made a fire to dress it, which could not be
discerned through so thick a wood; whereas, in the daytime, the smoke
might have discovered us. I went at some distance and dug up several
wild yams; these were very agreeable on account of their moisture, this
place being destitute of water; but none of them, how much soever they
might long for them, would venture to dig for themselves till I came,
lest the noise might betray them to the enemy.

At night we sat very sociably round the fire, whilst I entertained them
with the story of the engagement, and the dangers I had escaped. I also
roasted the meat, and hung part of it up in one tree and part in
another, out of the reach of the wild dogs and foxes, with which this
country abounds. When it grew late, I told them I had no bed to lie on,
having forgot my mat in the hurry. They laughed at this, and my mistress
said, “Sure, Robin, you do not think but we will make room for one man
amongst us?” and then bid me make choice of my place. Now I could be
free and jocose enough with the young women slaves, though not with
herself; yet I laid myself down close by them all night, and I can
assure my reader we were very innocent.

I must here confess, I could not but wonder at first, why my master
trusted me so readily with his wife, contrary to his care of her in
regard to other men, and to the custom of the country; but when I began
to reflect how dangerous it was for any woman, who was liable to be
called to an account for all her actions, to carry on an amour with a
white man, the wonder ceased; for, should a woman prove with child, the
colour of the offspring would betray its mother, if not point out the
father. But I must not let this pass with any thing which may be
misconstrued to this lady’s prejudice; for I solemnly declare, I never
once discovered in her the least criminal inclination; notwithstanding
what may be said here or elsewhere, of some such freedoms as would
appear too condescending, and be censured as too forward in our European
women.

We arose by daybreak, and listened very attentively to hear, if we
could, the noise of guns, but none were discharged; and in a short time
the two men came again to us, and brought us more provisions. They
informed us that deaan Crindo had sent a menacing message to deaan
Mephontey, to let him know, that unless he obliged deaan Mevarrow to
come to him, and submit to his determination of the quarrel between him
and deaan Frukey, that he would humble their pride, and remain there
with his army till he starved them; and moreover, he would guard the
watering place so strongly, that they should not dare to approach it.
Deaan Mephontey, on the other hand, returned as resolute an answer; that
he was under no apprehensions of starving, having provisions enough of
all kinds; a great number of cattle, and other conveniences for them to
live on for three months; but besides, he had strength sufficient to
force his way out of the town whenever he thought proper; and advised
deaan Crindo, for that reason, not to put it to the hazard of a trial,
but to move off, and rest contented with the repulse he had already met
with.

After the men had told their tale they returned home, and we all went to
digging of yams; even my mistress condescended to make one amongst us:
so I sharpened sticks for them, and they pulled off their lambers to
keep them clean; notwithstanding some of them were such worthless
things, that a rag woman in England would scarce have picked them up. My
mistress’s, indeed, was a fine silk one of various colours, and very
large, hanging almost down to her feet, with a handsome fringe at the
bottom. They made more free with me than they would with some others;
saying, with a smile, that they did not look upon me as a man, since I
discovered no warm or amorous inclinations. My reader, perhaps, will
scarcely believe me when I assure him, there were amongst them such
beauties, as were not much inferior to our European ladies, except their
colour; but my behaviour and resolution were actually such at that time,
and long after, that I told them, I resolved never to entertain any
thoughts of women, till I returned to England my native country. They
replied, they were sure I should be mistaken. However, I lived very
idly, indeed, but merrily enough, during the few days I continued here;
there being about a dozen women besides my mistress. And for my part, I
did not care how long the war lasted, for my provision was given me all
the time, and I had no work to do. As to the dangers that attended war,
I did not concern myself about them; I had nothing to lose but my life,
which, considering the circumstances I was in, and the small hopes I had
of ever getting home, was but a burthen to me; but we had not yet seen
all the miseries of a civil war. Every morning we used to listen to hear
if possible the noise of guns; when, at length, one of the slaves came
to us alone without any meat; and having seated himself (as slaves in
particular always do before they speak) he told us, that deaan Crindo
was gone away, and that my master had sent for us home. This was very
agreeable news; so we sat down to breakfast together, sang, and were as
jovial as so many beggars. My mistress was in a hurry to be gone; for
she was uneasy till she paid her respects to her husband. As soon as
ever she saw him she fell upon her knees, and licked his feet; and he
returned her compliment, after the manner of the country, by touching
her nose.

Now the reason of deaan Crindo’s sudden departure was, an information
that deaan Murnanzack had seized six hundred of his cattle; he might
have taken them all indeed, if he would, but he did this only to begin
the dispute. We stayed, however, a week longer at deaan Mephontey’s
town, till we were better informed how the matter stood between them;
and that there was nothing to fear on that side. Deaan Crindo, it seems,
had sent to deaan Murnanzack, to know the reason why he seized those
cattle, and whether he was determined to take deaan Mevarrow’s part? The
answer he received was, that he did it to show him his right of
dominion; notwithstanding he doubted not, but that he would dispute his
title with him, as unjustly as he had usurped it.

This was a mortifying stroke, and happened at a very unlucky juncture:
deaan Murnanzack was always a formidable competitor, and was looked on
as such, whenever he thought proper to maintain his right; and he,
doubtless, embraced this opportunity on purpose, when deaan Crindo had
weakened his interest, by affronting deaan Mevarrow, deaan Sambo, and
their friend deaan Mephontey. Crindo was soon convinced of his error,
and endeavoured to soften matters, by sending messengers to all of them,
to tell them that what he did, was with no other view than to chastise
his grandsons; and what was highly requisite to restore that peace and
tranquillity, which they and his son Frukey had disturbed; though he
began with the former, yet Frukey, had he proved refractory, should have
felt the weight of his resentment as well as others: he hoped,
therefore, that they would consider his good intention, and not break
friendship with him.

Three or four days after this, we departed from deaan Mephontey’s; but
first returned him many thanks for these generous testimonies of his
friendship and hospitality. We went home, (or rather homeward only,) for
though we found our way and the place of our late abode, yet not a house
was left to put our heads in. Our plantations too were totally
demolished, and the very barns and storehouses reduced to ashes; so that
we had nothing to live on but what the woods afforded, and a few cattle
among the richest and chiefest men; who were in fact very good, and
communicated to their poor neighbours.

The town being so absolutely demolished, as not to be repaired, deaan
Mevarrow determined to build a new one; and searching for a commodious
place, at length he found a wood so thick, that a dog could not creep
into it. This, therefore, was more than half fortified to his hand, and
pitched upon accordingly. A vacancy was soon made in it, the men cut
down the trees, bushes, and briars, and the women and children conveyed
them away; so that in about three days, we cleared a large space to
erect our houses on: however, as it was summer time, we were not in so
much haste for houses, as for fences against an enemy. We fortified it,
therefore, with bodies of trees, which we cut about sixteen or eighteen
feet in length; these we drove into the ground so close together, that
no creature whatever could possibly get between them. But as one row
only of these poles of trees was not thought a sufficient security, we
made three or four, one within another, round the whole circumference of
the town; leaving no other vacancy than a small and private passage for
the conveyance of our women, children, and slaves away with safety, in
case of an enemy’s approach; and this was so contrived, as not to be
discerned with ease or known by strangers. We made but one gateway or
entrance, and that not only narrow too, but defended with four
prodigiously thick and substantial doors, one within another.

The walls being completed, nothing more remained to do, but each man to
erect a house of what extent he thought proper for himself and his
family. We, who were slaves to deaan Mevarrow, took care to build his
first; some of us cut wood, others fetched grass in order to fill up the
sides; whilst I and about thirty more, went a tedious way, at least ten
miles, for annevoes, which are the leaves of a tree like those of a
cocoa-nut. These we split and covered the house with, for they make a
thatch much neater and stronger than any in England, but these trees
were so scarce, and at such a distance, that a single man could not go
often enough, in any reasonable time, to collect the leaves; and
notwithstanding we went in such a body, we were obliged to go twice for
a sufficient quantity to cover my master’s house.

When we had finished my master’s seat, we went about our lesser
apartments, and as at deaan Mephontey’s a small one served my turn, so
it did here in like manner; for, notwithstanding all our strong walls
and fortifications, I much questioned whether we should be able to keep
them long; neither did we, as it proved soon after: so I made my hut no
bigger than just to have room sufficient to stretch my self at full
length, and make a fire in, should I, by good fortune, find any victuals
to dress.

About a week after we were settled in our new town, a messenger, (or
rather, an ambassador,) arrived from deaan Murnanzack, with about twenty
in his retinue. His business was to sound deaan Mevarrow’s inclinations,
and (if they found a favourable opportunity) to desire his friendship
and assistance. He soon found there were good grounds to hope for
success, and for that reason delivered his message the first night he
came. To which deaan Mevarrow returned in answer, he would take it into
consideration, consult with his people, and give him his determinate
answer the next morning. In the mean time, he gave him a slave’s house
for his immediate accommodation, as is customary on such occasions; and
sent a bullock for the entertainment of him and his attendants. In the
next place, he sent out messengers to all the chiefs and freemen to come
and consult with him on an affair of the last importance. I was present,
and saw this assembly. As soon as deaan Mevarrow and his brother deaan
Sambo were seated, the principals placed themselves on either hand, and
the other freemen on each side of them.

Deaan Mevarrow opened the consultation, by telling them, that deaan
Murnanzack had sent a very honourable messenger to him to ask his
friendship and assistance. We must not forget, says he, that deaan
Murnanzack proved of singular service to us in the quarrel we once had
with deaan Termerre; therefore, consider we are much indebted to him
upon that score. Consider, moreover, that Chahary and Frukey will ever
be irreconcilable enemies, so long as we detain their wives and
families; and you concur with me not to deliver them without a due
return of all our cattle, which they obstinately refuse: then, as deaan
Crindo is their father, he, doubtless, will be partial, notwithstanding
his seeming pretensions to peace, and affected regard for justice; but
in what manner he has lately used us, is too fresh in all your memories
to need repetition. The justice of deaan Murnanzack’s claim to the
dominion, is, I presume, indisputable; whether deaan Crindo may not
justify himself as affairs now stand, in assuming the authority, is what
we shall not, at this juncture, take into consideration; but it is
highly requisite for us to consider, whether deaan Murnanzack has
strength enough to maintain the dispute, and protect us, and such other
friends as may be inclined to join him. This requires the most mature
deliberation: the chance of war is very precarious, and you have
families, slaves, and cattle to lose as well as I; weigh well,
therefore, the matter in hand, and let me have your resolution, with
which I shall readily concur.

They argued the point for some considerable time, and consulted not only
what would be most conducive to their interest, but reflected on the
dangerous situation they were in; and that it was most probable they
should be safest in joining with deaan Murnanzack. Thereupon they
agreed, that one of them should declare the result of their consultation
to the deaan. In the name of the rest, therefore, he desired him, if he
approved of their opinion, to contract and enter into a solemn
friendship with deaan Murnanzack; and if so, they would faithfully
observe and support him to the utmost of their power.

After I had seen the manner and formality of this grand assembly, our
parliament in Great Britain ran strangely in my head: I imagined this
the very image of it: and though I was but a lad when I went from home,
yet as my father kept a public house, to which the best of gentlemen
resorted, I remember, I have heard them often disputing with one another
about the power of the prince, to oblige the people to do what he
pleased without consulting them; whilst others insisted that a king had
no power without a parliament. Then they would dispute about the origin
of parliaments and their power, and by whose means the use of them was
brought first into England; in this too they seldom agreed. Some said
the Saxons introduced it; others maintained that it was of a more modern
date; whilst many were of different opinions from both. Now methinks
this article might be adjusted without any reference to authors and
historians; that parliaments were established long before the Saxons or
Romans either: for I imagine, that not only England, but several other
countries besides, were once like Madagascar, without the knowledge of
letters and coined money; and if that be the case, it was then
impossible for princes to exert that authority over the people, or to
dispose of them contrary to their interest, or inclinations: for I look
upon those princes to be like my master, who neither had, nor could have
any separate army or interest; but when any neighbour desired their
assistance, or any enemy had injured them, they assembled before the
house of their chief; and there debated what measures were most proper
to be taken for the good of their country. If war were agreed on, the
same men took their arms, and the sovereign or chief headed them, as my
master did here; and when they returned, each man went home to his own
family. Thus the people are their own army and defence; and the lord
could never oblige them to do what the majority did not think convenient
to be done, because he had no army to compel them. This was, doubtless,
the condition of all other countries once, and must have continued so,
had not people subjected themselves unwarily to the power of one man, by
giving him wealth and authority, not only sufficient to raise an army,
but to keep it in pay himself, and use it at discretion for their
defence; with which he most shamefully insulted and abused them.
However, in the state of nature, and the first establishment of
societies, this was the form of government; and with due submission to
the learned, I am of opinion we need not turn over many volumes to find
the original of British parliaments, for they are of much earlier date
than all their histories, or than letters themselves—and as to their
power, it is grounded on the strongest basis, reason and nature. But to
return to our story.

The alliance being unanimously resolved upon, deaan Mevarrow sent for
the messenger the next morning; and told him that he and his people,
after mature deliberation, were agreed to assist deaan Murnanzack; and
desired that their friendship might be ratified, and confirmed with the
usual solemnity. Hereupon an ox was immediately brought and killed, the
liver roasted, and stuck on lances, and deaan Murnanzack’s ambassador,
and a deputy of deaan Mevarrow’s, eat the liver between them, repeating
the imprecation we have mentioned before; that they wished it might
prove poison, and a farther curse might be sent by God upon that party
who first broke the alliance.

After this solemn ratification, the ox was divided between the
ambassador’s people and ours, who were present, and both eat it
together; after which, he and his attendants departed. And now deaan
Mevarrow repented that he had built this new town, for he would have
gone and lived near deaan Murnanzack, whose country bordered on
Merfaughla on one side, and was within ten or a dozen miles on the other
side of Fennoarevo. He had three brethren; deaan Mussecorrow, who lived
near him; deaan Afferrer, who lived on the mountains of Yong-gorvo, of
whom we shall have occasion to give a large account hereafter; and Rer
Mimebolambo, the youngest, who lived but about five miles from us to the
eastward; and this last being so very near us, we were ready at hand to
join in any enterprise, or to aid and assist one another. However, we
did not think ourselves safe, and, therefore, we took care not to let
deaan Crindo know our resolution, till we had made one expedition; and
after that, we made ourselves more secure.

But the course of my narrative naturally leads me to a detail of deaan
Murnanzack’s attack on deaan Mundumber’s town, where he took three
hundred cattle, and a great number of women and children; for it is not
customary to take men prisoners, if they cannot get away from their
enemies, they are immediately cut off. Among the captives were deaan
Mundumber’s wife and daughter, the only child he ever had. Having
plundered the town, they were going to reduce it to ashes, but deaan
Murnanzack prevented them; and marching into the plain, waited to see if
deaan Mundumber would rally, and give him battle. His people appeared,
indeed, but at a great distance, not daring to come nearer; which, as
soon as he perceived, he marched homewards, but first did a very
generous action, and sent back deaan Mundumber’s wife and daughter to
him; telling her, he did not intend it as a compliment to her husband,
but as a token of his respect to herself and family: she being niece to
the king of Yong-Owl, one of the most powerful princes on the island.
Nor did he do it with any view that he should return the like favour,
for he had no wife, and was well assured by God’s assistance, who would
favour his just cause, that it would never be in his power to prove
prejudicial to any of his relations.

As soon as deaan Crindo heard that his son’s town was taken, he thought
it high time to seek revenge; and accordingly mustered up a great army,
threatening to lay the country waste, to destroy all the men, and make
slaves of their wives and children. He sent, likewise, to our master to
join him, but he peremptorily refused; saying, he would never join with
his professed enemies against his experienced friends. However, he did
not declare his intentions of opposing him. They both sent to deaan
Mephontey, but he refused to be concerned on either side, and kept his
word; for his dominions extending to the river Manderra, the boundaries
of Antenosa, he was apprehensive that the inhabitants of those parts
might take the advantage of his absence, plunder his towns, and lay
waste his country.

When deaan Crindo marched from Fennoarevo, he did not wholly abandon his
towns, but left a considerable number of men in them, for fear of Rer
Mimebolambo and Afferrer. He had no jealousy of us, however; whilst he
was gone Rer Mimebolambo and my master deaan Mevarrow joined forces, and
went out to see what they could find; they soon surprised three towns,
for the men made a very weak resistance; so they brought off about two
hundred cattle, and fifty slaves. My master was discovered by having a
white man (meaning myself) along with him. This was altogether
unexpected to them, and deaan Crindo’s wife immediately sent him notice
thereof, and that she was in no small concern on that account. To which
information he returned for answer, that he would soon despatch the
business he was about, and then he would be amply revenged of deaan
Mevarrow. But we took care to be provided for him.

In our way homewards, the cattle and slaves were equally divided between
deaan Mevarrow and Rer Mimebolambo; and they then came to this
resolution, that it was absolutely necessary for them to live together
in one town. Ours was the strongest, but not so big as we could wish;
theirs was of a larger extent, and they had, moreover, abundance of
empty houses, which were deserted by those who went away upon the war’s
breaking out; so it was agreed we should settle there. We lost no time,
for the very day we went home we packed up all our goods, and marched
away directly to Merhaundroverta, which was the name of Rer
Mimebolambo’s town, and abandoned our own in less than a fortnight after
we had built it. Thus were we driven about like our wild boars that
change their holes every day, and fly from one wood to another, lest the
wild dogs should find them out. And we were not only forced to secure
ourselves against the surprises of a body of our enemies, but as we
lived so near one another, three or four, or half a dozen of their men
would often lie lurking in the woods near towns, and catch a woman,
child, or slave of ours, that happened to stroll out on any occasion
whatever, as digging of wild yams, &c., so that we had little else to
eat but beef; and such as had it of their own gave it to those who had
none.

However, I had an employment here which maintained me handsomely enough,
and it seemed as if Providence had thought fit to appoint it, on purpose
for my support in this seasonable conjuncture. Few of this part of the
island will eat any beef unless it is killed by one descended from a
race of kings; now my master, just before the war broke out, growing
haughty to excess, and having none but himself and his brother to
execute these high offices, they were sometimes obliged to go five or
six miles to kill an ox. He at last reflected that these people have an
exalted opinion of all white men, and taking me for the captain’s son,
whom they looked upon to be no ways inferior to a king, I was thought of
honourable descent enough to be preferred to the dignity of a butcher;
though in fact I did nothing more than cut the throat of the beast, and
they carved him up themselves: however, for this, I always had my fee,
which was a large piece of meat. Though my master and some others, as
discerning as myself, plainly perceived that this was a very idle
custom; yet he knew that the vulgar are not to be opposed in their old
ways, be they ever so ridiculous and absurd; and had deaan Mevarrow
obstinately declined this office, and called it a mere caprice of
theirs, so abrupt an innovation would, in all probability, have been
attended with an almost general desertion, for they would instantly have
gone and lived under other lords. He contrived, therefore, to substitute
me in his room, and by that means did, (as all wise governors will,)
seemingly conform to custom to humour the people; yet by an ingenious
expedient shifted off from himself a mean and troublesome employment.

The next morning the cattle were divided; my master had ten, his brother
six, and the principal men one a piece: some others had one between two,
and we slaves one between four of us. For my part I wanted no beef; for
I was often employed, during my residence in this town, to kill the
beasts. I was obliged, however, to agree with my partners to kill ours,
for they had little enough, though I had plenty. I lived tolerably well
here, often exchanging beef for potatoes, &c., with the towns-people;
and here we heard of the havoc deaan Crindo had made in the country. The
people who were allied to deaan Murnanzack, and dwelt in small towns,
left their habitations and removed with their families and cattle beyond
deaan Murnanzack’s toward the sea, where they were sheltered under his
protection. When deaan Crindo came to such towns as were abandoned, he
burnt them down, and utterly destroyed the plantations, pulling up every
thing by the roots, as if his intention were to create a famine in the
country.

Deaan Murnanzack was all this time with his brother Mussecorrow, on his
march towards them, and had such good intelligence, that, under the
cover of a wood, he came undiscovered almost upon them. They were then
ravaging a very large plantation of potatoes, and some others not far
distant from it. He divided his army into four parts, resolving to
attack them on all sides, whilst they were thus mischievously bent; and
boldly showed his face in front, whom they hurried to oppose; the other
parties fired each from their post, killed several, and put the rest
into confusion. However, they made a vigorous resistance, retreating and
forcing their way into a wood, where it was almost impossible to follow
them. Here deaan Crindo rallied them, and disposed them in good order,
each either under his own, or one of his son’s command; for Mundumber,
Chahary, and Frukey, his three sons, were with him. They were much
superior in number to the other; some said, nearly twice as many; which
deaan Murnanzack was no stranger to, nor to the courage of his uncle;
but he was resolute notwithstanding to engage him: and though he had
time sufficient to have retreated, yet he only marched back into the
plain, to secure an advantageous ground, and have time to form his army;
which he did accordingly, and waited for his enemy’s approach to attack
him. It was not long before the engagement began, which was carried on
with great vigour and warmth on both sides; till deaan Murnanzack
perceiving his brother Mussecorrow’s division began to give ground, he
was determined to make a bold push himself; and throwing away his gun,
with six small lances in his hand, he challenged several of his
principal men to follow him, if they durst, into the thickest of the
enemy’s body, which they very gallantly did. But he, being foremost, ran
like an enraged lion, and in spite of all their fire and flying lances,
came to close quarters, hand to hand with his lances; and those gallant
men with him, following his example, drove all that division of their
enemy’s army back, and put it into utter confusion, who not being able
to abide their fury, ran away. They broke into the very part where deaan
Crindo himself was posted, who would have been struck through with a
lance by one of Murnanzack’s companions, had not the deaan himself very
generously prevented it, desiring them not to kill his uncle. He left
his people to pursue them, whilst he ran to the aid and assistance of
Mussecorrow, who, at the same time made a vigorous push, being ashamed
to be outdone; however, they would have been utterly ruined, had not
deaan Murnanzack himself stept in to their assistance in that critical
conjuncture. But they were soon in one general disorder, flying towards
the woods with the utmost precipitation, where deaan Murnanzack followed
them to prevent them from rallying, and carried on the pursuit till he
saw they were quite dispirited, and making homewards to recruit
themselves.

Deaan Crindo perceiving he could do no good with Murnanzack, was
determined not to be idle, and permit deaan Mevarrow and Rer Mimebolambo
to join forces; so out of policy as well as revenge he resolved to
attack us first. But no sooner had he declared his intentions, and made
preparations for that purpose, than a friend of Mevarrow came out by
night, and acquainted him therewith. On this information he held a
consultation with Rer Mimebolambo about their defence; and in order
thereto, considering there were so many cattle in town, as would disturb
them in an engagement, he proposed to send part of them to deaan
Murnanzack’s; where the other people had secured theirs. Rer Mimebolambo
would send none of his; my master, however, willing to have something to
subsist on, in case they should lose what they had here, picked out
forty beasts; some of our richest men also sent six, and others more or
less; in short, there were in all about fourscore and ten beasts
separated from the rest, to be sent away. I perceived what was going
forward, and would fain have concealed myself; for I did not know
whether I should live so well there as here: besides, it was a large
number for one person to take care of. But there was no remedy; nobody
else would send a slave with me, and my master himself would spare no
more than one, and he looked upon me as the best qualified of any one
man to do it; whereupon he gave orders to six or seven men well armed to
guard, and conduct me, and I took my leave of my friends and
acquaintance, and proceeded accordingly.

We were forced to go round about by several tedious, unpractised ways,
and to look out as narrowly as possible, lest our enemies should
intercept us; but we embraced a very favourable opportunity when they
were all dispirited by their defeat, and suspected nothing of any such
prize being near them. So in two days we arrived at deaan Afferrer’s
town, situate on the hills of Yong-gorva, where we stayed two days to
rest our cattle, and were going upon the third in the morning, at which
time we heard a shell blow. This alarmed not only the town, but the
whole country; they ran immediately to defend the passage up the hill
(for there is but one) when instantly came two messengers from deaan
Murnanzack to deaan Afferrer, to acquaint him that he was at the bottom
of the hill, in order to pay him a visit. When my guardians saw them
join, and found it was deaan Murnanzack, they went (as soon as the usual
compliments were past between the two brothers) to deaan Murnanzack, and
informed him, that deaan Mevarrow had sent some cattle and a proper
person to look after them, in order to be conveyed somewhere under his
protection. He desired them to thank deaan Mevarrow for his friendship
and assistance, and assure him that his cattle should have all the care
taken of them imaginable, and be put amongst his own. As soon as they
had delivered up their charge they took their leaves of me, and
returned.

When deaan Murnanzack saw the cattle, and found that I was left with
them, he seemed surprised; and asked me if I was cow-keeper, saying, he
never heard of a white man being put upon that employment. I made
answer, since it was my master’s pleasure, I did not think proper to
dispute it with him, and would execute my office as well as I could.

Three days after, deaan Murnanzack went homewards, giving orders to
three servants to assist me, and we followed in the rear; we had also
above a dozen other people with us, who carried provision, bedding, &c.
for their masters. As soon as we were down the hill, I discovered a new
scene; the soil was of a quite different nature as well as colour;
yellow clay with stones; which made my feet very uneasy, having been
used to a sandy ground before: however, I was soon inured to it. The
trees, likewise, were different; much loftier, and more straight and
regular. This was the place I had often wished to see, on account of the
wild cattle, of which I had heard so much. I soon found the large tracks
they made through the woods, which rendered the driving of mine much
easier here, than in other woods.

About noon we lay down to refresh ourselves in a grove. The whole
country is very beautiful, and well watered with springs and rivulets.
They soon showed me some wild cattle which were standing under the
covert of the trees: I was very desirous of viewing them closer, and
taking a gun in my hand, I went toward them; but when I was got within
thirty yards, I was obliged to creep on the ground, and conceal myself
as well as I could with the grass, which is very high. Before I came up
to them, I saw three bulls running directly towards me; their eyes
sparkled with fire, their ears pricked upright, and they foamed at the
mouth; in all probability they fled from some that gave them chase. They
put me into such a terrible fright that I thought of nothing but firing
at them, to save myself from being torn to pieces; but as Providence
would have it, I fired and wounded one so deeply, that he fell. Though I
was safe with respect to him, I expected the others would have attacked
me; and to avoid their fury, I lay flat on my face, not daring to stir,
till hearing no noise, but the halloos of my companions at a distance, I
looked up, and found that all of them had run away, except the wounded
one, which lay kicking on the ground: however, I durst not go near him,
till my friends came up, and put us both out of our pain, by cutting his
throat, and applauding me for my courage, and being so expert a
marksman. How contrary to one’s expectation things often happen! I
imagined they would have laughed at me for my cowardice; and by mistake,
and mere chance, I was looked upon as one of more than common courage as
well as conduct.

Whilst they were cutting up the bull, I could not forbear gazing with
admiration on those which they called wild cattle, and in fact they are
so; but they are so like those in England, that I could then perceive no
manner of difference: nor have I been able since to discover any, except
in two trivial particulars; the horns, I take it, of our English bulls
are somewhat shorter, and their bellowings deeper. When we had cut up
our beef, we roasted some part of it, and pleased ourselves with the
thoughts of our masters having left us behind, because we should not
spoil their sport; we happened, however, on better luck than they, and
had not only beef to eat sooner than they, but got some ready to dress
for them at the place of rendezvous at night. This bull-beef, you may be
sure, could not be any thing extraordinary, nor any ways equal to the
flesh of such as are tame; especially after it had run so far, and so
hard, before it was killed. These wild cattle will give the hunters a
chase sometimes of several miles together after they are wounded; which
makes the flesh but indifferent meat, especially if it be a bull; but
people in want are glad of what comes first to hand; for these wild
cattle are a great help to such as live in the remote parts, who, in
necessitous times, come here a hunting. However, they are frequently
found in another vast tract of forest land of some hundred miles extent;
of which, and of their supposed original, I shall have an occasion
hereafter to give a particular account. The place where we baited at
noon, and lay this night, were very agreeable and delightful groves; and
indeed, all this country is so, for several days’ journey together. It
abounds with wild honey, wild boars, and such a variety of pleasant
fruits, that men may not only find enough to satisfy their hunger and
thirst, but to indulge their luxurious appetites, without the fatigue of
any cultivation; and there are many that live in a state of indolence
and ease.

Amongst the most wholesome as well as delicious fruits of the earth, and
that which I first tasted of here, is their faungidge; it grows (as my
companion showed me) in the thickest woods. They search first for the
plant, which is a tender creeper, or wild vine that takes hold of a tree
or any thing near it, twining round the trunk and shooting into several
branches like a vine. I never perceived that it bore any fruit, and was
surprised when they told me it was the root of this which produced the
faungidge; however, instead of digging at the root, they went at least
half a dozen yards from it, and struck the ground with the points of
their lances to observe where it sounded hollow; and digging there they
found the faungidge. The root spreads a great way under ground, and but
few of the branches bear the faungidge; so that it would be to little
purpose to trace it from the spot, where it appears above ground.

The first I saw was not much less in bulk than one of our gallon
runlets; it is red and very smooth without, and the coat is as thin as
parchment; the inside is white and has a milky juice; it eats as soft as
a water melon, but has no seeds in it; it is both meat and drink, very
wholesome, and always eaten raw.

The verlaway is of the same species, and in all respects much like it;
with this difference only, that the skin of the latter is thinner, but
so tough that it must be pared with a knife. There is another kind,
called the verlaway-voler, which is reckoned unwholesome: I once saw a
man, who had tasted some of it swell immediately, and was ready to die;
but by giving him some melted fat to drink, he brought it up and soon
recovered. This verlaway-voler is easily known, for it is much more
beautiful to the eye than the other; and the leaf which springs from it
is very different.

The next day I was extremely diverted: for deaan Murnanzack did not
leave us as he did the day before. In the morning, we saw a bull alone
in the midst of a large plain; the deaan, by way of amusement, ordered
us to stop, whilst he and two more drove my cattle toward the bull; who
no sooner saw them, than he roared and tore up the ground with his
horns, as if he expected some enemy to oppose him; but finding they were
cows, he showed an inclination to be better acquainted with them. The
deaan and his companions hid themselves under cover of the cows; they
let them graze a little, and then drove them forwards, till the wild
bull was amongst them; as soon as he put his nose to a cow’s tail, deaan
Murnanzack, concealed under another cow’s belly, stuck a lance in his
flank; away he ran with it, but not far before he had another in his
side; and now they had room for the sport they aimed at, which was not
unlike (as I have been informed) the diversion of a Spanish bull feast.
Several, by this time, joined in the chase; he ran nearly a mile
outright before he stopped, and turned to his pursuers; which they
always do, when they are closely beset; and then every one must take
care of himself: for it is a very dangerous encounter, and so it was
here, the beast grew outrageous, and turning upon them, ran directly at
the man who first wounded him, whilst another from behind, threw a lance
into his flank; then the bull turned again, as he always does, to the
person who last wounded him; and the hunters being divided to take him
all ways, and keeping at a good distance likewise, as well to prevent
hurting one another, as to give him room to play in, they at length
killed him; but this sometimes proves a very tragical pastime.

This night we lay in a wood, where we found faungidge in abundance; thus
we lived deliciously with only the natural produce of the country. I
tied up my calves every night that my cows might not stray, and was
forced to rise two or three times, to see that none of my cattle got
amongst the wild ones; for when they do, it is no small trouble to catch
them again; for whenever they see the others run, they follow likewise,
as fast as they can.

The next day at noon we halted at a spring, which rises from the highest
hill in this island, called Vohitch-maner, or red hill; vohitch
signifying a hill, or mountain. I drove my cattle into a fine valley,
where there was fine grass, but a wild bull came amongst them, and
covered one of my cows. I had a great inclination to kill him, though I
almost shook for fear; they are terrible creatures to any body’s
apprehension, who is not used to them, and my fear was the cause of my
ill success; for concealing myself under another cow, I took such an
awkward aim at him, that I struck one of my own herd instead of him.
However, as the wound did not prove mortal, I concealed it; not so much
out of any apprehension I had of my master’s anger, as out of fear of
being laughed at, for wounding a tame cow, instead of a wild bull.

We set up early this afternoon, in a place commodiously situated near
some good water; and then we went out to search for wild honey and
faungidge. I had the good fortune to discover a large hole in a hollow
tree, that was full of the former; I made a fire presently, and with a
brand smoked the bees out. In the next place I cut down a vounturk, to
make a vessel like a tub, to put my honey in. This vounturk is a tree or
plant, (for I don’t well know what to call it,) of a very particular
shape and nature. It grows upright as an arrow, about sixteen or
eighteen feet in length, is thin below, thick in the middle, and taper
again above, like a nine pin. At the top there are two or three
branches, that bear leaves of a great length; in the spring they have
blossoms, but I never saw any fruit that came to perfection; the outer
bark is whitish, like old lead, and full of long thorns, which are
easily struck off with a lance. We likewise cut the bark all round, and
the tree immediately falls down, not being able to support itself: after
this we take away what length we want, and pull out the spongy substance
on the inside, till we come within three or four inches of the bottom.
By this means we make a vessel light and easy of carriage, and in one of
these I secured my honey. The juice of this vounturk is good liquor, and
even fit to boil any thing in, when water is scarce. I found also some
faungidge. At my return I paid my respects to deaan Murnanzack, and made
him a present of some of my honey, which is a compliment our lords
always expect.

It was now night, and they were going a beef hunting: when they set out
on purpose to kill the best beasts, they always make choice of the
darkest nights. They permitted me, on my request, to accompany them; but
first ordered me to wash myself, as they themselves did, that we might
not smell either of smoke or sweat. I would have taken two lances
according to custom, but they obliged me to leave one behind me, lest
two together might rattle in my hand. These cattle feed only in the
night, and if all these precautions were not taken, they could never be
surprised; for they are always on their guard, snorting with their
noses, and listening after their pursuers. We can hear them roar, and
bellow a great way off; by which we know where they are, and we are
forced always to go round till they are directly to the windward of us;
for otherwise they would soon scent us. As soon as we had got the wind
and cattle right ahead, and were within hearing, we walked with all the
circumspection imaginable, cropping the top of the grass with our hands,
as close as possible, to mimic, as well as we could, the noise a cow
makes when she bites it. The moment they heard us they were all hush;
not one of them bellowed or grazed, but seemed to listen with the utmost
attention: which when we perceived, we all stood still likewise without
a whisper, whilst three or four, who understood the nature of it best,
continued cropping the grass. When the cattle had listened, till (as we
imagined) they took us for some of their own species, they returned to
their grazing, and we walked with caution nearer, still mimicking them
as we moved softly along. Deaan Murnanzack ordered me to keep behind,
lest they should discern my white skin, and be startled; he also gave me
his lamber to cover myself with, which was a large piece of black silk,
so that if I had been near them, they could have seen nothing but my
face, the grass being above knee deep.

At length we got amongst them, so that one of our men (as he told me)
with some grass in his hand, and under the cover of a bush, took hold of
the dug of a cow, and finding she gave no milk, he concluded she was not
lean; for which reason he stuck his lance instantly into her belly, and
drew it out again, making no other motion. The cow thus wounded will
give a spring perhaps, and make a noise, as if another had run her horns
against her; but this is so common amongst them, that the herd is not
any ways disturbed by it: so that our people stuck three or four after
this manner, and left them, with an intention to come the next morning,
and track them by their blood; for it is very dangerous to come near
them in the night. As soon as they find themselves sorely wounded, they
run from their companions, and will attack the first man they see. They
are generally found actually dead, or fallen down in some wood, or
shelter of bushes, as if they industriously endeavoured to conceal
themselves. No sooner had we determined to depart, and I had returned
deaan Murnanzack his lamber, than a calf, that had been mortally
wounded, began to make a hideous uproar, and running about, made the
herd jealous; so that they ran away, and the calf made directly at me,
and knocked me backwards; I caught hold of his leg, but cried out
lustily for help. This accident afforded much mirth, and fixed a joke
upon me afterwards; as a stout fellow to cry out for assistance to cope
with a calf. However, they took him, cut him to pieces, and carried him
away; of whom we made a very good supper. I have been informed, that
notwithstanding these cattle are so wild, the cows will sometimes stand
still to have their dugs handled, and several of them have been milked
in the dark into a horn; however, as I never attempted this myself, I
cannot absolutely vouch it for truth; yet as I have heard so many affirm
it, I think there are no just grounds to contradict it.

We were in no hurry to get home, for not only our cattle, but we too,
lived as well as we could desire there; so that though we kept going
forwards, yet we made several days more of our journey than we should
have done. A day or two after this beef hunting, we had an accidental
diversion of another kind: our dogs had got the scent of some wild hogs
that were got into a thicket, and were very busy in running round it;
but could find no entrance for a considerable time. At length, however,
they found the path which the swine had made, and attempted to enter the
wood by it: the passage was defended by a large boar, who fought the
dogs with great fury, and wounded one of them in a very dangerous
manner. Now, what with the dogs on the one hand, and the swine on the
other, there was such a yelping, grunting, and howling, that the woods
rang with their noise; and one would have imagined, all the hogs in the
island had met there by consent, in order to revenge their quarrel upon
us.

We laid down our burdens, and some of us went up to them, armed with
guns and lances. Deaan Murnanzack shot the boar that wounded his dog;
whereupon another in an instant defended the entrance, and fought so
resolutely, that neither the dogs, nor we ourselves, could come near the
cattle that were within; till we had made a passage behind them with our
hatchets and lances, and then fired upon some of the most resolute, who
turned upon us. The rest perceiving themselves attacked behind, fought
their way through the dogs, and ran away, with the dogs after them.
Words cannot describe the noise there was, especially after a number of
them were wounded. We found seven dead, besides several others so
wounded that they could not make off. We picked out only one or two of
the fattest, for there are very few that will eat them. I did not dare
to take any, on account of my office of killing beeves, and the eating
of swine’s flesh is accounted so contemptible a thing, that I should
have lessened my dignity, and perhaps been degraded; which, whatever
mean thoughts I might possibly have, as to the honour of it, I had too
good an opinion of its value to part with it for the gratification of my
appetite in one meal: for in this case they are curious to a punctilio,
that if the daughter of a king be married to any one that is not of a
royal family, their children are not admitted to the honour of killing
beeves, notwithstanding the father be a freeman, and a chief amongst his
neighbours.

We used every evening to sit down near the prince, and discourse of one
thing or another to divert the time; now, though it is a common custom
amongst the princes here, to converse with every body in the most
familiar manner, yet they preserve a decent state and distinction. The
people throughout the whole island pay a religious regard to dreams, and
imagine that their good demons (for I cannot tell what other name to
give their inferior deities, which, as they say, attend on their owleys)
tell them in their dreams what ought to be done, or warn them of what
ought to be avoided; more especially after a sacrifice, or a prayer to
God, and an invocation of this demon. I well remember our discourse this
evening turned principally upon this topic. The next morning deaan
Murnanzack came to me as I was alone, and discoursed very freely with me
about several things; and in particular he advised me to take what beef
I wanted, and could carry with me; for we should have no more
opportunities of killing any wild cattle. Observing him fond of
conversation, I told him, if there were any dependance on dreams, as
some had asserted the night before, I should incur his anger that day;
having dreamt that I was at home with my parents, and all my relations
round about me; that my pockets were full of gold, and they added still
to my store. This, I said, did not only throw me into a melancholy when
I awaked, to find myself naked in a wood and in a strange country, but
it likewise gave me some concern, for that I had always observed, not
only when I was a lad in England, but since under my master Mevarrow,
that to dream of plenty of gold money was a certain indication of anger.
At this deaan Murnanzack smiled, and made answer, “I wonder that you,
who laughed but last night at the talk of God’s sending dreams by the
good demons, should today be afraid of one.” “However,” says he, “I dare
say you will be once mistaken; for I don’t know any thing you can do to
make me angry.” I would not have my reader imagine, that I have
introduced this story, merely for the sake of telling an idle dream; but
it proved the introduction to something very remarkable, and furnished
us with a discourse the next evening, that may possibly be thought an
agreeable amusement.

The next day we roasted our beef and laid it to cool, in order to bind
up in a burden, which we called an enter, to carry at our backs. All I
had to do, was to provide for myself, and what with my beef and honey I
was pretty well loaded, and as well contented, for I lived in plenty; my
honey, likewise, mingled with water, made a pleasant drink. This was the
last day of our passage through these groves and habitations of the wild
cattle; some of which they attempted once more to surround, more for the
sake of their diversion than want of beef: and in this, not wilfully,
but for want of knowledge, I spoiled all their sport, by traversing the
way they were running, which was directly towards the place where deaan
Murnanzack lay in ambush for them. This made them run quite another way,
and put him into such a violent passion at first, that he lifted up his
lance, and frowning, threatened to kill me, and, indeed, I expected no
less, which made me get out of his sight as soon as possible, being
apprehensive of some such barbarous treatment as I had before met with
from deaan Mevarrow. This prince, however, was of a more generous
disposition; for when his passion was over, he sent for me in a very
courteous manner, and desired I would spend the evening with him as
usual, and sit down by him, which, accordingly, I did. After we had
discoursed on a variety of subjects, he, at last, pressed me to give him
some account of the customs of my country, and in a more particular
manner to inform him, what god or gods we worship, since I seemed to
have so little veneration for theirs; and that I would be ingenuous, and
tell him, as I had been a great traveller, what things I had seen, in
order to improve the evening to the best advantage. “And pray,” says he,
“what God is that you adore?” Upon this the company drew round me, and I
began by asking them in the first place, if they were not satisfied that
there was a God above the skies? I could not say above the heavens,
because there was no term in their language expressive of them; nor had
they, as I could perceive, any idea of what we christians mean by
heaven, as the peculiar residence of the Almighty, and the glorious
mansions of the saints after their decease. They told me that they
firmly believed there was a God above, who was the supreme Lord of all
other gods, demons, or spirits, of what nature or kind soever. “That
very God,” said I, “is the deity we adore, for we know of no other God,
nor do we pay the tribute of divine worship to any other object than
this one—this supreme and only God.” “Do not you then,” said they, “make
prayers and sacrifices, and invoke some guardian demons to assist you in
the knowledge of the will of that God; and to warn you of any
approaching dangers? If your countrymen had such owleys as ours, your
good demons would have assisted you that night you lay upon the sands,
and have told you in dreams of the danger, and directed you to escape
before the morning.”

To this I replied, “that all good men in England acknowledged an
overruling Providence; and I am fully persuaded, that it was by the
providence of that divine power that I was preserved at that time; and
why God did not see fit that the rest should save their lives, is a
secret I do not pretend to pry into; but I cannot conceive that your
owleys, to which you seem to pay a divine homage, and pray to for their
aid and assistance, should have a spirit or a god within them; or visit
you in the night when you are asleep, and forewarn you of such
misfortunes as you would willingly avoid. I plainly perceive, that they
are nothing more than pieces of wood, and alligators’ teeth dressed up;
I plainly discern, likewise, how they are made; and I am certain that
other wood, and other alligators’ teeth are not living spirits, have no
power of speech, and are incapable of knowing things present, much less
things to come; for which reason, we look upon it as an act of idolatry
to pay that adoration, which belongs to the great God alone, to any
created thing, or the likeness of any created thing above, or here
below, since he has strictly forbid the worship of any thing but
himself.”

Deaan Murnanzack listened to this serious discourse of mine with
abundance of attention, and then turned to some of his people and argued
with them for some time; partly in vindication of what I had asserted,
and partly in endeavouring to explain to them the nature of their
owleys, which I am sensible I had not a just notion of at that time. But
I was too young when first I was reduced to this slavery, and had
neither friends nor books to assist me; besides, I was not capable of
making such just remarks then, as I could do now.

But, to proceed; as soon as the deaan had done discoursing with them, he
turned again to me and said, “To me it seems very strange, that you,
who, but this very morning, told me a dream of your own, and found it
happened true, should argue against these owleys of ours; for you
mistake us; it is not the wood, nor the alligators’ teeth that we
worship; but there are certain guardian demons, who take care of all
nations, families, and private persons; and should you be possessed of
one of these owleys, and give it the name of some guardian spirit, it
will undoubtedly attend you; for how could you know this morning that I
should be angry with you, had not one of these good demons visited you
and discovered it; and if you had not had such friendly notice, you
might, probably, have been killed, though I did not design it; but men’s
passions are unruly, and I was highly provoked, I own, though I say not
this to reproach you, as if I imagined you wilfully spoiled our sport,
for I am fully satisfied you meant no harm. I only mention this to put
you in mind that you argue against yourself; besides, if the spirits of
our forefathers, or these guardian demons did not declare these to
mankind, how should they know them? No one could tell that I should be
angry with you, when you had given me no offence; neither did you intend
to provoke me, and nothing was done that any such accident should have
happened. You do not imagine, I hope, that the great God himself came
down to tell you, since these inferior spirits, of whom there are such
numbers, could more conveniently attend you. But you observed just now,
as I remember, that the great supreme God had forbid you the worship of
any thing but himself. Pray did any white man ever see this great God
above? or does he often condescend to talk with your people, and not
with ours?”

To which I made answer, that no man ever saw God, but some of our
forefathers, many ages ago, heard his voice when he descended in a
cloud. “But,” says he, “if this was so many years ago, and there is no
man now living, black or white, that ever heard the voice of this God,
how are you sure it is true? And since, as you allow it was many ages
ago, things may be so altered or misrepresented from what they were when
your first forefathers told them, that you cannot rely upon their
certainty.” I was here at some loss, as they had no knowledge of
letters, and consequently, I could not make them comprehend any thing of
the sacred scriptures; I only told them, therefore, that we had a way of
preserving the memory of things, which they were wholly unacquainted
with; and by that means, I said, we had an account of the beginning of
the world, and of its creation by God, and that I could tell them a
great many strange things in relation thereto, which they then seemed
very desirous of hearing.

And, accordingly, I told them that the world was originally dark, and a
confused chaos or mass; and that God, by the word of his power, made the
sun and moon, the beasts, fish, fowl, trees, herbs, and every thing
else. They still persisted in their first objection, and as they
imagined with much more reason than before; “for,” said one of them,
“though it is possible you may have a better method of preserving the
memory of things than we have, yet you could never have the knowledge of
what was done before there was any man created.” To this I replied, that
God hath revealed the knowledge of this, and much more to particular
persons; which, they listening attentively to, I went on to the creation
of man, and then of woman’s being made out of a rib, which God took from
him while he was asleep. At this they all broke out into astonishment
and laughter; and deaan Murnanzack said it was a manifest untruth, and
that, therefore, it was a shame to tell such a story with a serious
countenance; by this, he said, he was convinced that all the rest was
false; for, were this true, a woman would have a rib more than a man,
and a man be defective on one side.

Here I was guilty of a gross error through ignorance; however, I think
myself obliged ingenuously to confess it. I hope our divines and all
good christians will consider the circumstances I was in, and readily
forgive me; for I had so little wit, as peremptorily to insist on the
truth of it, and affirmed what I had heard, when a child, from
illiterate persons, that a man had one rib less on one side than the
other; nay, I had so much assurance as to put the whole argument upon
this issue, and offered to lay any wager on the fact. The prince laughed
at me, though he was willing to be convinced; we had two women with us,
one was very lean, whom he ordered to be called, her ribs were told and
found to be equal; and after that, a man was examined, and his ribs were
the same. They were not all of them, indeed, convinced of the exact
number, nor could I myself, in attempting to count them after them. From
this time, I perceived deaan Murnanzack treated all I had said on
religion with contempt, and immediately resumed his former objection
with more vigour, and said, that to talk of what was done before man was
created, was perfect nonsense; that what I had asserted in relation to
God’s conversing with men, and telling them such and such things, had no
manner of evidence; and that the things I pretended to know and talk of,
were, in short, nothing more than old women’s tales. “However,” says he,
“pray go on, and give us some farther account of this God of yours, who,
in former ages, was thus familiar with mankind.” Then I went on with the
scripture story of God’s displeasure with the whole world, and the flood
which destroyed all men and beasts on the earth, except those in the
ark; and of Noah’s taking male and female of every species into it to
preserve them. Upon this, one of them shortly replied, “if they had been
all destroyed, could not that God who made them at first, make more of
them at his pleasure?” But I went on and told them of the rainbow, that
it was appointed for a sign of God’s promise not to drown the world
again. To this deaan Murnanzack replied, that they had no such tradition
handed down to them; “but besides,” says he, “if none but Noah, with his
sons and daughters, were saved, pray was Noah a white or a black man?”
To which I answered, “Sir, I perceive you give no credit to what I say
of this nature.” He said, “There are many things which I do not rightly
understand, and shall be glad to be informed of; nay, I would give
credit to any thing that a reasonable man can desire, but most of these
things are no better than old women’s fictions, and I am fully persuaded
that all white men will not talk thus idly as you do.” These were his
very words, which he repeated several times, and with which this
evening’s conference concluded. It was no small concern to me to find
how the truth suffered by my weakness; but I was in hopes that deaan
Murnanzack, who was a man of penetration, might consider that I was but
a child when I left England, and for that reason, not well acquainted
with the topics I undertook to explain.

The next day we went directly forwards, for we were then past all the
wild cattle, and deaan Murnanzack therefore hastened homewards. About
three in the afternoon, we came to a place where the road divided; here
the prince halted, as I perceived, with no other view than to take his
leave of me, ordering two men to conduct me and my cattle to his
cow-keeper. Here we parted, and we lay that night near the banks of a
river, which are the boundaries of deaan Murnanzack’s country, and leads
into Madamvovo, the great river which runs through Anterndroea. To this
place where I was going, all the cattle come to water. As we were
passing through the woods, we met a company of men and women going to
fetch water; they stopped and gazed at me with admiration, having never
seen a white man before, asking those who accompanied me, who I was? and
from whence I came? who waggishly told them they found me in the forest
among the wild cattle, and intended to make a present of me to the
prince. In order to carry on the jest, I ran towards the women, and
talking gibberish, frightened one of them to that degree that she fell
into such violent fits, that the rest had much to do to recover her, for
which I was afterwards extremely sorry.

This wood extended from the river about seven miles, without any break
or plain, till within a mile of the town. It was no small concern to me
to think what a great way I had to drive my cattle to water every other
day, but it did not prove so great a fatigue as I expected; for there
being eight or ten of us, we took our turns, so that it came to each
man’s turn but once in about sixteen or twenty days; besides, as there
was no grass by the way, there was no impediment or interruption; and
when they returned hungry, they would go home fast enough of themselves.

As the people here had never seen a white man before, I was a very
surprising sight to them at first; but they were soon acquainted with
me, and I became of singular service to them: for whenever they had an
ox to kill they were obliged, till now, to go a great way for one of the
royal family; this trouble I saved them, and lived very plentifully
myself by that means. I was frequently sent for upon these occasions,
and had always my fee, which was four or five ribs to carry home with
me, besides the leg roasted for my entertainment whilst I was with them.
I seldom went without a boy to wait on me, as there were always several
at hand, and willing enough, because I was able to oblige them with part
of my beef. I had also sufficient to live like those who are free and
generous, in communicating some portion of whatever they have to their
neighbours. As soon as I came home, I used to put on the pot, and send
messes out to all my acquaintance, which they did not fail to return
when in their power: and it may be observed in the whole course of this
history, that all the people of this island delight in this free,
good-natured, and sociable way of living.

Whenever I was sent for, the house was always set in order, the owley
dressed, and placed in view. I was frequently employed to kill a
sacrifice, in case of a circumcision, or when any one was sick; and
since I had the conference above related with deaan Murnanzack, I had
the curiosity to listen to their prayers; and more than once I attempted
to speak in favour of the christian religion. When I mentioned the
resurrection of the body, they told me it must be a mere romance; and to
talk as I did of burning in fire after death, was to them inconceivable;
for (said they) no man can feel after he is dead, and unless they could
see some person raised from the grave, they would give no credit to my
assertion. I told them farther of God’s appearing, and giving the ten
commandments, but it had no influence over them; “for” (said they) “all
mankind have the purport and meaning of them by the dictates of nature.”

Here are laws against adultery, theft, and murder; and they have such a
veneration for their parents, that they revere them even after death;
there is also a fine inflicted on any one who shall presume to curse
another man’s parents. They never swear profanely, but allow oaths
sometimes requisite, because, as they said, they were necessary and
convenient; and men could not live one by another if there were not such
laws; and for that reason there was no occasion for the great God
himself to prescribe those rules. The fourth commandment, indeed, they
seem to have no idea of; unless it be that they allow even their slaves
to spend one day in seven, as they think proper, without control; but
they have no religious duties to perform. And when informed that we kept
it holy, because God rested on the seventh day, they said this was as
improbable as any thing I had before asserted; and asked, how I could
tell what God did before there was a man living? And indeed, I could
plainly perceive that they despised me for talking of these things, and
looked on me as a common notorious liar, insomuch that I was obliged to
desist.

In short, I had no way to prove what I asserted: and that mistake in
regard to the rib, in my conversation with deaan Murnanzack, was a
mortifying stroke to me; and though at first I imagined my ill success
in the argument was wholly to be imputed to my own ignorance, I have
since had a thousand scrupulous thoughts arise in my mind upon that
head. And sure I am, that all was not owing to my weakness, for our
divines have not furnished us with sufficient arguments to defend it.
And I do not know, since miracles are ceased, but they would find it a
difficult task to demonstrate those truths themselves to these people’s
satisfaction. Nor do I know what miracle could possibly now be wrought
to prove what was done before any mortal man was in being. Though they
are fools enough here to be imposed on by the umossees, or conjurors,
yet they will entertain no notion of conversing with the great God. They
allow, indeed, that there are demons or spirits, which may be good or
bad, who appear to them in dreams, and discover to these umossees many
surprising things; yet they do not look upon them to be more pious or
better men than others, though, indeed, they imagine they are more
knowing. The awe, however, that my education has impressed on my mind
prevented me from joining in their worship, lest it should be
idolatrous; and there never was such a thing as persecution for religion
ever thought of amongst them; so that I was free to think and do as I
thought proper, so long as I took care not to affront them: and I think
it is both a shame and a sin that it should be countenanced or practised
by any sect of christians whatsoever. I have not here forgot deaan
Mevarrow’s threatening to kill me at first; but it must be observed
there was nothing more in that transaction than a secret pride and
ill-nature peculiar to the man; as appeared by deaan Sambo’s preventing
him, and reconciling us, without laying me under any obligation to join
in the ceremony.

I had not lived here above six weeks, before I heard that deaan Crindo
had attacked Rer Mimebolambo’s town, and reduced it to ashes, killing
two men, and taking some of their wives and children captive, with
almost their whole stock of cattle. This ill news affected me very much,
notwithstanding deaan Mevarrow had several times in his passion
attempted to kill me, yet living so long in his family I could not but
be concerned at their misfortunes. We used to have here a great deal of
flying news with respect to their wars; one day an account of a battle
fought, and the next day a contradiction of it; their reports being as
little to be relied on as some of our common newspapers at London, so
that I paid but little regard to them. Besides, we lived here at a
distance in peace and plenty, and heard now and then, perhaps, of the
losses sustained by our friends: however, as we felt none of the
miseries ourselves, they served us for conversation; in which we, like
coffeehouse politicians, sleep in security remote from danger, censured
the conduct of our superiors according to our several factious
inclinations, for facts we knew little or nothing of, or at most, but by
external appearances, and those too from very precarious reports. Our
business was to make our lives as easy and happy as our circumstances
would permit us; and among the many things which we met with to divert
us, one, I think, will bear the relation; which was a project of my
governor’s, and proved as profitable as it was entertaining.

There are some people in the remote parts of this country, whose
habitations are in secret recesses in the woods; they live easy,
indolent lives, never come near a town, nor concern themselves with any
affairs of peace or war, either foreign or domestic. They keep no
cattle, lest the vociferations of their herds or flocks might possibly
betray them, and induce some evil-minded men to disturb their peace by
plundering them of so valuable a treasure; but content themselves with
small plantations and the product of nature, which is, indeed,
sufficient to support them. They never concern themselves who is the
lord of any particular place, or sovereign of the whole dominions. Deaan
Murnanzack’s cow-keeper, my governor, formerly lived after this manner,
and by that means was acquainted with some of their private settlements.
As they are very illiterate, he imagined that I, being a man of a
singular colour, might easily be imposed on them for a prince of
Murnanzack’s family; as, indeed, many of our vulgar people in Europe
are, who think the royal family are something more than mortal, and the
nobility superior in beauty to the rest of the human species. In short,
the farce was agreed to be played, and I was to have one third of what
presents should be made us; he another, and the persons who composed my
retinue the remainder. Accordingly they procured me a gay silk lamber,
two or three strings of the most glittering beads for a necklace, and a
gun of the best sort to carry on my shoulder; my assumed character was
Rer Mimebolambo, who living in the most remote parts and far from them,
there was little or no danger of a discovery, since none of them had
ever seen any of the family in their lives. Twenty of our neighbours
made up my retinue, and we practised or rehearsed our parts three or
four days before we went, they waiting on me, and calling me by that
name and title, that every one might be perfect, and know his cue. The
plot in short was this:—

We set out in a very formal and pompous march, with shells blowing in
the rear, as is the custom of the country. The place we proposed to
visit was about ten or twelve miles off; when we came within half a
mile, my governor, and one appointed to attend him, went as heralds to
acquaint them that deaan Murnanzack’s youngest brother, Rer Mimebolambo,
was travelling that way, and understanding there were some inhabitants
in those parts, desired they would spare him such provisions as they
thought proper for himself and his retinue. We halted till we thought
our envoys had delivered their message and prepared them for our
reception, then we marched on in form and order. As soon as we came into
their little village I perceived a mat was spread for me to sit down
upon, and the whole clan, men, women, and children, came crawling upon
their hands and knees to lick my feet. My people played their parts
artfully enough, observing every punctilio of respect that was due to
the person I represented; for the moment I was seated, one ran to fetch
me water, another brought a calabash to receive it, and a third very
obsequiously washed my feet. I ordered my principal attendant (who was
in reality my governor) to procure a house for me; there were but five
in the whole place, except a few huts or separate apartments for their
children. He soon pitched upon one of the best, and left the owner to
shift for himself.

They stood with awe and attention before me, having never seen any one
command with such authority before. The chief called a kind of council,
and consulted with them what present was most proper to make me, in some
measure suitable to my dignity. Several of them returned in a short time
with some gallons of Guinea corn, and more of carravances; but the old
man did not make his appearance till near the evening, when he brought
with him four men loaded; two with as much honey as they could well
carry, and two with as much carravances; all which were placed in a very
formal manner before me. The old man sat down at a humble distance, and
struck with awe, in a hesitating tone, made a modest apology, and said,
he hoped I would excuse the meanness of his present; but as he had no
more to command on so short notice, he should be proud if it met with my
acceptance. I showed a tender concern for the poor man, and cheered him
up, telling him I was well pleased; that what he had done was a
sufficient testimony of his respect, and more than I expected from him.
Upon this, I desired him to sit down and keep me company, whilst my
people went to visit some of their neighbours; for I had sent some of
them one way and some another, to collect all they could by fair means,
and whatever the people could spare. I particularly ordered they should
attend me themselves, and taste the provisions they furnished us with,
lest they should be damaged by the incantation of the umossees. The old
man recovered his spirits in a short time, and began to talk with me in
a more familiar manner, saying, it was no wonder that my father and his
royal family ruled over them, for God and the demons had peculiarly
distinguished us from other men; and, “had I met you,” said he, “in a
wood alone, I should instantly have fallen down, and paid my duty to
you; for the varzachars, or white men, can never surely be whiter than
this young prince is.” Thus his tongue ran on, expatiating on each
feature of my face, and extolling every part about me in so lavish a
manner, that I could scarce tell what to say to him; nor did I know when
he would have ceased, but as good fortune would have it, an arch fellow
in my retinue came in, and in a drolling, though very serious manner,
answered him, saying, it is no wonder, old father, that you stand
astonished at the different colour, the regular features, the graceful
symmetry, and proportion of the prince; but you must consider, venerable
sir, that God has not created all mankind alike, but is pleased to
distinguish those whom he constitutes for the government of mankind, by
making them in such a particular form, and of such a particular colour,
that no one can be ignorant of their superiority. For (says he farther)
were all of one shape and colour, people would choose out of their own
clan whom they thought most wise and valiant to be their sovereign lord
and chief commander; and should they happen not to approve of his
conduct, they would abandon him, perhaps, and live under subjection to
some other prince; but when God appoints any particular men to be
princes and rulers over the rest of mankind, you may depend upon it, he
bestows upon them such excellent forms, and distinguishes them by such
marks that every one who sees them must know them at first view, must
immediately fall down before them, and acknowledge their divine right
and authority over them. “Ay, ay,” says the old man, “what you observe
is very true; for I remember my father went once in two or three years
to carry honey to deaan Mernindgarevo, who was deaan Crindo’s father;
and, as I have been informed, his skin was of copper colour, though his
hair was black, indeed, like ours.” “Yes,” says the other, “he was
somewhat different, but not very much; deaan Mungazeungarevo, however,
who was this prince’s father, married a lady from Port Dauphine, who was
a white man’s daughter.” “Yes, yes,” says the old man, “no doubt there
is something in that, but I have not a right notion of those marks which
you mention by which God distinguishes princes. Are all princes, pray,
of his fine colour and make? And has God set such glorious marks on all
kings?” “I cannot say,” says the other, “but that this is the whitest
that was ever heard of.” In the interim came some of the people who were
sent for, bringing their presents and offering to lick my feet, which,
to my no small satisfaction, put a stop to their insipid conferences.

I found that my people had formed this artful scheme among themselves to
delude these poor peasants, and carried it on with good success; for one
of these last, as I was informed, asked how he should know the person to
whom he was to pay his respects? And was roundly answered, do you think
God has not distinguished princes from other men? You will know him at
first sight by his fine colour and majestic mien.

But I fear I have tired my reader with the too tedious narration of this
petty farce. However, it plainly appears, that it turned out to all our
advantages; we proposed at first to have proceeded further into the
country, but were so well provided with whatever we wanted, that we had
no occasion for more, every man having as much as he could well carry.
So the next day all made up their enters, except myself, who still kept
up my grandeur. When we came home, we divided the spoil according to
contract, and though I sent several presents to my neighbours, I had
sufficient for two or three months.

This was too happy a life to last long. Before a year came about, I was
ordered home again with my cattle, three men being sent by deaan
Mevarrow to conduct me. The civil war had now subsisted about a year and
a half, which reduced every one to the greatest difficulties, so that
they wanted these cattle to live upon, the rest being consumed by
themselves, or taken by their adversaries; the enemy, however, was in as
bad circumstances, if not worse. We returned the same way we came,
through the forest of wild cattle, and hunted as we went along till we
came to deaan Afferrer’s town on Yong-gorvo. I was much dejected all the
way, and here I began first to think of making my escape to some seaport
town at the peril of my life; though it was a long time before I had
opportunity to accomplish it. As soon as I arrived at Rer Mimebolambo’s
town, where my master and his people still resided, I found none but
melancholy countenances; however, they were glad to see me safely
arrived, being richer by that means than the rest of their neighbours,
whether friends or enemies; for my cattle were considerably increased.
They thanked me, indeed, for my care, which was all the reward I had;
but my master was too proud and surly to do that; my butchering office,
however, brought me the usual fee, by which means I lived as well as any
of the others.

My employment was still to follow the cow-tail for the town in general,
for nobody was willing to trust either their children or servants; and
deaan Mevarrow durst not peremptorily command, even his own young
slaves, to do any thing which might hazard their being taken by the
enemy, lest their parents and friends should resent it, and leave him to
live under other lords. As for his white slave, he had neither parents
nor relations to mourn his loss if killed or taken; and for that reason
was the only proper person to be exposed to danger.

The war was not carried on with so much vigour as at first, for their
courage on all sides was pretty well abated; nor was there so much
advantage arising from the plunder of one another, as at the beginning;
but it was not long before Chahary and Frukey, who were our original
enemies, heard that we had cattle; and one day, as I was tending them at
some considerable distance from the town, they, with two hundred men in
a body, surprised and took them, and pursued me in a most violent
manner; firing and darting their lances, yelling out, kill him, cut him
to pieces, &c.: however, I got the start of them, and fled into a
thicket, which was so full of prickles and strong large thorns, that I
was most miserably scarified from head to foot; nevertheless I concealed
myself in the midst of it. They still followed me with their hideous
cries, beginning to cut down a passage in order to come at me; but just
as I was on the very brink of despair, I observed them all on a sudden
run as fast back again. It was some time before I could comprehend the
meaning of it: till at length, I perceived some people had been alarmed,
and came upon them; so that now they found it difficult to save their
own lives. They could not drive off the cattle, but resolving to do as
much mischief as they could, they killed some, and others they wounded,
and then fled. I was obliged to keep my station, and was still
apprehensive, that some of them would be driven upon me; till by the
noise of the guns, I found, that they went farther from me; I then
ventured to creep out, and perceived one of their chief men was fallen,
and wounded with two lances in his hand. He looked me full in the face
with his eyes swimming, and was going to speak, when I snatched one of
the lances out of his hand, and told him, it was my time now; and as he
was my enemy in a double capacity, I immediately struck him dead. When
our people first saw me they imagined that I was cut with lances, for I
was all over bloody. My flesh was torn in several places, my feet were
almost cut to pieces, and many large thorns were still visible in them.
So that when I recovered from the fright I was in, and came to be cool,
I was in excessive torment. The women and children soon helped to carry
the slain cattle into the town, there not being above fifteen alive, and
those most barbarously used. Whilst these were busy with the beasts, I
told deaan Mevarrow that I had taken two lances from one that seemed to
be mortally wounded; though alive when I left him at the side of the
thicket. I durst not own that I had laid violent hands on him, for some
of our people were his near relations, and I did not know but they might
privately seek revenge, for they lamented his loss, and begged his body,
in order to bury it; which was readily granted.

When I came home, my mistress was very kind to me, and ordered one of
her slaves to wash and dress my wounds, and pick out the thorns. It was
some time before I was perfectly well, and it was no small comfort to
me, that I had no more cattle to take care of: though I was conscious,
at the same time, of the ill consequence that would soon attend the want
of them. However, we had beef enough for some few days; and more than we
could well dispense with, whilst it was sweet.

I was no sooner recovered, than my master found out another employment
for me, which was to dig in the woods for wild yams; all our beef was
now spent, and scarcely any thing else was to be found hereabouts to
live upon: we now severely felt the miseries of a civil war; and so must
all countries wherever they are, feel in proportion to their
circumstances, whether christian or heathen. I went a long way sometimes
before I could find sufficient for my master and mistress, and myself,
being seldom able to bring home more than would serve one of us for a
meal the next day: I, indeed, always made sure of one private meal; for
I took care to kindle a fire, and roast some of them in the woods.

One morning just about sunrising, as my master and some of the chiefs
were sitting at the town-gate, condoling with each other on account of
the sad state of their affairs, deaan Mevarrow said, he had tasted no
beef for some considerable time; and asked, if there were any cattle
near them? They told him, none that either belonged to him, or any of
Rer Mimebolambo’s people; but there was one in deaan Mephontey’s
jurisdiction, about four or five miles off, who had several good fat
beeves. He immediately ordered me and another man to bring away one of
the best of those beasts with as much privacy and expedition as we
could. I began to make several excuses, and said I was afraid to go upon
so dangerous an adventure: besides (said I) as I am the only white man
you have amongst all your people should I be seen at a distance, they
will know me immediately to be your slave, and by that means you
yourself will be discovered. All I could urge had no influence over him;
he was resolutely bent that I should go, and ordered the man to provide
a rope that instant. I begged on my knees that he would send another in
my stead, but to no purpose; however, whilst he turned away, and was
speaking to some other people, I withdrew, in hopes that when he did not
see me, he would substitute another in my post; but the old villain
turning short and perceiving what I aimed at, took up his gun and fired
at me; the shot went through the straw cap I had on, and I was so near
him, that the wadding struck my back. Finding he had not killed me, he
took up a lance, and before any one could stop his hand, he threw it at
me. He raved, and gave me all the opprobrious language he could think
of. As to swearing, they are not any ways addicted to it; a custom too
prevalent amongst us christians, to the shame and reproach both of high
and low. However, at last he was pacified, and on my submission, and the
solicitations of his friends, he forgave me; but peremptorily insisted
on my obedience to his commands. As there was no remedy, I proceeded
with the man, though with many bitter reflections on my wayward fortune,
and state of bondage.

We soon came near the place to which we were directed, and after we had
wandered about some short time, we espied about half a score of cows
grazing; our next concern was to see if any cow-keeper was tending them.
To confess ingenuously, I was scarcely ever in more fear in my whole
life; the noise of the pretty little lizards, who hop about the trees,
and create a rustling amongst the leaves, appeared at that time in my
ears like the rushing out of so many men from an ambuscade; but after we
had listened very attentively, and taken a short tour with the utmost
precaution, we at length ventured to sally out from behind the covert of
the trees, and pitch upon one that was for our purpose; my comrade took
the rope, which till then he had twisted about his middle, and secured
her; we had much ado to get her from the rest of the herd; but at last
we mastered her, and drove her through the woods, for we thought it
safest to avoid all open places, and by noon we reached home. In a few
minutes she was cut up by a dozen hands at once, for fear the right
owner should have missed her, and should follow our track. The meat was
divided into two hundred pieces, and distributed to the same number of
men. My partner and I had the udder, and a slice of the buttock, which
is the customary fee to such as bring in either a stolen beast, or one
taken from an enemy; as almost every one in the town had a small
portion, all of it was despatched immediately; and the next day we were
in the same plight as we were in before.

It was now winter, and as the stalks of the yams are then withered, they
are very difficult to be found; insomuch that we were reduced to the
utmost distress, and almost famished. If we could get a meal once a day
it was luxurious living; when the children, therefore, cried for food,
though they had none all day, their mothers could with authority take
them up short, and say, would you be gluttons? Did you not eat
yesterday? These shocking taunts from their poor and distressed parents,
I heard for some months together; and our calamitous circumstances were
visible in our ghastly countenances. Here were no wars, no acts of
hostility now; our enemies never concerned themselves about us, nor we
with them. Thus we lived for eight or nine months after we had lost our
cattle. Our enemies, however, were in a worse condition, if possible,
than we were; because deaan Murnanzack and his brother, who lived on the
other side, frequently interrupted their repose, and deprived them of
the only happiness that attends a state of poverty; and that is, to
sleep away one half of their tedious hours, and so lull the acute sense
of their misfortunes.

Deaan Crindo, and, indeed, every body else, sincerely wished for a
peace, without finding any expedient to accomplish it; and though deaan
Murnanzack’s success had made them despair of one upon any honourable
terms, yet Providence threw an accident in the way, by which it was
effected. Rer Vovvern, king of Feraignher, which is St. Augustin-bay
country, had declared war against Woozington, our common enemy; and had
sent an ambassador, one Ry-Nanno by name, a very able and experienced
person, whose commission was to reconcile the contending lords of
Anterndroea; and procure their friendship and assistance in the common
cause. No sooner was he arrived at Fennoarevo, than the joyful news
spread round the country, and reached our ears. Deaan Crindo, without
any hesitation, permitted Ry-Nanno to make the first overtures from him
to his nephew Murnanzack; to whose residence the ambassador was then
gone when he heard it.

It was with no small reluctance, that this prince listened to a peace;
for not only his uncle’s deportment, but that of his sons too, was so
inhuman and savage, in destroying the cattle belonging to their nearest
relations, rooting up their plantations, and committing other flagrant
enormities, that he almost forgot his own private wrongs, and looked
upon deaan Crindo as the general enemy of mankind, who, to gratify his
unruly passions, endeavoured to lay his country waste; notwithstanding
he himself, at the first breaking out of the quarrel, had shown him so
glorious an example. With what generosity did he treat both Crindo and
Mundumber, and all who belonged to them? How careful was he of their
towns and effects? Evidently demonstrating that he aimed at nothing more
than doing himself justice, and deciding a controversy that was too
warmly pursued, and that the murder of men in cool blood, and the
destruction of countries, were actions of horrid impiety. And as
Ry-Nanno told me afterwards, it was his innate virtue that at last
determined him to a reconciliation; for he thought the Supreme Being
could never look down with a favourable eye on a man who would refuse to
relieve his fellow-creatures from such calamities as his countrymen then
laboured under. And this was the principal motive, in the height of his
success, to waive the prosecution of his own interest, when it stood in
competition with the public good. These were the truly noble sentiments
and generous resolutions of this great man, notwithstanding his contempt
of revelation; or, at least, of the christian religion, as I had
represented it to him in a disadvantageous light. I wish our priests who
build so much on their superior knowledge of God’s will, would be as
exemplary in their lives and conversations, and would teach princes as
well as others, to be in reality so truly just, honourable, and good as
this gallant black prince was in all his actions; and yet I doubt not,
but he will be stigmatized with the odious character of an illiterate
heathen.

As soon as Ry-Nanno had concluded his negotiation with deaan Murnanzack,
he passed by deaan Afferrer, well knowing he would acquiesce with what
his brother had done, and came to us, in order to compromise the quarrel
we were engaged in with Chahary and Frukey. He condemned them for their
rashness in the prosecution of their private resentments to the ruin of
themselves and their country, and told them it was represented in a very
bad light to all the kings on the island. He met with no great
difficulty in the accomplishment of the reconciliation he aimed at;
which being effected, he told them that Rer Vovvern had a pique against
Woozington, for several very gross affronts. Amongst others, he had
called a dog by the name of Rer Vovvern; and Ry-Nanno expected he should
wait on them next summer to beg their assistance against Woozington; but
his errand was at that time principally out of friendship, to put an end
to their destructive divisions. In a few days a peace was concluded and
publicly proclaimed all over the country.

While Ry-Nanno was delivering his first speech to Rer Mimebolambo and
deaan Mevarrow, I observed that he fixed his eye attentively upon me,
and seemed to view me with some concern; and calling to me in broken
English—you, white man, come hither. When he asked me my name, he turned
to my master and asked, here is a white bird among a parcel of crows; in
our country, indeed, they are common enough, ships come there
frequently, but then they wear clothes, and eat and drink with our
lords. This poor young lad looks piteously: why do you suffer him to go
naked? Pray show some charity to a distressed stranger, and do not use
him with inhumanity. Deaan Mevarrow answered, I have used him more
tenderly than he deserves; you do not know how his friends served deaan
Crindo. Yes, says Ry-Nanno, I know the whole story perfectly well; and
that deaan Crindo treated them in a barbarous manner in refusing to let
them go at their request to a seaport, where ships come, in order to
return to their native home. Had Rer Vovvern this white man, he would
give him some of the clothes which his countrymen have left behind them,
and take as much care of him as he would of his own son, till some ship
should come to carry him home to his friends.

I listened to this discourse with the utmost attention, and waited with
impatience for a favourable opportunity of talking with him in private,
which I did that night; for he brought part of the cattle which deaan
Murnanzack gave him, as he very well knew that we had none, and I was
sent for to kill a bullock. I embraced this lucky opportunity, and told
him in broken English, that I would wait on him at night. Accordingly I
went, and he received me with abundance of humanity and respect. After
we were seated, he inquired into the whole history of our shipwreck and
misfortunes. I gave him a long and faithful detail thereof, not
forgetting to acquaint him with the cruel treatment I met with from my
master, and to set my wretched state of slavery in the strongest light.
The relation of this melancholy tale, not only made me weep, but drew
tears likewise from his eyes. He told me he would endeavour to purchase
me of deaan Mevarrow, and desired me not to be too much dejected. I
stayed late with him, and when we parted, the hopes I had entertained of
his kind intentions to release me, kept me awake all night. The next
day, after he had discoursed with my master about their own private
affairs, he asked him if he was inclined to sell his white man; and in
case he was, he would give him in exchange a handsome young fellow,
capable of doing him more service, or a buccaneer gun, if that would be
a more agreeable compensation.

I was sitting among my fellow-slaves, and waiting with the utmost
eagerness and attention to hear the result of this conference. When my
master ordered me to stand up, I was in hopes it was to strike the
bargain; but, instead of that, says he, look on that white slave there;
for looking after cattle, digging of wild yams, and improving of honey,
there is not his fellow; and though a buccaneer gun is the common price
of a slave, I will not take two for him. Ry-Nanno thereupon showed him
three or four slaves, but Mevarrow told him in direct terms that he
would not part with me on any conditions whatever. Then turning to me,
he asked if I was not willing to dig some wild yams for him, as well as
his other slaves who were just gone on the same errand before. Not
daring to refuse, I was forced to take up my hatchet, shovel, and lance,
and go into the woods; but instead of searching for yams, I sat down and
wept till I was almost blind. However, I was under an indispensable
obligation to find some to carry home, which was no easy task, for the
stalks were now withered; yet I made up a bundle, after roasting them,
but had none myself. When I came home, my master thought I had been
idle, and said, you are mightily concerned I suppose, that Ry-Nanno is
not your master. I went home and laid me down on my mat, and had nothing
but a log of wood under my head for a pillow till some considerable time
after it was dark, and then I stole privately to Ry-Nanno.

I was no sooner seated, than he told me he was glad to see me again, and
asked me what success I had met with, which I told him; and, moreover,
that my master had abused me to the last degree for bringing no more
yams. He said I was the first man he ever saw who had a black for his
master; and though he could not purchase me, yet he did not question,
but Rer Vovvern would find some ways or means to get me into Feraignher,
when he came next summer into this country. To that I replied, that I
was afraid my master would not take me to the wars for that very reason,
and that I despaired of ever regaining my liberty; but I was determined
to make the experiment as soon as ever my master went out on another
expedition, and left me behind him. Ry-Nanno endeavoured all he could to
comfort me, and said, the same Providence which has hitherto preserved
you, will deliver you at last; and I have great hopes of seeing you at
St. Augustine-bay; for, said he, since Tuley-Noro’s death, there are but
few ships come now to Port Dauphine, though that, indeed, is the nearest
seaport, for ours is a great way off. I desired to be informed how many
days’ journey it was, and which way he came; for I am determined, said I
to attempt my escape; if they overtake me, I am sensible I shall be
killed, but then I shall be freed from my present bondage, which is
worse than death; and should I fall into any other master’s hands, it is
morally impossible he should treat me worse than this has done. The
whole country of Merfaughla, said Ry-Nanno, lies between us, extending
itself from the utmost part of Anterndroea, where deaan Murnanzack’s
cattle are all kept, to the river Oneghayloghe, which runs into St.
Augustine-bay; and I think I was about forty and two days on my journey,
but could have performed it in less than half the time, had we not
hunted by the way; for the whole country, said he, is so well stocked
with proper subsistence, that no one need carry any provisions, unless
he be in a more than ordinary hurry. There are abundance of wild cattle
in great part of it; besides, there is a large quantity of faungidge,
verlaway, wild honey, and wild yams to be had, wherever you go. I
inquired what kings lived in the way? He said three. Rer Trortrock is
the first to the northward; the next Rer Chulu-Mossu-Andro, and
Zaffentampoey; this last resides at the head of the river Oneghayloghe,
to the eastward; all their people, however, live near two long days’
journies from the road. The nearest way, said he, is by the foot of
Yong-gorvo hills, till you come to the west side of it, then strike over
to the northward half a day’s journey, and take your course betwixt the
north and west, and you cannot lose your way. I asked him a great many
more questions till it was late and time to depart, but he would not
permit me till I had supped with him. The next day he took his farewell
of my master, and I stole away privately to thank him for all his
favours. As they were packing up his provision, &c., he advised me to
oblige deaan Mevarrow as much as possible, lest he should kill me or do
me some secret injury, and bid me likewise not despair of getting home
to England. He then made me a present of a large piece of beef, and
after repeated expressions of my gratitude for his tender concern for
me, I parted from him, though with abundance of reluctance. When I
reflected on what had passed, I began to entertain quite different
thoughts of being in another country from what I had done; for I found
here were great numbers of people, nay, whole nations too, who were
civilized, and understood the laws of decency and good manners; but it
was my misfortune to fall among the most savage people of the whole
island.

The next day the crier went round the town with orders to all deaan
Mevarrow’s slaves to muster before his door. Among the rest I went to
know his pleasure, which was to get ready and march with all our baggage
the next morning to our own town; which was cheerfully complied with by
every body but myself, who was very indifferent where I lived. So when
we had taken our leave of Rer Mimebolambo and his people, we marched
home and found our habitations very little worse than when we abandoned
them, for they were at that time newly built. The orders were to attend
and receive axes and hoes for the cultivation of the ground. Whilst some
cleared it of the wood and briars, others hoed it up instead of
ploughing it. Our master sent to his uncle Mephontey for a considerable
quantity of guinea corn and carravances, which were soon sowed; and then
indulged his slaves for a fortnight, in order to improve their own
plantations. I desired deaan Sambo to use his interest with my master,
that I might have two days more to take care of my honey, which I had
secured from thieves, by setting up white sticks as a testimony that it
was poisoned by the charms of the umossee. He gave consent; and
thereupon, I took three large tubs, each of which would contain five or
six gallons, and as many calabashes. I had farther to go than from our
old town, which had been burnt; but when I came there, I found my hives
all safe and untouched, and my stock of honey prodigiously increased. I
smoked the bees out, and took the greatest part of their treasure away,
but not all, leaving them some to subsist on, for they will return of
themselves to the hives, and when they swarm, go directly to new ones
without any of that fatigue we have with them in England. I found some
fine Virginia honey with white wax, which I put into my calabashes. As
it was near two years since I had seen them, I had almost forgotten
where to look for a good part of them, they being planted at a great
distance from each other in different corners of the wood. I filled,
however, all my vessels, and left as large a quantity behind me for the
next day’s journey. As soon as I got home, I waited on my master and
made him a present of one of the tubs: now these lords always expect an
acknowledgment on such occasions. When my master saw how large a
quantity I brought him, he was surprised, and asked me why I brought him
so much? For to do him justice, I cannot say he ever discovered a
covetous disposition.

Besides, we have no officers to exact any certain quantity, but the
people must go voluntarily, and carry a present of such commodities as
their plantations and industry have produced; as carravances, guinea
corn, potatoes, &c.; but this is only by way of acknowledgment of
homage, and a calabash only would have been looked upon as a sufficient
compliment. But as I was sensible that he had a circumcision-feast to
make, and I had a large stock, I desired him to accept it. He told me it
was true, and for that purpose he would purchase all the honey I had to
spare, and give me a cow and a calf for it the first cattle he had.

The civil war being now over, we lived at ease, and could dig our wild
yams without the least apprehensions of danger. People now went
backwards and forwards to visit each other as usual, and every one
attended his plantations; it was six months, however, after this, before
we had plenty. My conversation with Ry-Nanno was ever in my mind, and I
only waited for a favourable opportunity of my master’s going abroad
upon some exploit, to make my escape, if possible, at all adventures.
After some time, it happened that one Rer Ambarroch, a petty prince to
the northward, having received and detained eight slaves of deaan
Mevarrow’s, and thirty head of his cattle, a little before the civil war
began; and the deaan sending a special messenger to demand them, he sent
word back that he might come himself and fetch them, if he thought fit.
He being now at leisure, Rer Mimebolambo and he agreed to join their
forces, and having obtained leave of deaan Crindo, they prepared for
their expedition.

I expected to be left behind, as usual, to take care of his wife, and
pleased myself with the hope that the time was near at hand for putting
my design in execution; but standing before him with two lances in my
hand, you shall not, says he, always live at home like a woman, but
shall go to the wars with me; the sight of a white man in arms will
strike terror into the people upon the mountains where we are going.
Hereupon he took my lances, and said, here is one of your grandfather’s
arms; you can manage this, I presume, somewhat better than ours; prepare
yourself for the march.

I desired, however, that I might have one of my lances, which he gave
me, and twenty musket balls, a sufficient quantity of powder, and two
flints. I took up my mat as usual, but my master gave it to one of his
slaves to carry for me, so I walked, gentleman-like, without any
luggage.

Our little army consisted of about three hundred men, exclusive of the
slaves; we went to the northward all the first day, on the second we got
into the forest to the east of Yong-gorvo, where the wild cattle are;
there we hunted, and killed some beef, while four men were sent out as
spies toward Rer Ambarroch’s town, to survey the fortifications of it.
We were almost a day’s journey from it; and, indeed, it was not
advisable to go nearer, lest some of their people should have discovered
us, and alarmed the town; for those wild cattle were their principal
maintenance and support. Our spies returned, and brought intelligence,
that it was an open place without any fortification at all. Thereupon we
marched all night, and arriving at the town by break of day, we divided
ourselves to surround it, and fired into their houses to alarm them; the
barking of the dogs and the noise of the guns soon roused them, and away
they scowered, for we gave them no time to collect themselves into a
body: so we plundered them at once, and took what prisoners we could
find. I saw the prince’s house, and ran directly up to it, in hopes of
taking him prisoner; but he jumped out and fired at me: as I was going
to return it, a man threw a lance at me, which I put off and fired at
him, and put a stop to his running; but by that means the prince
escaped.

I entered the house, and found his wife and daughter, with two or three
slaves attending them. I took hold of the ladies’ hands, and led them
both out, and left others to plunder the house as they pleased, since I
had a good prize enough; but one of Rer Mimebolambo’s men, who had got
no booty, would fain have taken one of my captives from me; whereupon I
told him, I supposed he was a coward, and had sneaked behind a tree in
the action, or else he might have found something worth his acceptance.
He insisted on his demands, and reproached me with being a slave, till
some of our people came up, at which time he was obliged to depart with
shame; for a complaint being made to deaan Mevarrow, he justified me,
and severely reprimanded the poltroon. For there was an agreement made
before we set out, that what cattle should be taken be divided; but all
captives should remain in the custody of those who took them. When we
had driven all the men away, we got what cattle we could find together,
and made the best of our way through the wood with them, lest the enemy
should rally and attack us. As soon as we got into the plain we halted,
and made preparations to receive them; and about two hundred of them
soon came as we expected.

I delivered my two captives, as every one else did theirs, to the slaves
that were in the rear, whilst we marched; and as we came near them, they
also met us; so that we made a discharge almost all at once, and killed
three or four of their men. We halted a while to load again, and
perceived that they stood confounded, and looked in a very wishful
manner on one of their party who was fallen. Having loaded again, I and
some few more ran directly up to them; seeing us approach, which is not
usual, they fired at us and ran away. We followed them till they got
shelter in the wood, and then returned to the main army. On our retreat,
they sallied out of their coverts, and followed us at a distance, being
desirous to take one view more of their wives, children, and cattle; and
to observe our motions, in hope some accident might happen, that might
give them a favourable opportunity to avenge their cause, and retrieve
the losses they had sustained.

At noon we came to a shady grove, and there halted near a spring, in
order to refresh ourselves; for we were all fasting. As soon as my
master was seated, he ordered me to bring my two captives before him;
and applauding me for my courage and conduct in the action, he told me I
should keep one of them myself, and have my choice too, and that he
would be contented with the other. I soon determined in favour of the
young one, who, in truth, was extremely agreeable; and I was pleased
with her from the first moment I took her. She was not above sixteen
years of age; her mother, whom I presented to my master, was about four
or five and thirty. Deaan Mevarrow was pleased with my choice, for he
was inclined to do a generous action; and thereupon calling her to him,
he told her, her husband had brought all this misfortune upon himself by
his unjust and obstinate proceedings; and (said he) I have only followed
his directions; I am come myself as he bid me, and have fetched away all
my women; and I perceive, some of my own cattle, with a sufficient
quantity of his, to pay me and my friends for our trouble. As for
yourself, I will restore you to your liberty; go back to Rer Ambarroch
and acquaint him, that if he be inclined to have his daughter and cattle
again, he must come and fetch them. You see she is fallen into my white
man’s hands, and for my part, I will never take her from him. And, said
I, I will lose all the blood in this white man’s body, before he shall
have her again.

After she had refreshed herself with some meat, which deaan Mevarrow
presented her with, she came to me in order to take her last farewell of
her daughter. They both wept heartily, not expecting ever to see each
other more; I pitied them, I confess, and would have dismissed the young
one, had I not really been in love with her. To confess ingenuously, I
never saw any woman before that time I liked so well; though I had been
so many years in the island. I comforted the mother, however, as well as
I could; and desired her, not to be too much concerned for the loss of
her daughter, since she should live as well as I did; nay, I assured
her, that I would take more care of her than of myself; and though I was
not of a sable hue, I had a heart as fond and indulgent as any black
whatever; and therefore, though she fell to my lot by the chance of war,
yet it was my design to make her my wife, if she approved of it; if not,
it was possible, I said, she might lead a less comfortable life. Her
mother asked her, what she thought of the motion? She answered, she was
at my disposal, and not at her own; and desired her duty might be
presented to her father. And present mine too, said I, if you please,
mother. So after some farther discourse for a short time, they parted.
She took her leave of deaan Mevarrow, returning him many thanks for his
courteous treatment, and went away by herself; though she had not, I
presume, far to go alone; for her friends were, doubtless, as near as
they durst come in the woods, to observe our motions. And though we
never saw them more, yet we kept a strict guard all that day, and the
following night. I was very fond and careful of my pretty prisoner,
tying a rope about her middle, with the ends about myself, and laid her
close to me, folding her fast within my arms; she only smiled and
rallied me for it, but I was so fearful lest she should get away, that I
could not sleep. We marched apace the next day, and when we halted, Rer
Mimebolambo and deaan Mevarrow divided the cattle, each had two hundred
and eleven; and then they parted, each taking the nearest way home.

Before we entered the town, we made another halt, in order to divide the
cattle among ourselves; the deaan had thirty, his brother ten, and each
of the other principals one. He that had two slaves retained one of
them, and delivered the other to his lord, and had a cow and calf in
lieu of it. If two men got a slave between them, they had each of them a
cow for it; even he who had taken no slave was to have a cow, provided
the number would admit of it; if not, one was divided between two; and
this is a general and an established law, with respect to the division
of an enemy’s spoils.

Deaan Mevarrow told me I had but one slave, whereupon I alleged he had
taken one away, and might have kept her, if he thought proper; but I
perceived he was only in jest, for he gave me a cow and a calf as an
equivalent for her; and generously enough offered me another cow and
calf for my honey, but I modestly declined that favour; so he chose them
for me himself out of the fattest of the herd. By this means I became
rich at once, having two cows and two calves, and a handsome
jorzerampeller; that is to say, a handsome girl.

No sooner were we come to the town, than the shells were blown, and all
the women ran out to see what was the cause of it, not expecting our
return in so short a time; but when they knew who we were, they ran back
to their houses till we had made our triumphal entry, and deaan Mevarrow
was seated; then his wife came out, and as it is the custom there,
licked his feet, and after her, the rest of the women paid him the same
homage; and after that, each of them testified her duty to her own
husband in the same submissive manner. I thought, indeed, I had now a
wife, and as fine a one as the best of them all; and that the next time
we returned from such an expedition with the like success, I should have
homage done me too. My mistress sent and desired to see my young spouse;
I went along with her accordingly, and she would make her sit down on
the same mat with herself, and could not refrain from tears, it having
been her own case; whereupon she charged me to use her tenderly. I did
not intend, I told her, to make a slave of her, but a walley, that is, a
wife.

As I had a stock of honey in a neighbour’s hands, as also some
carravances, and a sufficient quantity of milk, I made a very tolerable
repast for my bride and myself; and mimicked matrimony so far as to take
her by the hand, and assure her that I was willing to make her a
constant and tender husband; and asked her, if she was equally willing
to be a faithful and loving wife? to which she cheerfully consented. So
we lay down together, and though we had no bride-men or bride-maids, or
throwing of stockings, yet we were as happy as our circumstances would
well admit of.

Some of my readers, perhaps, may wonder how I could be so passionately
in love with a black woman; but as I had been several years in the
country, and they were become natural to me, I think the wonder ceases.
Besides, she was extremely handsome, of a middle stature, very straight,
and exactly shaped; her features were regular, and her skin as soft,
fine, and delicate as any lady’s in Great Britain. And to do the women
there justice, all who are of any rank and well brought up, have the
last good quality to boast of. There are uncleanly, coarse-skinned
creatures, indeed, amongst the vulgar, as well as in Europe; but the
women do not go naked as some of the Guinea negroes. Their dress is a
lamber, much longer than that of the men’s, and reaches to their feet
from their middle; above and under the lamber, they wear a kind of
shift, which covers all the body to the neck, and short sleeves. This,
for the generality, is made of cotton, and is of a dark colour; those of
the better sort embellish it with beads, in a very neat manner, more
especially on the back, where they are ranged in rows and cross one
another; and as they are of different colours, they form a large double
cross so like a union-flag, that one would imagine they copied after it.

Thus much as to a general detail of the person and habits of these
women, though I shall not, indeed, give them the preference to our
Europeans; yet I must ingenuously confess, that it is with pleasure I
reflect on mine, and remember our parting with the utmost reluctance and
concern. For as to their fidelity, duty, and submissive deportment to
their husbands, goodnature, and agreeable conversation, so far as their
little knowledge extends, I think the Europeans come far short of them.
We white people entertain a very contemptible and mean idea of these
blacks, and a high and partial one of ourselves: they, on the other
hand, have an exalted opinion of our merit; and modestly imagine, that
we are far superior to them in point of knowledge, arts, and sciences:
and therein, doubtless, they are right; but if an impartial comparison
were to be made of their good qualities, the black heathens would, in my
opinion, excel the white christians. I presume the reader will readily
allow, that the best character I could give myself, in order to
recommend me to my wife’s mother, was, to assure her, as I did, that I
had as tender a heart as any black whatever; for it must be
acknowledged, though to our shame, that they treat one another with more
humanity than we do. There are none miserable amongst them, if it be in
the power of their neighbours to assist them. There love, tenderness,
generosity, and moral honesty, too, are very conspicuous; and that not
only just in this one country of Anterndroea, but throughout the whole
island, and even in other places more than here. My master, deaan
Mevarrow, indeed, may be produced as an exception to this general rule,
on account of his stealing his neighbour’s cattle, I grant it; but it
must be considered, that there are some men of bad principles in every
country; he did it, it is true, against conscience, and stood
self-convicted: for he knew what justice was, as well as any one, as
appeared by his paying me my cow and calf in return for my honey; and in
many other particulars. There is a wide distance between the capacities
and virtues of some men; though it is with regret that I mention deaan
Murnanzack’s name in the same page with Mevarrow’s; yet the peculiar
vices of the latter are no objection to the national virtues of his
country.

My reader will excuse this digression, I hope, when he recollects the
only pleasure that alleviated the weight of my slavery while in
Anterndroea. I looked after my master’s cattle indeed, as I did before;
but then I had a few of my own, and an agreeable companion to spend my
leisure hours with, who took care of my house; and as I had plenty of
honey, I never was without toake, for my wife and I to enjoy ourselves
with, and entertain a friend upon occasion. So that I lived as well as
the best of my neighbours, and being now much less fatigued than
formerly, I was capable of taking more notice of the religion and laws
of the country: and as I propose to amuse the reader with a particular
detail of one of their circumcision-feasts, it will not be improper to
give first an account of that little religion which they professed.

They acknowledge, indeed, and adore the only one supreme God, whom they
call deaan Unghorray, which signifies the Lord above. There are,
according to their notion, four other sovereign lords, and that each
superintends one quarter of the world. The northern lord is styled deaan
Antemoor; the southern, deaan Meguddumdummateme; the western, deaan
Androwfertraer; and the eastern, deaan Anabeleshey. This last, say they,
dispenses plagues and calamities amongst mankind, by the command or
permission at least, of the great God; the others also are subservient
to his commands, but are chiefly dispensers of his favours and
blessings. They look upon these four as mediators between men and the
Supreme Being; on which account they have a peculiar regard for them,
and in their prayers and sacrifices, recommend themselves to their
indulgence and protection.

I have already given the reader some account of the owleys, by which
they seem to entertain the same idea as some superstitious people in
Europe formerly did of familiar spirits; because they employ them as
their favourite messengers with their petitions and prayers to their
great God; and, after a sacrifice, expect that they should come and tell
in dreams what they have to do, and also to warn them of any approaching
danger. This bears a great conformity to the idea, which some christians
have entertained of guardian angels, or some old philosophers of a good
or evil genius; or rather, is more exactly conformable to a very
ancient, and long received notion of demons; and for that reason, as we
have no other term so fit in our language, I choose to distinguish them
by that; for the owley is no more than the general name of the utensil,
or altar; which is rather like a talisman, or sigil, to which the demon
is thought to be attached, and by which, as a proper medium, they expect
to be invoked. For there are almost as many different demons with proper
names, as there are persons who have owleys; some of which are,
Ry-Leffu, Tompack-Offnarevo, Laka-petu, Deer-mefacher, Deer-hurzolavor,
Ry-mungary, Ry-ove. Then they invoke likewise the spirits of their
forefathers, and have a great veneration for them; calling upon them by
names that are given them after their decease; insomuch that they look
upon it as a crime to address them, or speak of them by the names they
had when living; and this name is principally known by the word garevo
at the end of it; as may be observed in the repetition of deaan Crindo’s
and deaan Murnanzack’s fathers’ names by my mock retinue among the
peasants.

The veneration they have for the memory of their ancestors, and the
assurance they have of their spirits always existing, is apparent in
almost every circumstance of the few religious ceremonies which they
perform: the burial of their dead is very particular and solemn. I have
frequently hinted at the great humanity with which they treat each other
on all occasions, and under all difficulties of what nature or kind
soever. In sickness they daily visit and contribute all that in them
lies to the relief of the afflicted family, and the restoration of the
patient. When any one is dead, all the relations and neighbours come to
the house; the women make doleful lamentations, and the men assist in
the necessary preparations for the funeral. In the first place, they
pitch upon a tree for the coffin, after that, a cow or an ox is killed,
and some of the blood sprinkled upon it: imploring at the same time
their forefathers, and the demons, and demigods to aid and assist them,
and take care that the tree does not split in the falling, or that any
one be not hurt either by cutting or felling it. When the tree is down,
they cut it about a foot longer than the corpse, and split it directly
lengthways, (for they always make choice of a tree which they know will
split after this manner,) and dig both parts hollow, like two troughs.
It is then carried to the house, the corpse being in the mean time
washed, and wrapped up in a lamber, or frequently in two and sewed
together. There is frankincense, or a gum very much like it, burning all
the time in the house. They seldom keep the corpse above one day,
especially in hot weather. They put the corpse in the troughs closing
them together, and carry it upon six men’s shoulders. Every family has a
burying-place of their own, which no one dare infringe upon or break
into; nor indeed does any one attempt it. This is enclosed, and fenced
round with sticks, like palisadoes. When they come near the place, the
corpse is set down, and then they proceed to the rest of the ceremony;
that is, to make four fires, one at each corner on the outside of the
burying-place; on these fires they burn the ox or cow, which was killed
before for that purpose; then they divide it into quarters, which are
all consumed in the flames: after this, they sprinkle frankincense upon
the coals, and spread them all about. This being done, the chief or
eldest of the family goes close to the entrance of the burying-place,
and hollas aloud several times; after a short pause, he calls upon all
the dead that are there deposited, commencing at the earliest, and
proceeding to the last, and each one distinctly by his name; and in the
conclusion tells them, that there is a grandchild, or near relation come
to lie amongst them; and that he hopes they will receive him as a
friend. Then the gate is opened, and two or three persons are sent in to
dig the grave, which is made for the generality seven or eight feet
deep; and the corpse is placed in it, and covered over with the earth
without any further ceremony. None are permitted to enter here, but some
of the nearest relations, and the bearers, and the door is immediately
shut fast again. There is commonly a crowd of people without, who are
busy in carving up, and dividing among themselves the cattle, that are
distributed amongst them for that purpose, if it be a great and rich
family that can afford it; but the poorer sort cannot gratify their
friends in so bountiful a manner. They generally visit this
burying-place once a year, to clear it from weeds and make it clean; but
never enter it till they have first burnt a cow, or bullock before it.

I knew some who, during a friend’s sickness, would make a sacrifice and
prayer here, to invoke the aid and assistance of the spirits of their
forefathers; but this is not a very common custom. And if any man have
any peculiar ceremonies of his own, which others do not think proper to
put into practice, no person is offended, nor do they concern themselves
about it; and the reason is, because there are no people here, who
pretend to be greater favourites of the Supreme Being than other men,
and to have a particular commission to interpret and declare his will.
No one here has yet been so presumptuous as to attempt this; and if any
one should be so hardy, he would meet with but few to credit him.

Every man here, the poor man as well as the rich lord, is a priest for
himself and his family; and expects the demons should answer his
requests in his dreams. If he differ from his neighbour in point of
ceremony, as there is no damage given or received, so there is no hatred
arises. But were they to set apart particular persons, and to give them
a certain number of cattle and slaves every year, for the performance of
some certain ceremonies, and instead of making their prayers to God for
themselves, leave it to these to officiate for them, and prescribe rules
and seasons to them, these very people would soon lord it over them. For
they would terrify them with the anger of the great God, and demigods,
and foment divisions among the people for the support of their interest,
lest they should lose their substance and honours; and at last punish
any innocent person for their insolent inventions, under a sanctified
pretence of demons coming in the night from the Supreme Being, and
enjoining them so to do. We had an instance how easily mankind might be
imposed on by these pretenders to prophesy, in my master Mevarrow; and
how artfully the imposition was carried on in one of our neighbours.

There was a person of distinction lived about two hours’ walk from us,
called deaan Olaavor, whose father died whilst I was here; he was making
preparations for his interment in the burying-place of his family; and
the night before, he dreamed his father appeared to him. Or, according
to his own expression, his father appeared to him in a dream, and
earnestly desired him not to bury his corpse; but keep it in a sundock,
or chest, and erect a little house for the reception of it.

This request he very dutifully complied with, building a house about
three hundred yards from the town to the eastward, to which place he
used frequently to resort, and make his prayers and oblations, and then
pretended that the spirit of his father, which he called lulu-bay, or
the great spirit, used to come and tell him strange things, which should
occur to his neighbours. He frequently visited deaan Mevarrow, who gave
the utmost attention to every thing he said; Olaavor perceiving his
weakness, soon found out ways and means to turn the credulity of his
friend to his own advantage: and when any troublesome time came on, he
would industriously wait on Mevarrow, and inform him how angry his
lulu-bay was, and what misfortunes he had just grounds to fear would
attend him. Now whether, as he was an artful man, he conjectured rightly
from the reason of things; or, whether he dreamed rightly (for
sometimes, indeed, it happened as he said, and often otherwise) I shall
not presume to determine; but his principal aim was (as it appeared to
me) to get a heifer now and then for a pretended sacrifice, and
frequently a present of some beads, and such other trinkets, for the
pains he was at, using his best endeavours to appease the wrath of his
lulu-bay, and procure his favour and assistance. The advantage he made
of this was so conspicuous, that many people grew jealous of his
conduct; but at length a brother of deaan Olaavor’s was killed in the
wars, and his lulu-bay never came in a dream to warn either one or the
other of the impending danger. This not only opened their eyes, but
convinced a great many more; however an excuse was at hand. That his
brother had been remiss and negligent in regard to his prayers and
oblations to lulu-bay; and for that reason he suffered him to fall.
Deaan Mevarrow, and some of the weakest of the people, swallowed the
cheat, and still continued their superstitious opinion of this great
spirit, and were afraid to speak, or entertain the least contemptible
thought of it; having always the plea of mean spirited bigots, that they
were safer who paid an awful regard to lulu-bay, than those who despised
him. But be the case how it may, if he were not a great and powerful
spirit, either capable of injuring them, or doing them any good offices;
if the whole were a mere fiction of deaan Olaavor’s, yet there was no
harm in thinking he was so, or in paying him honours; but upon the
supposition that he was really such a potent spirit, and they should
neglect him, then they were sure to suffer severely for their contempt.

This was all the idle answer those poor timorous creatures would give,
on their being asked a reason for their tame compliance with deaan
Olaavor; which, doubtless, would have been as good a plea for their
paying divine honours to a potato, had any one told him he had a
revelation in his dream, that it was a demigod. The reader, I presume,
may entertain a more adequate idea of the natural disposition of the
people, with respect to their morals and religion, from such instances
and occurrences, than from any formal description which I can pretend to
make; I shall therefore pursue my history, and give a particular detail
here of the feast and ceremony of the circumcision of deaan Mevarrow’s
son.

The toake was made some weeks beforehand, by boiling the honey and combs
together, as we in England make mead. They filled a great number of
tubs; some as large as a butt, but some indeed smaller; a shed being
built for that purpose, which was thatched over, to place them in. On
the day appointed, messengers were despatched all round the country to
invite the relations and friends. About three or four days before the
ceremony of the circumcision was actually performed, you might see the
beginning of a festival; people went about blowing horns, and beating
drums both night and day; to whom some toake was given out of the lesser
vessels as a small compensation for their trouble: deaan Mevarrow had
procured two large oxen from deaan Murnanzack. They, who lived in the
most remote parts, came a day or two before; and they were entertained
with toake. In the evening, I found the town full of people, some
wallowing on the ground, and some staggering; scarcely one individual
person sober, either men, women, or children. And here one might
sensibly discern the effects of peace and security, the people
abandoning themselves without fear or reserve to drinking, and all
manner of diversions. My wife I found had been among them indeed; but
had the prudence to withdraw in time, for she was fast asleep when I
came home.

And now the day being come, I returned from feeding my cattle before
noon, in order to bring up the two oxen and a bull, whose legs being at
once tied fast, they were thrown all along upon the ground. The child
was about a year old; for they have no stated time for the observance of
this custom. He was decked with beads, and a skein of white cotton
thread was wound about his head. A great crowd attended the festival.
Some brought such presents as their abilities would admit, such as a
cow, or a calf, beads, iron shovels, hatchets, and the like. Every one
was served once only with a small quantity of toake in a calabash before
the ceremony began. All things being now duly prepared, they waited for
the signal from the umossee, who was all this time very busy, to all
outward appearance, in measuring his shadow with his feet. When it came
to the length of three and a half, he gave the word. Upon which, one of
the nearest relations, who had the child in his arms, ran with him up to
the bull, and putting the child’s right hand on the bull’s right horn,
repeating the following form of words.

  Tyhew deaan Unghorray, deaan Antemoor, deaan Anebeleshey, deaan
    Androfertraer, deaan Meguddumdummateme, an Ruey Owley, Heer-razehu,
    ittoey acquo toey Anomebay loyhe ittoey handrabeck enney raffa
    loyhe.

Which in English runs thus:—

  Let the Great God above, the Lords of the four quarters of the world,
    and the demons prosper this child, and make a great man of him. May
    he prove as strong as this bull, and overcome all his enemies.

If the bull roar whilst the boy’s hand is on his horn, they look on it
as an ill omen, portending either sickness, or some other misfortunes in
life; and all the business of the umossee is nothing more than this:—to
tell them what is the most unlucky hour or minute (like our strolling
fortune-tellers) to do it in; for, as to the religious part of the
ceremony, he is no ways concerned in it; if there be any religion
intended by it, which is somewhat to be questioned; for any experienced
man of the neighbourhood, whom they imagine understands it best,
performs the operation by feeling for the head of the yard, and cutting
off the fore-skin as closely as possible, two men holding the child’s
legs and arms at the same time. As to the name, it is given long before,
and frequently is changed afterwards; this child was named Ry-Mocker.
After the fore-skin is cut off, an attendant having a stick in his hand
like a gun rammer, the biggest end whereof is pointed, puts the
fore-skin upon it, and going to the wood, throws it towards the east.
The ceremony being over, the child is delivered to the mother, who is
all this time sitting upon a mat with the women round her. And now their
merriment began; the thatch was all pulled off the toake-house, and I
was ordered to kill the bull and the oxen; but these not being
sufficient, my master sent for three more which had been brought him by
his friends, for there were abundance of mouths to be fed. Before they
began to drink, he took particular care to secure all their weapons, and
no man was permitted to have so much as a gun or a lance; and then they
indulged themselves in boiling, broiling, and roasting of meat, drinking
of toake, singing, hallooing, blowing of shells, and drumming, with all
their might and main. I do not believe there were twenty sober persons
among the whole company. These revels continued all night; some went
away the next morning, but most stayed till evening, so that the feast
lasted three days successively.

These people are great admirers of toake, and some of the vulgar sort,
as arrant sots, and as lazy as any in England, for they will sell their
guinea corn, carravances, nay, their very spades and shovels, and live
upon what the woods afford them. Their very lambers too, if worth any
thing, must go for toake; and they make an ordinary one serve turn, so
it will but just cover their nakedness. It is made of the tree called
the whooring, which they cut down with their lances. The outer bark is
taken away, and the inner, which is white, is peeled off whole, and beat
with a stick till it is made soft and pliant; and then they wear it as a
lamber, but it can never be washed. Their lambers, however, for the
generality, are made of cotton dyed in the yarn. The richer sort,
indeed, and people of distinction, buy silk and calicoes at seaport
towns, and often give a cow and a calf for no more than will make them
one lamber. The men wear no other clothes, but they adorn themselves
with mananelers, which are rings round their wrists; and these, both men
and women of distinction, are very fond of. They are sometimes made of
gold (but where they get them I cannot say), oftener of silver, but more
frequently of copper; which, at last, I found was produced and made in
the country, as well as iron. They dress their heads in a very agreeable
manner, curling up their hair to make it lie close, for they have hair,
and not wool on their heads, as the Guinea negroes; neither are their
noses flat, though small, nor their lips so big as theirs, but their
hair is always black, and for the generality, has a natural curl. Deaan
Crindo’s family are particularly distinguished, on account of their long
hair, and their copper-coloured skins. Notwithstanding they have no idea
of letters, yet they have here very wholesome laws, which are fixed in
their minds and handed down from generation to generation. I well
remember many of them, the recapitulation whereof, I flatter myself,
will be no disagreeable amusement to the reader.

If one maliciously assault his neighbour, and break a leg or an arm, the
offender is fined fifteen head of cattle, which are delivered to the
party injured.

If one break another’s head, and he that is wounded have not returned
the blow, he has three beeves by way of damage.

If two men quarrel, and one happen to curse the other’s father or
mother, whether they be living or dead, and his antagonist have so much
command of himself as to refrain from cursing the other’s father or
mother, he recovers two beeves as a compensation.

If a man be caught robbing his neighbour of an ox, or a cow, he is
obliged to restore it tenfold; and this is executed too with the utmost
rigour, notwithstanding my master frequently broke this good law; but,
like other great men, in more polite parts, he was not to be curbed by
the ordinary laws of his country; and yet he, as well as most others,
found, to his cost, that there were those who could cope with him; and
was at last convinced, that if a man will live amongst his
fellow-creatures, he must be observant of the fundamental laws, which
the community wherein he lives has framed for their mutual peace and
tranquillity; without which, men are not sociable animals, but each one
is a mere savage, and the world an uncultivated desert.

If any one be found guilty of stealing guinea corn, carravances,
potatoes, or the like, out of any of the plantations, he forfeits a cow
and a calf to the owner, or more, in some measure proportionate to the
offence.

In case one man’s cattle break into another’s plantation, the owner, for
every beast found there, must give an iron shovel.

If any one steal another man’s hive of honey, and be caught, the fine is
three iron shovels. These iron shovels, hoes, &c., are a kind of small
money with these people, for here is no trade but by barter, or the
exchange of one commodity for another; and, therefore, they are as exact
as they possibly can be, in proportioning the value of one thing to
another.

If a man borrow an ox, or a cow, of his neighbour, and does not return
it in a year’s time, six calves are looked upon as an equivalent for the
ox; and if he neglect payment at that time, those calves are supposed to
be three steers, and three heifers; and the increase, which by a fair
computation arises by their growth and production, is the man’s right of
whom the ox was borrowed; and if it go on for ten years, or any longer
term, it is computed what three bulls and three cows might have produced
in that space of time, and all that produce is due to the creditor.

If a man lie with the wife of another man who is his superior, he
forfeits thirty head of cattle, besides beads and shovels in abundance;
but if the men are of equal degree, then the fine is twenty beasts
only.[1] In this country of Anterndroea, they are not addicted to such a
plurality of wives as in some other parts of the island. If a man have
but two wives here, and his brother or an intimate friend come to visit
him, he never scruples to let him lie with one of them.

Footnote 1:

  A man can put away his wife at pleasure.

The nearest of kin, even brother and sister, marry, if they have not the
same mother.

One brother, after the decease of another, often takes his wife; nay,
his father’s too, and lies with them, if they be not their own mothers.

To lie with one of the king’s or prince’s wives, is death by the
established laws.

My master Mevarrow was jealous of a young man’s being great with his
wife, or, as he said, was well assured he used to lie with her. Whether
he had any just grounds for such a suspicion, I cannot say; yet every
body expected the young man would be killed for it; but his brother
being a chief man, and a favourite of the deaan’s, and the civil wars
coming on, he seemed at that juncture to take little notice of it; but
two years after the offence, when those dissensions were appeased, the
man being constantly in his view, he determined to punish him; and,
accordingly, when the young man, his brother, and some few slaves of us
that attended them, were in the woods, it being so contrived, under
pretence of stealing and killing a cow, he and deaan Sambo drew the
young man into a remote part of the woods, at a considerable distance
from us, and in a short time we heard him halloo three times, at which
instant deaan Mevarrow arose, and pretending to stretch himself with his
lance in his hand, he struck the young man’s brother through the body.
This so surprised us all, that some of us ran one way, and some flew
another, imagining our master mad; and some went home and positively
asserted it as fact, this person whom he killed not being the adulterer.
He had been our master’s counsel-keeper, it is true, and knew all the
secret recesses of the women and cattle; and taking it for granted that
he would turn his enemy and revenge his brother’s death, thought it most
advisable to despatch him likewise. Deaan Sambo killed the supposed
adulterer that moment the halloo was made, which was the signal agreed
on between them; but whether he was apprized of deaan Mevarrow’s wicked
design upon the other, I cannot determine, for there were several others
whom he brought there, as if he intended they should be witnesses of it.
As deaan Sambo was the executioner, I was inclined to think there was
more than suspicion, for that he was no cruel man, I was very sensible,
by experience. I must own I had entertained a very favourable opinion
before of my mistress, as I had never observed any thing like it in her
conduct; but I had now almost done, not only with this family, but the
country likewise; for every circumstance in my affairs had some tendency
to promote my departure and escape, which, at length, I effected.

Not long after this, it happened, whilst I stole out to visit my own
plantation (my corn, &c., being near ripe) that some of my cattle broke
into the plantation of a principal man, and did him some considerable
damage. My fellow-slaves soon informed me of the misfortune, and went to
seek the beasts; but they were driven home by the planter’s servants
with very heavy complaints: I knew the danger of going within reach, or,
indeed, within sight of my master; and therefore turned aside into the
wood, to consider what measures were best to be taken. At length, I
recollected the friendship between deaan Olaavor and deaan Mevarrow: and
for that reason went directly to him, and laid my unhappy case before
him, and begged he would use his best endeavours to reconcile me to my
master. He readily complied with my request, made me very welcome, and
desired me to stay, not only that night, but the next day and night too;
and then assured me, that he would go with me himself; but business
would not permit him to go before. By this means I was absent long
enough to alarm them, and give them just grounds to suspect that I had
deserted. Deaan Olaavor, however, went with me according to his promise,
and after he had expostulated the case with my master, and obtained
pardon, I was sent for in, and restored to favour, with only some
friendly admonitions for my better conduct for the future. As soon as
their conversation relating to my fault and pardon was over, they fell
into discourse on other matters; and deaan Mevarrow put his hand to his
mouth, which is an action they frequently use to express their surprise
at any thing more than common.

Deaan Olaavor, says he, I sent yesterday for an umossee, to consult with
him about Robin, and to know what was become of him. After he had
conjured a long time, he assured me, that I should see Robin once more;
but the next time he went away, I should never see him again in the
capacity of his servant or slave; for he will have a new master to the
northward, with whom he will tarry but a short time; and then he will
still go farther northward and have more masters; till, at length, he
will return to his native country. I listened, I own, not only with
attention, but pleasure, to what he said, though I put no great
confidence in these fortune-tellers. Just as I was getting up to go home
to my wife, my master called me; stay, says he, I have something to say
to you before you go. Perceiving that I looked a little startled and
surprised; I shall do you no harm, says he, only secure you. The umossee
was sent for immediately, and then I found they were going to enchant me
(as they imagined) that I should not run away. I had seen this magical
farce acted before upon such slaves as they are jealous of, frequently
forcing an oath upon them by the demon Fermonner. And when these poor
wretches have afterwards attempted to fly, and bewildered themselves in
woods and unfrequented paths, or hurt themselves by any fall, or any
common accident, they are weak enough to imagine that the demon
Fermonner was the cause; that he confounded them, and dazzled their eyes
in such a manner that they should not find their way. Two or three
instances of this kind in an age, are enough to make fools give credit
to the whole.

At length the wrinkled old wizard enters with solemn pace, and with a
leering sneer in his haggard countenance, shakes his projecting noddle:
Ha! Well I see you have him fast. I told you so. Who is he that shall
presume to despise my prophetic spirit? You see as much is proved true,
as the time will permit. Neglect my advice for the future; and look to
the northward for your slave. But you may look, and send too in vain; it
will be then too late. The spirits who are at my command may do somewhat
now. What (says deaan Olaavor, who was not so great a bigot as deaan
Mevarrow, notwithstanding his lulu-bay) has proved true? Robin never ran
away at all, he would have been here yesterday, if I could have spared
time; so that there is nothing at all in what you talk of. Pray,
venerable sage, says deaan Mevarrow, (interrupting Olaavor,) pray
proceed; I sent for you on purpose to take your advice. Prepare your
charms. Away goes the fumbling old fool to work, scraping a root, and
mixing several ingredients together, which, I was well satisfied, had
neither good nor harm in them; (for I was afraid of nothing but his nose
dropping into it;) muttering all the time, between his few broken teeth,
words that neither he, nor any one else knew the meaning of. When the
dose was prepared, he called it the fermonner, and put it into some
carravances, which were boiled on purpose, and it was given me in a
calabash. But before I took it, he hung several roots about me; one over
my eyes, another at my back, one upon my breast, and one upon each leg,
giving each of them a distinct name: then scraping a small quantity from
each of them, and putting it into the mess of carravances, I was ordered
to eat it, which I did without the least fear or reluctance; in the mean
time he pronounced his curses, as well as prayers over me. Whenever
(says he) he thinks of running away, remember, O thou, deaan Fermonner,
how he has eaten what belongs to thee; and also, O ye, &c. [Here he
named all the spirits belonging to other charmed roots.] how he has
eaten what belongs to you; and if he offer to run away, arise in his
stomach, O deaan Fermonner, and make him so sick that he shall be
incapable of stirring. And ye, which have hung at his back break it
asunder; let his breast be tormented with pain, and his legs fettered as
with parra-pingos; and if he attempt to fly, join all your united
forces, and break his legs whenever he jumps and steps over any thing
that lies in his way. Thus the old dotard went on for a long time, but
in a more abrupt manner, and without any method. He tossed his hands
about, and changed his voice almost every minute. He made, in short, a
hundred impertinent repetitions and cant words of his own invention, and
foamed like a fanatical enthusiast. When he had quite tired himself with
preaching, he took off the charm and made me lick every individual root.
Now let him go, says he, where he will; the demons which regard these
charms will soon inform me where he is, and I shall acquaint his master.

I had a holiday that day; for my master was in a good humour, being
highly delighted with what he had done; and sent a proper servant to do
my business. When I came home, I found my wife in a very melancholy
posture, being under great concern for fear I should be killed. She
would have provided something for me to eat, but I had dined, I told
her; and then related to her the whole affair. She was overjoyed to find
I got off so well, and was surprised that I should be so dull at it;
since she knew well enough I did not regard any of these ceremonies, and
made a jest of them; but my thoughts were quite otherwise engaged than
she was aware of, and I did not think proper to let her know the truth;
which broke my rest to that degree, that I scarcely ever slept soundly
there any more. I found myself now under the necessity of running away
at all adventures. For should sickness, or any common accident attend
me, so great was deaan Mevarrow’s superstition, that he would,
doubtless, have thought it had been effected by these demons or spirits,
which were invoked in this incantation; and have taken it for an
infallible testimony of my resolution to go from him; and then, very
probably, in his passion he might have killed me. So that these
conjurations, which Mevarrow depended on to prevent my departure, had
the direct contrary effect, and was the strongest motive that could have
induced me to it, and made it absolutely necessary that it should be so;
yet I have often smiled to think how unexpectedly true his prediction or
guess proved, even in all its circumstances.

Whilst my head was full of projects in order to accomplish my flight, I
could not forbear saying something in relation to it to a very civil,
honest young fellow, who kept cattle always near me; and was a captive
from another country. One day I asked him, from whence he came? and he
said from the northward. Was I so near my own country, said I, as you
are, I would not stay much longer in slavery. Nor would I, said he, if
it were not for the demons; who I am afraid will break my bones, ever
since the umossee cursed me in the same solemn manner as he did you. At
which I laughed. Why, if you have no apprehensions on that account, said
he, you may get away with as much ease as I. At this I started, and told
him, I suppose he only said so to try me. But he offered to enter into a
solemn oath before the owley, that he meant as he said, and would assist
me in my flight.

However, I dropt the argument for that day, but I tried him next; for
after I had sworn him in a religious manner (knowing him to be like most
people, more religiously inclined under misfortunes than in prosperity)
I confessed ingenuously my secret intention, and asked his friendly
advice. You have nothing to do, said he, but to fly directly to deaan
Afferrer, who will protect you, and treat you in a courteous manner.
When Rer Vovvern’s army comes next summer, continued he, you may easily
get to them; who would be proud to oblige the white men, by sending you
home in the first ship which arrives at Feraignher. For nobody, says he,
in the whole island will make a white man a slave, or keep him against
his inclination, but these people. So that if you can but fly from
hence, you will soon get to some town where ships come. I returned him
many thanks for his kind advice, and told him I would show him my
beehives, and the roots of which the charm was made. This I did with a
view to make him keep the secret. And now,

I had but one hard task more to go through, and that was to prevail on
my wife to accompany me, or let me conduct her to her father. It was a
difficult point to break my mind to her; but at length observing her in
a humour to talk of her friends, and wish she could see them, I told
her, if she had courage enough, and would keep the secret, and always
love me, I would venture to carry her to them, and stay with her; but
she was superstitious too, and afraid I should be hurt by the
incantations of the umossee. So that I pressed it no farther. But to
part with her, and leave her not only in bondage, but to be ill-treated,
perhaps on my account, was a mortifying consideration; for I sincerely
loved her.

However, there was an absolute necessity; my resolution was fixed, and
no time was to be lost. It was then wet and rainy, and I stayed only
till the weather was more favourable; which was about a fortnight. Near
which time I took my comrade into the woods, and showed him my hives,
and the manner how I dug the roots for the charms; for to attempt to
undeceive him would have been to no purpose. The night before I took my
flight, I wilfully left a heifer in the field; having told my friend
when I called, and desired him to look after my cattle whilst I went
after the heifer, that should be the private signal of my departure. He
told me it was two days’ long walk to Yong-gorvo; but I said I would run
it in one, and did not question but that I should get safely thither,
(though my master should send after me,) if I were but two hours before
them. When I came home with my cattle, my master took a survey of them,
and missed the heifer; but after reprimanding me a little, he ordered me
to get up betimes in the morning, and look for it, before it broke into
any neighbour’s plantation.

This was what I aimed at, in order to have the whole day before me; but
now came the hardest struggle, which was to take a last farewell of my
wife. It was some secret satisfaction, however, that I had no child by
her. I was almost afraid to reveal the secret to her: but at length,
after making her swear in the most solemn manner by the owley, that she
would never disclose it, I told her in direct terms that I was going;
and the only thing that disturbed me, was parting with her. She begged,
and cried most bitterly; but there was no staying for me any longer, my
life being every day in danger. Had I been in any other part of the
country, where I could have lived with freedom, ease, and safety, I
don’t know what effects the unaffected love I had for her might have
produced. At length, however, she was somewhat appeased, and I broke
from her arms by break of day; but with what sorrow and reluctance, such
of my readers as are tender lovers, can better imagine than I describe.
I drove my cattle into the field, where my comrade was ready; I did not
go near him for fear of being observed; but called, and bid him take
care of my cattle: he said yes, yes, and away I walked, or rather ran;
for by the time the sun was two hours high, I had got beyond the first
woods, which is not less than ten English miles, if it could be
measured.

I had now a large plain of five or six miles to go over, here I looked
back every now and then, for fear of being pursued; but saw the coast
was clear. My wife and friend, as I was informed afterwards, were true
to the trust reposed in them. About noon, I came to a pond, where I just
washed and refreshed myself, and kept jogging on till at last I espied
the white cliff of Yong-gorvo. It is very high, and appeared like land
that is seen about seven or eight leagues at sea; that however did not
discourage me, and two hours before night I was at the foot of it. It is
half an hour’s brisk walk to go up the hill to deaan Afferrer’s town,
where I arrived safely, and went directly to him. He thought as soon as
he saw me, that I came with some message from deaan Mevarrow, but I
threw myself immediately at his feet, and begged his indulgence and
protection; then I informed him of all the miseries I had undergone
through my master’s cruel treatment of me, and the apparent danger my
life was in every day, and at that time more than ever.

No sooner was he convinced of the true reason of my making thus my
earnest application to him, than I perceived a pleasure glowing in his
countenance; and he at once assured me, that he would protect me at all
adventures, and that I should be a slave no longer; that I should do
nothing but go with him wherever he went: and as a testimony of his
sincerity, he would present me with a gun. Now carrying a gun here, like
wearing a sword in England, is the mark of a gentleman; with this lance
in your hand, said he smiling, you look like a mall-a-cross, which is a
nickname they give to one of the meanest of their natives; you shall now
appear like what you are, a free-born man. I licked his feet with all
the satisfaction imaginable, in conformity to the custom there, and
returned him a thousand thanks; nor did I forget my grateful
acknowledgments to the Divine Goodness, who had thus far given success
to my honest endeavours, to recover my former state of freedom; and to
implore his assistance in the completion of so happy a project, which I
had no hopes of ever putting into execution.

When I assured them that I came from my own house in one day, there was
scarcely any one would give credit to the assertion. About a week or two
after, two messengers from deaan Mevarrow came to demand his white
slave; and to reproach deaan Afferrer, for not sending me back by some
of his own people on my first arrival. This imperious message made him
smile: send him back, says he, and by my own people! and his white slave
too! why, no one ever saw a white slave before; nor has he the least
authority to make him one. I look upon him as a distressed man, fled to
me for succour, and he shall never be exposed to misery any more. I
shall make no slave of him; he shall be at his free liberty to stay with
me, or go where, or whenever he sees convenient. He here expatiated on
the conduct of our people, with regard to deaan Crindo; which being much
to the same purpose as has been hinted before, I shall not recapitulate.

In short, he convinced the two men of the unreasonableness of their
master’s demand so far, that they excused themselves, and said, that
they only came with a message. And I only tell you, says he, what answer
to return to deaan Mevarrow. After this, he entered into familiar
discourse with them, and asked them, what day I came away? When they
told him he was perfectly surprised, and so were they to find I had
actually walked it in one day; for it could not be much less than sixty
English miles. I could not forbear rallying them, on account of their
superstitious confidence in their umossees. See, says I, how my legs are
swelled! how the spirits have made my bones rattle within my skin! I was
a white man they said, and they had no power over me. As soon as deaan
Afferrer had ordered them a house and provisions, and I had made some
inquiry after my wife, which proving more to my satisfaction than I
expected, I took my leave of them with pleasure; for I had some doubt
before, what might be the effect of such a peremptory demand from deaan
Mevarrow.

And now I lived, I must confess, with more freedom than ever I had done
as yet; for I walked about with my gun upon my shoulder. When the deaan
was disposed to eat, I ate with him; though not in the same dish,
indeed, for no one here has that privilege. I had little else to do,
than to go with him a hunting; by which means I made myself expert in
all the arts of taking wild cattle. My principal business was to observe
the situation of the country, and to inquire the route which Ry-Nanno
was expected to take.

I was fond of going often a hunting, in order to take particular notice
of the most remarkable mountains, which might hereafter be as so many
landmarks to me. Besides vohitch futey, or white hill, here is another
high mountain more to the northward, called vohitch manner, or red hill.
It is in form of a cone, or sugar-loaf, and runs spiring up a great
height; the inhabitants are of opinion, that it is the highest in the
whole world. After I had lived in this manner six months, Ry-Nanno met
me by accident in the forest, as he was coming to give deaan Crindo, and
the other lords, intelligence of the Feraignher army being upon their
march. This was such agreeable news to me, that I was at a loss how to
conceal my joy; and for that reason I walked into the woods, for fear
they should discover my inclinations by my deportment. I attempted to
return my humble and hearty thanks to the Almighty in my native tongue,
for the fair prospect I had of getting to a seaport town; but found I
had forgotten my English, and could scarcely with propriety put three
words together. However, the Madagascar language served me well enough
to express the sentiments of my heart.

Deaan Afferrer told me as soon as I came home, that he had seen
Ry-Nanno; that Rer Vovvern was dead, and that his son deaan Mernaugha
now succeeded him; and that his nephew deaan Trongha, assisted by his
brother Rer Befaugher, and deaan Mernaugha’s brother Rer Mundrosser,
commanded the army. As I was conversing with the deaan, I could not help
expressing my sorrow for Rer Vovvern’s death; because he was so faithful
a friend to all white men. I found he suspected my design immediately,
for he told me, though in a very courteous manner, that he hoped I had
no temptation to change my place of abode through his treatment of me.
To which I replied, after thanking him for all his favours, that I had
no thought of removing from my habitation; that I was conscious to
myself that I lived as well, or better than I could do in any other
place. And, indeed, this was really fact, for he treated me with the
utmost humanity and complaisance. I eat and drank as he did, and did no
manner of work; but I perceived by this, he was not inclined to part
with me. For which reason, I was under a necessity to be more close and
artful, than I should have been had I made such a discovery.

Orders were sent to the three towns under deaan Afferrer’s command, that
instead of hunting the wild cattle, they should make proper preparations
for hunting the wild boar; by which they meant the king of Merfaughla.
Whereupon, all hands were instantly at work, cleaning and fitting up
their arms; for there are artificers here, who can make or mend a
spring, and do twenty other things to guns as well as lances. The women
employed themselves in making caps, to distinguish us in the wars; these
were made of the same materials as our mats. The children beat Guinea
corn in order to carry with us. I made it my business to put deaan
Afferrer’s and my own gun in order; and to cast a considerable quantity
of shot or rather slugs, by making a hole with a round stick in a lump
of clay, to cast the lead in; and cutting it afterwards into little
pieces about half an inch long. Though they frequently buy shot at the
seaports, yet this was made, as I imagine, of the lead which they had
procured from the wreck of our ship.

Ry-Nanno went back, after he had given notice of the Feraignher army’s
march to deaan Trongha, in order to meet him at vohitch manner,
according to appointment. Deaan Crindo sent orders that we should march,
and meet him at the river, where we watered our cattle, in deaan
Murnanzack’s country. I might have stayed at home, if I had thought
proper; but I was resolved at all adventures to go with them, though I
told deaan Afferrer, I was under some apprehensions of my old master
Mevarrow, whom, I concluded, I should see there. But he bid me be under
no concern on that account, for he would protect me; and deaan Mevarrow,
he was well assured, would make no disturbance in the army. However, it
happened better than I expected, for Mevarrow was left behind sick of
the colah; which, in Guinea, or the West Indies, is called the yaws. It
is a cruel distemper, and bears a near resemblance to the venereal
disease, affects the bones and joints with great pain and soreness,
breaks out all over in blotches and dry scabs, and is mostly in the
privy parts, and under the arm-pits. However, it is not actually that
complaint; for I have known children of three or four years old have it,
whose parents never knew by experience what it was. There are but few
who escape it once in their lifetime, but then they never have it more.
In that respect, it is like the small pox, or the itch; and caught also
as they are. If a person, who never had it, follow one infected in the
long grass or bushes, if he lie or sit on the same mat, or even eat and
drink after the diseased person, he most assuredly catches it. For which
reason they send their children, when afflicted with it, out to nurse,
to such persons as live alone in remote places; and when a man, woman,
or a whole family is taken with it, they oblige them to go into the
woods, and tarry there till they are perfectly recovered; which is
frequently a whole year, and sometimes two.

It was good news to me to hear that deaan Mevarrow was left at home
infected with this distemper, and that deaan Sambo had the command of
the people in his stead; for I knew, by experience, that he was none of
my enemy, though he demanded me in his brother’s name upon his first
arrival; but when deaan Afferrer had expostulated the case with him, and
told him what answer he had returned him by the messengers; when he
urged, that it was natural for a man to fly for his life, who was every
day in danger, and treated like a brute, had he been a lawful slave,
which was not the case here, deaan Sambo gave up the argument, and
turning to me, asked if he had not several times saved me? I readily
owned the obligation. Do not be afraid, said he, for I shall not insist
on my demand any more; but pray come often and see me as a friend. I
gratefully acknowledged all his favours, and particularly thanked him
for this last signal one, for he confirmed the account I had given of
myself before.

As deaan Crindo had intelligence of the day the Feraingher army was to
join them, he put himself in a posture to receive them with abundance of
form and ceremony. He was seated under a great tamarind tree, with his
sons according to their seniority on his right hand, and all their
people; on his left were deaan Murnanzack and his brethren, with all
their people. The whole assembly formed a line of above a quarter of a
mile in length. After a short time, the Feraingher army appeared, and as
they advanced, they came dancing, each with a gun in his left hand, and
a lance in his right, their shells sounding, and their drums beating. At
a small distance they fired some pieces by way of salutation, which we
immediately returned; and now the three generals, deaan Trongha, Rer
Befaugher, and Rer Mondrosser, went up to deaan Crindo and the rest.
After the usual salutations, they were all seated under the tamarind
tree, and ten calabashes of toake were sent for by deaan Crindo to
entertain them. I sat all this time behind deaan Afferrer, with his gun
in my hand. After mutual assurances of an inviolable friendship, the
division of the prices of cattle was settled and adjusted. Deaan Crindo
and his sons were to have one third; deaan Murnanzack and his brethren
another; and deaan Trongha and his brother and cousin the remainder.

After they had amicably concluded their own affairs, and begun to be gay
over their toake, says deaan Trongha, you have got a white man amongst
you, I perceive. Yes, says deaan Crindo, this is one of those who took
me and my nephew prisoners, and would have delivered us into deaan
Tuley-Noro’s hands, who was our adversary. I don’t think, says deaan
Trongha, they would have done you any harm; you must doubtless have
given them some provocation first. I did them no injury, replied the
other, as I know of, unless maintaining them well was doing them
injustice. They were inclined, indeed, to go to Antenosa, and I would
rather have detained them to assist me in the wars; and was not this,
says deaan Trongha, a manifest injury, and a just provocation, to keep
free men against their wills in a country far from their native homes.
I’ll tell you, however, a very remarkable transaction of my
grandfather’s with these white men, before he was rightly acquainted
with them.

An English ship came to our seaport town, which they call St.
Augustine-bay, in order to buy provisions and furnish themselves with
water. They did not go up to my grandfather’s town, but he thought
proper to visit them, and made the captain a voluntary present of two
oxen; and the captain as voluntarily gave him a gun, and some powder and
shot, as a compensation. The whites built themselves a house upon the
shore, for the reception of their sick men. Some few days after we had
been here, the white men and some of ours got in liquor together, and a
quarrel arose amongst them. At first, indeed, they only beat one another
with their fists; but at length, they made use of weapons, and a white
man was killed upon the spot by one of ours. The news being carried
immediately to the ship, the captain came on shore, and after a strict
inquiry into the matter, he laid hold of the king whilst his people ran
to the boat and fetched their arms. My father and Rer Vovvern instantly
placed themselves at the head of our people, and would have attacked
them, but my grandfather prevented them, for he was morally assured of
being killed by one side or the other, so he went contentedly on board
their ship. The fishermen were under no apprehensions of danger from the
whites notwithstanding this disturbance, for they knew them; and,
besides, were well acquainted with their manners; so they went on board,
and asked what the captain’s demands were of the king? He said
satisfaction for the loss of his white man. They returned, and in the
name of the king’s two sons, asked what satisfaction he required? The
captain insisted on their sending him the man who killed the Englishman
and ten oxen as an equivalent. The fishermen had no more wit than to
deliver their message in the hearing of the murderer; whereupon, he fled
directly into the woods, so that when they sent to secure him, he was
not to be found. The fishermen returned to the captain, and assured him
that they had made strict search for the criminal, but could not find
him; however, if he would be contented with a slave or two in his stead,
or with twenty oxen, they were willing to give him them. At this the
captain was very angry, and peremptorily insisted on their producing the
same man; for he had murdered his man in a most barbarous manner, and
unless they found him, he would keep their father; but, notwithstanding,
he would allow them ten days’ time to make their farther search for him.

During all that interval, my grandfather’s legs were loaded with irons,
in order to prevent his making his escape; however, he eat and drank
with the captain all the ten days’ time, and was treated in a very
courteous manner. When the term granted was expired, and the captain was
fully satisfied they had done all they could to find out the murderer,
though to no purpose, he took the irons off the king’s legs, and asked
him if he would enter into a solemn oath, never from that hour to do any
act of injustice to an Englishman, or suffer any of his people to do it,
if he could possibly prevent it. To which my father readily consented.
When he had dined with the captain, they came on shore together. What!
says deaan Crindo, do you and your family eat with white men? Yes, says
deaan Trongha, we Andry Voler, for that is the surname of the family,
not only eat out of the same dish, but drink out of the same cup too,
and look upon them as a part of our own family. We never attempted to
assume any authority over them; they come when they please, and go where
they please with us; and if any idle fellows do what they ought not to
do, their captain never hinders their being punished. These white men
are very advantageous to us, and they would not come amongst us, if we
did not treat them with civility; besides, our grandfather has laid us
all under a solemn oath, with a curse annexed to all our posterity, who
shall treat an Englishman with severity; for, as soon as he and the
captain came on shore, the owley was brought out, and they entered into
a solemn and perpetual friendship, which all of us strictly observe, and
imagine that God will not prosper us should we break it.

My grandfather hereupon gave the captain twenty oxen, which, though he
received, he would return an equivalent in guns and other things; and
had we this white man amongst us, we should give him such clothes as his
countrymen have left who died there. He will never wear any of his own
country clothes again, says deaan Crindo, I believe. Better you were
hanged, thought I, though I durst not say so.

The next day we marched to the borders of Merfaughla, and there
encamped. I lay always in deaan Afferrer’s tent. The next morning,
however, we shifted our quarters and marched a great way into the
country towards Manner-ronder, a small river passing through several
small towns, but found the inhabitants had abandoned them, and from the
dung of the cattle, which was very dry, we judged they had been gone
about a fortnight; for Woozington was a politic man, and would leave
nothing for us to subsist on; neither would he weaken his army by
fruitless skirmishes and unnecessary attempts, but wait till he was
fully apprized of our strength by his spies, and had collected all the
force he could to oppose us. A man came to me from deaan Trongha, and
told me privately that his master desired to speak with me, to which I
answered, I would wait on him, as soon as I could possibly contrive to
come without being observed. Accordingly, in about two or three days, I
found a proper opportunity, and told deaan Afferrer I was going to see
deaan Sambo. You need not ask me leave, said he, but don’t go any where
else; by which I knew his meaning, and found he was jealous of me.
However, I returned, and by private ways, and in the dark got to deaan
Trongha’s tent, where was a numerous assembly. He spoke to me in
English, and asked me how I did? I was obliged to answer him in the
Madagascar language, for I had forgotten I told him my mother tongue.
This, and my being naked withal, moved his compassion to that degree,
that he spoke as indulgent things to me as my own father could; and
assured me, that if he could find any means to take me with him, he
would send me home in the first ship. Whilst we were talking, Rer
Befaugher came in, who shaking me by the hand, said, Brother, how do you
do? I answered very well, but could speak no more English, without a
mixture of this country language. They informed me that there had lately
been some English men of war in quest of pirates; and that they had
directed them to St. Mary’s, and Mattatanna, which are situate on the
other side of the island; and that there was but one white amongst them,
and he a Dutchman; and moreover, that an Englishman had been killed not
long since in the wars. I told him I was determined, at all adventures,
to escape and follow them, but they said they would purchase me, though
they gave six slaves for me. After thanks for so courteous a promise,
and a mutual agreement not to take any public notice of each other, I
took my leave of them and went to deaan Sambo’s tent, who also treated
me in a very handsome manner. He told me he was going to live by
himself, and asked me if I would come to him? and I promised him I
would. I took my leave and returned to our tent. The next morning we
held a consultation, in which it was determined to throw the army into
three divisions and march abreast; but at a quarter of a mile distance
from one another. We saw nobody all this time, till we were near the
capital town, and then we perceived their spies that observed us, but
the inhabitants were all fled. We passed the river Manner-ronder, and
encamped upon the plain; we had not been long there before three men
called to our people, and desired them to acquaint deaan Crindo that
deaan Woozington proposed to pay him a visit next morning. Now he was an
artful man, and full of stratagems, so they knew he would endeavour to
surprise or overreach them. Upon which, we went hard to work to fortify
the camp, which was thrown in a circular form. We cut down several trees
and set up forked limbs; the spaces were filled with great pieces of
wood, piled one upon another lengthways, at least four feet high, and as
they joined close, they made a wall of it. In the next place, we dug the
ground about a foot deep, and about seven feet wide, and threw up the
earth against the wooden pile to make the wall still stronger; we left
only two narrow entrances. The loose small boughs, with the leaves, were
thrown carelessly, as it were, without side to hide the fortifications,
so that it looked like nothing but a common method they observed, in
order to conceal their numbers. When our camp was made secure, some few
cattle were killed and we all went to supper, and then laid us down
under our tent clothes, for we did not set our tents up, neither did we
pull off our lambers, but lay close under the fortifications, prepared
for an attack; the slaves that carried the provision were planted in the
center.

We arose by break of day, putting our guns through little holes which we
had left in our wall on purpose, and kneeled to fight with the more
ease, and to take the better aim. We had not been in readiness above ten
minutes before we saw them coming down with fury upon us. Whilst we were
preparing to receive them, another party appeared on the contrary side,
and proposed to have come upon our backs, but as we were in a circle we
were all front. Our shells were immediately sounded, and our drums
beaten, but we soon altered this for another kind of noise. When they
came within thirty yards of us, they fired briskly, still approaching,
and having no notion of our wall, expected we should soon retreat from
behind the boughs. I observed their eyes red with smoking jermaughla,
which made them more resolute than usual. Of this I shall give a
particular description after the account of the engagement. Ry-Opheck,
with a body of men, attacked one of our entrances; he came skipping
along, his eyes glowed like fire; he had a lance in one hand, and a gun
in the other; his people ran after him in so furious a manner, that
Trodaughe and his people, who should have defended the passage, gave
way. We were employed on our side, and knew nothing of it till he had
got within our camp; at which time one of our chief men turning about
and seeing Ry-Opheck stabbing our men, fired at him, and shot him in the
belly. When he found himself wounded, he retreated, and fell about
thirty or forty yards from the place: his people, instead of revenging
his cause, turned backward when he did. How common men will sometimes
mimic a general’s behaviour! But when they saw him fall, they returned
to bring off his body, and this brought on a warm engagement in the open
field; for deaan Afferrer jumped over the works, and most of us, who
were his people, after him, and forced them to retreat. Here one, who
was distinguished from the rest by his yellow complexion, and who seemed
of superior rank, took aim at me, but luckily missing me, I wounded him
in the thigh and ran up to him. I found his hand was full of powder, in
order to charge again, and he threatened me hard, but I snatched his
lance from him, and prevented him from either doing me any farther
mischief, or hurting any body else. Another such push on the contrary
side so totally defeated the enemy, that they flew for it; and we
pursued them, but not indeed very far; because we were unwilling to
divide ourselves, lest Woozington should have turned and taken the
advantage of our confusion, which he certainly would have done, had an
opportunity offered.

When we returned to our camp, the deaans all assembled at deaan Crindo’s
tent, who took notice of each individual man according to his merit,
returning them thanks for their courage and conduct. He next made
inquiry what men were lost on our side, and found no more than sixteen
killed, and thirteen wounded. After that he sent out to number the dead
bodies of the enemy, and found the total amounted to one hundred and
seventy-five; among whom were sixteen persons of distinction; two of
Woozington’s younger sons, Metorolahatch and Rer Fungenzer; his nephews,
Ry-Opheck and Rer Chula; the names of the rest I never heard. Deaan
Crindo gave orders that the bodies of these sixteen great men should be
cut to pieces and scattered about the field, that their friends might
not bury them. Two or three days afterwards we marched farther into
Merfaughla, plundering and spoiling all their plantations.

As these people are more addicted to smoke jermaughla than any others,
it will be proper to give a description of it here. It is a plant that
grows about five feet high, and bears a small long leaf with a cod,
which contains about a dozen seeds like hempseed. These leaves and seeds
are mingled together, and laid in the sun for three or four days
successively, till they are very dry, and so prepared, are fit to be
smoked. Their pipes are made of reeds, or rather small canes. Sometimes
they make use of a very long shell, which answers the end proposed. The
quality of it is such that it makes them drunk; their eyes look red and
fiery, and their looks fierce and savage. It is easy to know a man who
smokes jermaughla; whilst the effects last, they are more vigorous and
resolute, acting as it were like madmen. Those who are too much addicted
to it are good for nothing but during the time they are intoxicated with
it. My curiosity led me once to smoke a little myself; but it made my
head so giddy, that I was drunk, as it were, for three days together,
and so sick that I never meddled more with it.

Our spies were two days before they could discover any cattle. At
length, however, they informed us they had heard some bellow, whereupon
a thousand men were detached to fetch them. They were gone a whole week;
they returned, however, with above two thousand beeves, and two hundred
and fifty captives, women and children. This great prize made them fond
of a second expedition; so, upon a consultation, a new camp was formed,
and fortified in the same manner as before; in which deaan Crindo
remained with four thousand men, whilst two thousand went out to
plunder; and on their return two thousand more were to go.

Deaan Afferrer, deaan Sambo, Rer Mimebolambo, and Rer Befaugher, went
out with two thousand men. We had three or four for our guides who were
perfectly well acquainted with the country, and knew where the cattle
were usually fed. We were two days before we came to any of their
tracks, and then they were driven off, and, as appeared by their marks,
quite different ways. So our army divided, deaan Sambo and Rer Befaugher
went northward, and we south-west. We marched in the tracks all day and
all the next night, as it was moonshine. We found ourselves in the
morning near the sea, where they had driven the beasts to the margin of
the water, that the ebbing and flowing and the wash of the sea might
efface their footsteps on the sands; as indeed it did in a great
measure: but we continued our march all day, till we found out where
they turned off towards the woods. The next morning our spies came in,
and informed us, that they heard a cow bellow. We soon came to the
plain, where we found a hundred at least, but these were not sufficient;
and therefore, narrowly observing their footsteps, we traced them
farther, and found eight or nine hundred more. Here were besides two or
three hundred sheep, which we killed, the best of them we dressed, and
left the others behind us. However, we were in great want of water, for
we had none for nearly two days. At length one of our scouts discovered
a pond, where the cattle used to drink, and this, though hot and foul,
we eagerly drank, as we could get no better. Till this time we saw no
enemies, though we expected them, for we could see the cow-herds fly
from their cattle, in order, no doubt, to alarm their masters. And as
some of us were taking up this water, as clean as we could, in our
calabashes, and whilst one in particular was stooping down to wash his
lamber, a volley of shot was fired amongst us before we perceived any
body. We looked up and saw about eight or ten men, who ran back into the
wood, which extended along on the other side of the water, within three
or fourscore yards. We fired at them, but they vanished out of sight.
None of us were hurt, but the man who was washing his lamber; he
received a shot in his fundament, of which he instantly expired.

Though I had been superstitiously addicted to observe certain fixed
characters, or hieroglyphics, when they occurred to me in dreams, which
was indeed but seldom, and used to find they foretold some things to me;
yet I could not but observe a remarkable instance which we had here of
relying on dreams, and I did not fail taking notice of it to deaan
Afferrer, and thereupon to turn their superstitious devotions to their
owleys into ridicule. For seeing me come in a hurry, and hearing guns go
off, he asked, “What news?” “Nothing,” said I, “but a man was killed by
the order of his gods.” “How!” says the deaan, “by the order of his
gods? I do not understand you.” “Why,” says I, “a man prayed to his
owley last night, and when he lay down, bid it not fail to come when he
was asleep. The demon which attends his owley, according to his desire,
came, and told him in a dream, or, which is the same thing, he dreamed
he told him, that he must wash his lamber the next morning. He went
along with us in obedience to this divine vision, to the watering place,
though he had no other business there; and as he stooped to wash his
lamber, was killed by a random shot, which he received in his posteriors
from some of our fugitive enemies, who fired, ran away, and hurt nobody
else.” I was under no apprehensions of deaan Afferrer’s anger on this
piece of raillery, for persecution on account of difference in religion
is not thought of there.

I remember one instance, whilst I lived with deaan Mevarrow, of a piece
of bigotry more blind and senseless, if possible, than this. A young man
had an owley, the demon of which was called Ry-Leffu. He made his
addresses one night to him, and Ry-Leffu in a dream told him, that his
brother must shoot at him. Early in the morning he took above an hour’s
walk to his brother, told his dream, and desired him to perform the
order of Ry-Leffu. His brother endeavoured to dissuade him from it, but
the other insisted it must be done, or worse would ensue. “Well then,”
said he, “I will shoot near you, but take care to miss you.” “No,” said
the bigoted idiot, “it must be executed according to order, without the
least prevarication; for I am fully persuaded that the demon will defend
me from all harm.” At length he prevails on his brother, who loads his
piece, and stands about thirty yards distant, and fires at his lower
parts; but notwithstanding all his precaution he broke a leg; and then,
blaming himself for his credulity, and being so easily overruled in an
action he no ways approved of, ran with tears in his eyes to the
assistance of the wounded bigot. In short, with the usual means,
together with some of the fat of a sacrifice, laid on the owley of
Ry-Leffu, the wound was healed, but he never recovered the free use of
that leg.

We drove our cattle to the seaside, the same way we came, by the verge
of the water, and went round the bay called St. John’s. I took
particular notice of it; there is a ridge of rocks which seemed to
extend quite across it, so as to leave no entrance; but were there a
channel wide enough for ships to sail in, it would be a very commodious
harbour, the waters being smooth within. Not far from hence, as I have
heard, on the coast of Merfaughla, a French ship was cast away about two
or three years before ours, and the whole crew destroyed; but the reason
of their inhuman murder, or the particular circumstances of it, I could
never learn. They have no canoes, either here or in Anterndroea, for
which reason the natives can have no commerce with ships. For they are
very treacherous to white men of any in the island. Whether their little
acquaintance with Europeans gives them a dread of them, I cannot say;
but I am sensible they imagine that white men are extremely addicted to
fighting, and not so tender-hearted as themselves. This received notion
may be a great motive to their destroying them on very trivial
provocations; for they are always jealous that the white men have some
cruel designs upon them. So that they are ever on their guard, dreading
the audacity and superior skill which the Europeans have over them in
point of war.

As to their mercy. In such places where they have subdued them, as the
French did in Antenosa, they made them all slaves, inverted the whole
order of their government; and most of them being illiterate seamen, who
took upon them to rule, they showed no regard, either to morality,
civility, or indeed common decency; made no distinction of persons,
confounded all order, and treated every black as if he were a brute; and
so much inferior to themselves, as not to have the least right or title,
in their opinions, to the common privileges of human creatures. So that
to kill one of them was no more than killing a dog, or any other noxious
animal whatsoever. I do not make this as a general reflection on the
French only, though if credit were to be given to half that the natives
say, they were guilty of the most scandalous and execrable actions. Our
own countrymen (too much addicted to their follies and vices) are not
exempt from the just cause of this scandal upon white men; for the
conduct of our British pirates, and others too, who are not willing to
be thought inhuman, has been barbarous to the last degree. And in the
countries of Anterndroea and Merfaughla, where no stories are told but
what are very strange; and as they cannot distinguish by experience,
that wicked men are the product of every land; and having seen no good
ones here, every white man is looked upon by them as much a monster as a
cannibal is by us.

We returned to our camp with our booty four days before Rer Befaugher,
who not only got a good prize of cattle, but of captives likewise: which
they discovered by the observance of a smoke. Deaan Crindo was in pain
to be at home, lest deaan Woozington should go into his country and
plunder it; but Rer Mundrosser and deaan Mussecorro would take their
turn to see what they could find, and return with slaves as well as
cattle. We had no enemy all this time come near us; for deaan Trongha
stayed in the camp till we returned. I told deaan Afferrer I would go
and pay deaan Sambo a visit as before, on purpose to conceal my visit to
the other. He treated me with the same good manners as at first; but
whilst we were in discourse, one of deaan Afferrer’s slaves came in and
told me his master desired to speak with me. I durst not speak privately
to deaan Trongha before him, nor would I stay, as he would have had me;
but went directly with the man, being apprehensive of some ill
treatment. When I came, he was in a terrible passion, charging me with
being deceitful; and asking me, if I intended to go away with them? He
would take care, however, that I should not go out of Anterndroea. I
might go any where among his own countrymen; but he would not part with
me. I perceived he was determined to be my master, though he was a much
better than deaan Mevarrow; for he never offered to strike, much less to
kill me. It was fourteen days before Rer Mundrosser returned; he
brought, likewise, several slaves as well as cattle. As soon as the
cattle were divided, which was the next day, the army marched back into
Anterndroea; for deaan Crindo would not consent that the Feraignharians
should go home, till they had accompanied him into his own country, and
till he was out of danger. Our habitation on Yong-gorvo hills lay in the
way. Deaan Trongha, with his brother and cousin, came the night before
we parted, to take their leave of deaan Afferrer; and after some general
discourse, he said if you will part with your white man, I will give you
three slaves for him. Though this was a handsome price, yet my master,
for so I must call him, made answer, I will not take three times three
for him. So no more was said, and deaan Trongha went his way. The next
morning before they marched, I had the opportunity of seeing one of the
Feraignher men; whereupon I desired him to assure his general that I
would be with them in three or four days at farthest; for I was
determined to run away, and follow their tracks at all adventures. At
present, indeed, I was prevented; because as they were jealous of me,
two men were ordered never to let me go out of their sight, either by
night or day, till we got home. And for two months afterwards, I was
never suffered to go any where without somebody with me.

Before I take my farewell of Anterndroea, my readers may justly expect
an account of such things as I thought most worthy of observance, and
which have not hitherto been described; and which, indeed, are but few,
considering the great variety of things, which a more curious person
than myself would have employed himself in inquiring into. But when they
consider how young I was when I first came here, how I passed the prime
of my years in slavery among these savages, and the little or no hopes I
had of ever making my escape; it will not, I presume, be expected, that,
at this time, I should have known what was worth a virtuoso’s regard. I
shall not, however, supply these deficiencies of mine, as many
travellers frequently do, with inventions of my own. I could not help
knowing such things as were of daily service, and in common with other
places; such as bonanas, plantanes, monkies, turtle, and a hundred other
things of the like nature; of which it would be impertinent to give a
particular detail.

There is no good thing to be met with, either on the trees, or in the
earth, that lie within three or four miles of the sea; nothing but short
prickly wood, that bears no eatable fruit. In the country there is great
variety; among which is a currant that grows on a tree, not a bush, as
in Europe, and is very pleasant. Here is a very large tree likewise that
bears a plumb; which is black when ripe, and as big as a cherry, with
little stones like those of grapes. There are thorns too on the tree
about two inches long. Here is a fruit like a sloe, which grows also on
a prickly bush, but is very sweet. Another fruit grows on the most
stately trees, that are speckled like a sparrow’s egg, and in the same
shape, which is full of seeds, and very juicy. It is looked upon as an
infallible cure for fluxes; the leaf of it is like that of a pear-tree.
Here is a tree, the leaves and tender sprigs whereof will sting like
nettles. The root of this is of great service when water is scarce,
which it often is in many parts of this country; and as this root is
spongy, it retains abundance of juice. We beat it in a wooden mortar (as
we beat our Guinea corn) and express the liquor. They make ropes of the
bark of this tree. Here is wood in plenty fit for building; as also some
cedar and ebony, but none proper to make ship masts of. The plains are
well covered with divers kinds of grass, and of various colours; which
grow much taller than any in England. They never cut any down for hay,
for before the old is dead, there is new springing up under it; but the
old grass is commonly set on fire. Here is also some tobacco, which they
smoke in reeds; or shells, as they do the jermaughla.

When I was in deaan Murnanzack’s country, I frequently went fishing; but
they have no canoes, as I hinted before, so we only go upon the rocks
and fish with hooks and lines, and not with nets. Night is the best
time, when it is low water. Then we carry lights with us, and take the
fish out of deep little holes (as the negroes say) fast asleep. Here are
abundance of lobsters and crawfish, which never run away at sight of the
lights. We have also a sharp pike made for no other purpose than to
strike fish. Here are eels and the sword-fish, and some such other fish
as are common to countries in the same climate: but many of a species I
never saw elsewhere. Here is one fish as round as a turnip, and full of
prickles; which, I suppose, may be called the sea hedgehog, but in their
language it is called sorer-reake. Here is likewise great plenty of fine
turtle.

I never knew the country infested by any beasts of prey, such as tigers,
lions, &c., the wild foxes, wild boars, and wild dogs are the worst we
have in Anterndroea. Here is a creature of the species and form of the
serpent; which is very large. One of which I killed, by tearing its huge
jaws asunder with my hands; it was no way venomous, nor did I ever know
of a serpent which killed or hurt any man by its venom. Several of them
have been bitten by them, and no worse hurt has accrued, than is
customary from the bite of any beast.

While I was in Yong-gorvo, our employment as well as diversion was
principally hunting wild cattle; and here I observed the people call
these cattle, Hattoy’s cattle, or Anomebay Rer Hattoy. The tradition
they have of their original, is, that they belonged to a great man named
Hattoy; and he being very avaricious would kill none of them, but let
them multiply and run about wherever they would. He lived in the desert,
but his family and people, after his decease, lived with a king of an
inland dominion, called Untomaroche, and left most of their cattle
behind them. Others say, that Rer Hattoy and most of his people were
killed; and that the other cattle being better approved of, his were
neglected, and strolling about in the forests, they multiplied without
interruption. But this no way accounts for the manner in which they came
into the island. This Hattoy, as all allow, was a native; so that I am
apt to believe these were the original cattle of the country, and the
tame beeves were imported; for there are the same cattle with humps on
their backs, on the coast of Natal, and Dillagoe in Africa. These were
preferred to the others, and bred up whilst the Hattoy’s were neglected.
And what confirms me in this notion is, here are two sorts of people, as
if they were two distinct species of mankind; of which I shall have
occasion to give a full account in a more proper place.

When deaan Afferrer had kept strict watch over me for about two months,
and thought the track of the Feraingher army was impossible to be found,
as the grass was grown up again, he took me with him hunting these
Hattoy’s cattle again. We had very good diversion, had not the
conclusion proved tragical; for we killed five cows, and had thoughts of
departing: but a bull ran off with a lance in his side, and we, being
loth to lose it, pursued him, and stuck two or three more in his belly.
When his wounds smarted, he grew enraged and turned upon us. One man
more bold than the rest threw another lance, and hit him on the back.
Upon which he ran directly at the man; we hallooed to frighten him off,
but he pursued his adversary; and when he had overtaken him, he tossed
him several yards above his head. The ground where he fell was stony,
and we were afraid of throwing lances lest we should hit the man, who
was all this time endeavouring to rise; but the bull pushed him down, as
often as he made the attempt, and gored him to that degree with his
horns, that he soon died. When we perceived the man was past all
recovery, we threw more lances at the bull, till he fell down like a
log. I have known them fight so long, that they have been absolutely
dead before they fell; for they will fix their feet so wide, and die
standing so firmly, that we have been obliged to pull them down by the
tail. They were forced to dress the meat this evening, because of going
home next day with the corpse of their neighbour. When we had roasted
the beef, and made an end of our supper, we made up our enters for the
next morning. For my part, I packed up as much as I could conveniently
carry; for I was determined to go away this very night. I laid down,
indeed, when the rest did, but could not sleep much, it may be supposed,
for thinking of the hazardous journey I was about to undertake. Every
one else slept soundly enough, as they were tired, and their bellies
were full; so about midnight I took up my burden, and away I marched,
directing my course to the northward, not without recommending myself to
the good providence of God to be my conductor.

The instructions I received from Ry-Nanno, and which on inquiry I found
from others, was to go to the southward, till I came to Vohitch Futey;
and to leave it on my right hand, directing my course between the north
and west, till I got to the great river Oneghaloyhe, which goes to St.
Augustine’s bay; then to keep along the river till I saw highland
running along the westernmost parts of the forest: and then when I had
passed over the river, to go away to the westward.

I walked very briskly all night, and at break of day I saw the white
mountains very near. By this I perceived I had made a great progress,
and therefore would not conceal myself as at first I proposed; but
proceeded on my journey, looking sharply about me, thinking it morally
impossible for them to overtake and find me, should they have attempted
it. I went, therefore, merrily on, singing Madagascar songs; for I had
forgotten all my English ones. The bellowing of the wild cattle would
now and then make me start; imagining they were my pursuers. When I came
to a pleasant brook, I baited there; and at sunset I looked out for a
covert in a thicket to lie in; but I could not find one near at hand. So
I was contented to repose myself in the open plain, pulling up a
sufficient quantity of grass for a bed and a pillow, and making a small
fire to warm my beef. I did not think proper to make a great one, for
fear of its being discerned at a distance; for in the afternoon I
observed some fires to the eastward of the mountain. I was disturbed in
my sleep by night-walkers, whom I imagined were my pursuers; and
accordingly I took up my lances in order to defend myself; but when I
was thoroughly awake, I found they were only some of Hattoy’s cattle,
that snorted at the smell of my fire, and ran away, much more afraid of
me than I was of them.

The second day in the morning, I stayed till the sun appeared before I
moved forward, that I might not be deceived in my course; for being
abreast of Vohitch Futey, I walked more easily; and though I was under
no apprehensions of being overtaken by deaan Afferrer’s people, yet as
there might be others in the forest a hunting of beeves, I was very
circumspect. Nothing remarkable happened this day. I looked out early
this evening for a lodging, the clouds gathering very black, and soon
found a large thick tree, where I made me a fire, warmed me some meat,
and hung up the remainder, to keep it as dry as I could; for I had
nothing else that could be prejudiced by the rain. At length, it poured
down as I expected, in a violent manner, attended with thunder and
lightning; it soon penetrated my roof: however, I crowded myself up
together, with my head on my knees, my hands betwixt my legs, and my
little lamber over my ears. The rain ran down like a flood, but as it
was warm I did not so much regard it; in three or four hours it was fair
weather again, and I laid me down and took a comfortable nap.

The next morning I dried my beef at a fire, which I made for that
purpose, for it was the third day after it was killed; but I was very
careful of it, not knowing how to kill more at that time: so I put it up
in clean grass and marched forward. The mountains over which I was to
pass seemed very high, craggy, and thick with wood, and no path or
opening could I find. It looked dismal enough, but I was determined to
run all hazards. Those mountains seemed to me to traverse the island,
and appeared, as we call it at sea, like double land; one hill behind
another. I saw nothing all this day but a few wild cattle, and now and
then a wild dog; the weather was fair, and I slept soundly all this
night.

The fourth day I walked till noon, at which time I baited; my beef was
now but very indifferent. In the afternoon as I was walking I saw about
a dozen men before me; upon this I skulked in a bush, peeping to observe
whether they had discovered me; but I was soon out of my pain, for they
were surrounding some cattle a good way to the westward on a hill. I was
likewise on another hill, so that I could see them throw their lances
and kill three beeves, which I was well assured were more than they
could carry away with them at once. I stayed where I was, proposing when
they were gone to have some beef. To work they fell immediately, cutting
up the beasts, and each man making up his burden, hanging the remainder
up in a tree that the wild dogs might not get it, and went home to the
eastward. As soon as they were gone, and I had looked well about me, I
threw away my bad meat, made up to the tree, and took as much as I could
well carry. Away I marched with my booty towards the mountains, not
daring to rest lest they should return and discover me. In less than an
hour I reached the foot of the hills in the thick woods, and finding no
path or track of men, or any hopes of any, not knowing what to do, I
determined to go through all; but as I happened on a run of water, I
took up my quarters near it, made me a fire, cut me some wooden spits,
and roasted my beef; I kept my fire burning all night lest the foxes
should come and attack me.

The next morning I made up my enter with grass, binding it with the bark
of trees, and moved forward up the hill. My burden was now much lighter.
In an hour, though I could find no path but what some swine had made, I
got to the top of it. I perceived here were faungidge and verlaway
enough, with which I was very well pleased, though I did not at present
much want them. I climbed a high tree to take a survey, but could
discover no entrance: nothing but hills and vales one beyond another; a
cragged dismal desert was all that presented itself to my view. I would
have descended had I not been in danger of being seen by the hunters;
besides I could not tell which way to look, whether east or west, for
the passage; so setting a lance up on end, I turned the way it fell,
though I imagined it was due north, or rather somewhat to the eastward.
However, superstition prevailed where reason was no way concerned, for I
was as likely to be right one way as another; and in case I went to the
northward, so long as I knew it, I must go as often as I could to the
westward; as sailors are forced to do, run their latitude first and
their longitude afterwards. I went down this hill and up another, which
was about an hour’s walk; but when I came to descend this, it was right
up and down. Without due thought I threw down my lances, hatchet, and
burden, thinking to descend by a very tall tree, whose top branches
reached close to the brow, but I could not do it. However, I made ropes
of the bark of a tree, and fixing them to the strongest branches, I slid
down, I dare say, no less than thirty feet rather than I would lose my
lances and other materials. I passed over a fine spring and run of water
in the vale. Though the hill on the other side was a craggy steep rock,
I found a way to ascend it; and on the top climbed another tree to take
my view, but had the same dismal prospect. Here I dug faungidge, it
being sunset, and seeing a hole in a large rock I had thought to take up
my lodging there; but peeping in, on a sudden I heard such an outcry,
which, with the echo in the rock, made so confused a noise, that I knew
not what it could be. My fears prevailed, and I imagined it might be
pursuers, for it drew nearer and nearer; so setting my back to a tree,
with a lance in each hand, I waited for the murderers; when instantly
came squeaking toward me a herd of wild swine, who ran away more
terrified than myself. After I was well recovered from my fright, I made
two fires for fear of the foxes, and then laid me down on my stony bed,
for here was no grass.

The next morning, which was the sixth day, I made a hearty meal on
faungidge and beef, and the hill extending north and south, I went
straight on till it declined gradually into a valley, in which was a
small river that ran westward; I am apt to think it was the head of
Manner-ronder, where we fought deaan Woozington. By the time I arrived
at the top of the next hill, it drew towards evening, for I was not much
less than two hours ascending it; and yet, considering my burden, though
it was not very heavy now, I went a very good pace. As I was looking out
for a commodious lodging, that is to say, a place with the fairest
stones in it, I uncovered a swarm of bees; this was a joyful sight, for
it was food that would not spoil with keeping. I soon cut down a
vounturk to secure the honey in, and smoked them out.

I made such a hearty meal this night of honey, faungidge, and beef, that
I slept too soundly; insomuch that I was waked with a severe
mortification for my thoughtless security. A fox caught hold of my heel,
and would have dragged me along; whereupon I startled, and catching up a
firebrand gave him such a blow as staggered him; but as soon as he
recovered he flew at my face. By this time I was upon my feet and
recovered one of my lances, with which I prevented him from ever
assaulting me more, but his hideous howling brought more about him. I
saw three whose eyes sparkled like diamonds, however they kept at a
distance; for with some dry light wood that lay near me I made a blaze
directly, in order to keep a flame all night, but did not wake to renew
it as I ought to have done: so that both my fires being almost reduced
to ashes, one of them boldly ventured between them, and it was very
happy for me that he did not seize upon my throat; for when men have
negligently slept where they haunt, I have known them meet with such a
mischance. After I had made up my fires, and put my enemies to flight, I
examined my heel and found two great holes on each side, where his teeth
had entered; I bound it up with a piece of my lamber in the best manner
I could; and making a great fire, threw the fox upon it by way of
resentment. I had not that pleasure in eating my breakfast this morning
as I had in my last night’s supper; besides, my beef was now a little
too tender; however, as I had honey enough for a week and here was
faungidge in plenty, I did not concern myself much about it.

I walked on this seventh day; and though I favoured my lame foot as much
as I could, yet I rested but once all day. This way happened to be plain
and easy. At evening I came to a place where lay several bodies of trees
which were dead and dry. Thinking this, therefore, a proper lodging, I
made four very large fires, sat me down to supper, and afterwards
ventured to go to sleep with all those fires around me. But my heel now
grew so very painful, and was swelled to that degree, that I could not
go forward the next day; but as there was faungidge enough within twenty
or thirty yards of me, I dug up several, and determined to continue here
till my foot grew better. My beef was soon gone, but faungidge was both
meat and drink to me. I saved part of my beef-fat to dress my heel with;
which, as I gave it six days’ rest, took down all the swelling. During
this time I made such large fires every night, that could they have been
seen, were like those of an army. I had not far to go for wood or any
thing else that I wanted, or at least that I could any way expect in
such a place.

After these six days’ rest, it being the fourteenth since I left deaan
Afferrer, I went forward, and that day passed over three very high
mountains. By this time my honey was all gone, and I could find no more;
so that I lived altogether upon faungidge.

The fifteenth day I walked very smartly again, and passed over several
hills that were very rough, craggy, and tiresome. I took particular care
however to get dry wood enough, for I never ventured to sleep without
four fires.

The sixteenth day I had not travelled above three hours, before I
perceived the earth to be of another colour; it was chalk then, and now
clay. This excited my curiosity, to climb the first high tree I could
meet with, from whence I discovered an opening to the northward, with
which I was highly delighted, but it was too far for me to reach that
night, so I took up my lodging as before. This night I was disturbed by
a herd of wild swine.

The seventeenth day I walked very hard, being very desirous to get
through this wilderness, which still abounded with hills. About noon I
reached the open country, where I could look about me with some pleasure
and walk upon level ground. I was now like one just delivered from a
prison, having been twelve days in this mountainous desert. I was
actually travelling near six days, and I imagine I did not walk less
than twenty miles a day; it might have been passed indeed in three days,
had I been so fortunate as to have found out the path.

I had not been long in the plain before I came to a little wood, where I
took up my lodging, because here was firing and faungidge in plenty,
which I was very glad to see, having been under some melancholy
apprehensions of wanting provision in the plains; but I had soon a still
greater hope of being better supplied, for in the night I was waked by
the roaring of a bull, by which I was very well assured it was the great
northern forest of wild cattle, which Ry-Nanno had informed me of.

The next day, which was the eighteenth, I saw several herds of Hattoy’s
cattle; and perceived there were more here than in the southern forest.
I looked wishfully about to discover some hunters if I could, or to
observe if any crows hovered about any particular place, for then I
might reasonably expect some beast that had been wounded was fallen
there. In the afternoon I came to a river, which was both deep and
large. As I was searching for a proper place to wade through or swim
over, I spied a large alligator; I still walked upon the banks, and in a
short time saw three more. This was a mortifying stroke and almost
dispirited me. I went on till I came to a shallower place, where I
entered the river about ten yards, with a view to swim over the rest in
four or five minutes, but seeing an alligator make towards me, I ran
back directly; he pursued me till I got into very shallow water, and
then he turned back into the deep, for they will never attack a man near
the shore. It nettled me to be stopped by a river that was scarcely a
hundred yards over. At length I recollected that at Bengal there are the
largest alligators in the world, and so bold that they will take a man
out of a shallow boat, insomuch that whenever we came off from the shore
in the night we made one small fire at the head, and another at the
stern of the boat, which no alligator would ever come near. Distress
puts a man’s invention upon the rack; something, thought I, like this
must be done, for it was to no purpose to stay here, neither could I go
back; so making choice of a stick for a firebrand, I cut it into long
splinters, and waited till it grew dark, then, after I had bound my two
fire-sticks to the top of one of my lances, I went into the water, and
recommending myself to the care of Providence, I turned upon my back,
and swam over with my two lances and hatchet in one hand, and my
firebrand burning in the other; my lamber being twisted and tied fast
about my lances.

The place where I pitched upon to swim over had a gap through the
thicket on each side one against another, which made it look like a
common passage either for men or cattle. No sooner was I landed, than I
heard some wild cattle grazing; whereupon I extinguished my fire
immediately, and washed myself as silently as possible, that they should
not smell me. I stood some time close under the cover of a thick bush in
the passage expecting that they would come to drink. The wind, as it
luckily fell out, was with them, so that they could not scent me, though
they often snorted for that purpose. I stood prepared with my lance, and
did not wait long before a numerous herd came running through the
passage to the river, and as they passed by, I pushed my lance with all
the force I was able into above forty of them, and used my utmost
endeavours to wound them in the belly. They ran roaring away, fighting,
and goring one another, to revenge as it were the blows they felt, for
they expected no other enemies than what were amongst themselves. I
thought I had struck a sufficient number, and hoped some of their wounds
would prove mortal; however, I would not run any hazard by night, and
therefore sat down contented without roast meat, and secured myself from
their attacks in a thick wood. The next morning I went to see what
success I had met with, and I found one bull and three cows dead upon
the sand; I soon cut up the youngest and fattest and carried it to my
quarters, near which I made an oven to bake it. This is a common
practice, though I never described it before; however it is made after
the following manner: a hole is dug about five feet in length, two over,
and about three in depth; this is filled with wood, which is then
kindled; on the top of the fire I put about a dozen large stones, each
weighing about a pound. Whilst the fire was burning I cut off the bark
from a tree, called the succore, and took the outer part away, and the
inner being pliant and lying flat it served for the cover of my oven.
When the fire was burnt to ashes, I laid three or four green sticks
across, that my beef might rest upon them; the stones being red-hot, I
placed them about the bottom and sides; I laid likewise more sticks over
the top, and then the bark covered all close with the earth. This is our
method of baking meat in the forests. I broiled some for my breakfast,
and then went out to see what farther execution I had done, and found
six more beeves lying dead upon the plain: however I had enough here.
When I returned, my beef was as well baked as it would have been at any
baker’s in London. When it was cold, I made it up into an enter, but
went no farther this day.

The next morning I went forward well pleased with my load: though I
discovered some smoke to the eastward, yet I saw no people, but many
herds of wild cattle; as there were several little woods in this plain,
I never wanted either a covert for a lodging, or grass to make me a
tolerably soft bed to lie on. The country was pleasant enough, and
travelling was so easy, that I determined if it should be my misfortune
to meet with as bad a master as Mevarrow, and there were no hopes of
getting to England, that I would run away and live by myself in this
forest.

The twenty-first day in the morning I saw several wild dogs engaged
with, and pulling down a bull that had been wounded as I imagined some
time before, for I never knew the dogs attack them unless they were. It
was no business of mine to interrupt them, and if it were, it would have
been a very dangerous thing to make the attempt, for though they do not
seek to assault a man, yet upon provocation they have been known to
destroy several. This night was the first time I ever felt mosquitoes in
the island; for, lying in the evening in a covert near a run of water,
they stung me to that degree, that I was forced to shift my quarters,
and as it was moonlight I got up and walked three or four miles farther
to the top of a hill, where I slept without molestation. I had no
occasion to light more than one fire, for there was no great danger of
wild beasts here.

On the twenty-second day I discovered a fog in one long canal that ran
from east to west, which as it continued all the day long, and at a vast
distance, I conceived it to hang over the great river Oneghaloyhe, that
runs into Augustine-bay. This put new life into me, to think I drew near
to a seaport; I saw two men that day laden with beef, and would have
spoken to them, but they dropped their enters and ran from me, though I
called and laid down mine, and went towards them. As soon as they
imagined I was gone, I saw them return and take their beef up again.

On the twenty-third day in the morning the fog appeared again, but much
nearer. I walked as hard as I well could, being desirous to get to the
river: it was afternoon, however, before I reached within a mile of it,
and then the bushes and thorny small wood were so thick that it was with
great difficulty, and many severe scratches, that I got to the river
side. When I saw the river so very broad I was surprised, for at least
it was twice as broad as the Thames at London. I had been informed that
a man might wade over it near the head, but that they always made use of
canoes to transport themselves over other parts, which way they got them
I cannot say, for my own part I had no such help. I made my fire, went
to supper, and then reposed myself to rest, or rather to study which way
I should get over. In the morning I determined to look out for some old
trees or branches that were fallen, and in a short time I met with
several that were fit for my purpose, not only great arms but trunks of
trees broken off by tempests, these I dragged down to the river side. In
the next place I made it my business to find out a creeper, which is as
large as a withy, but twining round trees is very pliant. I lopped the
superfluous branches off of six long and thick arms of the trees, and
placing three at bottom and three at top, I bound them together, making
what we call in the East Indies, a catamaran. I built it afloat in the
water, for otherwise I could not have launched it; and moored it to a
lance which I stuck in the shore for that purpose; I then fixed my enter
in order to preserve it as dry as I possibly could, as also my hatchet
and my other lance, after that I made a paddle to row with; then I
pulled up my lance and kept it in my hand to defend myself against the
alligators, in case any of them should assault me, for I was informed
they were very numerous and very fierce here. It blowed a fresh gale at
west against the stream, which in the middle made a sea, and gave me no
small concern; for I was in great danger of being overset and becoming a
prey to the alligators. It pleased God, however, to protect me, and I
landed safely on the other shore. This being a pretty good day’s work, I
determined not to go much farther that evening before I took up my
lodging.

On the twenty-fourth day, though I travelled a great way, yet nothing
material offered; I saw indeed a few wild cattle, but not near the
number that was on the other side of the river, and those too were
somewhat shyer, by which I concluded it to be an inhabited country.

On the twenty-fifth day my burden grew lighter and began to smell, but I
did not concern myself much about that, since I resolved to speak to the
first people I could see; for I remembered, that deaan Trongha had told
me that his town lay by the north side of this river. I forded over a
brook which runs into the great river. The country is very pleasant, and
here are abundance of palmetto trees, which they call satter-futey. They
bear a long leaf like a cocoa-nut tree, but the fruit is quite of
another nature: of these leaves the people make baskets, caps, &c. I saw
no wild cattle all this day.

On the twenty-sixth day, though I walked very hard again, yet I baited
in the heat of the day, and in the afternoon, making the best of my way,
I espied a smoke; and being determined to speak to those who made it I
mended my pace, lest they should be passengers only that baited as I
did, and would be gone; but I soon heard the tongues of several
children, who ran into the woods as soon as they saw me. Upon which,
immediately three men, armed with guns and lances, started out. I looked
behind me for a commodious shelter, not knowing what to think of them,
and retreated a little; which they perceiving, left their guns behind
them, and came towards me. Upon that I went to meet them, and, at a
distance, desired to know what king they belonged to. They answered
deaan Mernaugha, and as a farther testimony, perceiving that I was a
white man, they spoke two or three words in broken English; and after
that we shook hands, and saluted each other with the usual compliment,
salamonger. They invited me to go with them to their habitations, where
we sat down, and I gave them a short detail of my travels. They said
they had heard of me, and having some susers in the pot just boiled,
they desired me to eat with them. After which, I asked them several
questions relating to their trade, their war, and peace; and one of the
most experienced of them gave me the following melancholy account of it.

Our late king, Rer Vovvern, said he, killed himself with grief at an
irruption which Rer Trimmenongarevo made with nine thousand men, and
took his two daughters captives. Our prince pursued him with seven
thousand, but the enemy, by a stratagem, got privately into Feraignher,
and plundered it; deaan Woozington at the same time attacked the
southern parts, having made canoes and passed the great river; the other
passages being first stopped. He took also a great many people, but
deaan Trongha, and his brother Rer Befaugher, who stayed at home with
two thousand men, disconcerted his measures and prevented his carrying
off the captives; which so enraged Woozington, who was a man of a
barbarous disposition, that he slew a great many women and children. Rer
Trimmenongarevo took a contrary method, for he sent messengers with
friendly invitations to the people to come and live in his country and
be his subjects, and with repeated assurances, that he would restore to
them their wives and children; which promise he punctually performed,
and still continues so to do; so that some hundreds are gone away: and
he still so embarrasses us, who are unwilling to leave our native
country, that many of us are obliged to fly into these forests and
secret recesses in order to be safe, contenting ourselves, as you see,
with what the country naturally affords us; for we dare neither plant
nor keep cattle, lest we should be surprised. We have another petty
prince in the mountains, who takes this opportunity to make incursions,
and helps to impoverish us, so that we have enemies all around us; and
those who remain in towns are almost famished. For we have no friends
but white men, and there has not been a ship come this way a long time;
and should they be apprized of our poverty they would come no more. Thus
this kingdom, which was lately the glory of the island, is now almost
reduced to nothing.

This melancholy tale so shocked me, that I sat mute and as fixed as a
statue, till the man perceiving my concern, roused me by asking me my
name; and if I had not thoughts of going to the king before I went to
deaan Trongha, as, they said, was my duty; but I told them I was a
freeman, and would act as I had already told them; so they gave me a
mat, and I lay down ruminating on the hard fortune that attended me; but
as Providence had taken care of me hitherto, I did not question but in
due time my deliverance would be accomplished; and with this resignation
I laid me down to rest.

These men were very courteous to me, and pressed me to stay two or three
days with them; but I only breakfasted there, giving them some of my
beef, which they accepted, though it was far from being good. When they
found I was determined to go, they made me a present of a parcel of
roasted susers to carry with me, and accompanied me as far as the path,
and showed me how to find these susers, which till then I had never
seen; they grow like wild yams, which were their principal diet. This
was the twenty-seventh day of my travels, and turning out of the path
into the wood, I hunted about for such an inn as had served me many a
night before; which I soon found, made a fire, and after supper slept
very contentedly.

The next morning I met with four men, who informed me, that though I
could not reach deaan Trongha’s town, yet I might Rer Befaugher’s, and
he would send a man to direct me. My way lay over a high hill, from
whence I saw the sea, and the road where the ships used to lie in
Augustine-bay; on the other hand was the great river, and the country
very pleasant along its banks. When I came to the bottom, some boys who
were tending their cattle ran up to me, for they are not afraid of white
men, and one of them very courteously offered to show me the way to the
town.

On my arrival, the people stared to see a white man without clothes;
some said, a ship was arrived; but most said, I could not come from a
ship naked, and without a hat. When I came near Rer Befaugher’s house, I
perceived he looked earnestly at me, not knowing me at first; but, when
I came nearer, he arose from his seat, clapped his hand to his mouth and
cried, “Ah! Ry-Robin, how came you here?” Had I been his brother, he
could not have embraced me with more affection. As soon as I was seated,
several came about me; some who knew me in the army asked me, who were
with me? And when I answered, nobody, they wondered how I could find the
way by myself; but when I informed them how I lost my way, and came
through the mountainous wilderness, and what stratagems I made use of to
pass the rivers, they were perfectly astonished.

Rer Befaugher took me into his house, and made me sup with him; he had
roast beef, and his wife brought milk on purpose for me. I asked about
the state of the country, and he gave much the same account I had heard
before; with this addition, that he expected every day that Rer
Trimmenongarevo would come, and ravage the whole country, for they were
altogether incapable of making any resistance; those, however, who were
the pillars of the land, were determined to stand till they were cut
down by death, and not to fly. For indeed, said he, we have nowhere to
go but into the sea, and we have no notion of living there as you white
men have.

When we had supped, and talked till I was sleepy, he sent a man with me
to a house prepared for my reception. The next morning I begged the
favour of him to send a man to direct me in the right road to deaan
Trongha’s; but he would go himself. I told him that it was too great a
condescension, and too much beneath his dignity, to attend a slave as I
was. He answered, that he never looked on white men as slaves, and that
he had waited on several. And Rer Vovvern, as well as he, had clothed
and maintained some who did not deserve it, but they did it for the sake
of others; for, says he, here have been some very quarrelsome people who
come ashore, and never go aboard again, and behave themselves shamefully
ill. I asked him what they trafficked for here. He said, for nothing but
provision, for which they gave them gold and silver in exchange, and
sometimes pieces of silk; and when they sail away, no one, nay, they
themselves don’t know to what country they are going: for they are
wicked, careless wretches, and their whole business is to plunder other
ships. I told him, they were to blame either to assist them, or sell
them any provisions; and that the government of England was at a
prodigious expense to fit out ships on purpose to destroy them, for they
spoil the merchants’ trade, and were a disgrace to their country. The
English, for the generality, said he, were very good people, and by the
trade which they drove with them, were of singular service to their
country. That he had been on board divers ships, and had met with
several captains, who were very honest men, for they used to receive him
in the most courteous manner, and entertain him with wine, punch, and
brandy; and sometimes another sort of liquor that was very bitter, what
the name of it was he could not tell, but they loved it themselves. I
told him it was beer. He said, yes; but he could never drink it with any
pleasure. Thus we went chatting along to deaan Trongha’s, which was
about two hours’ walk. When we arrived the people flocked round me, some
saying a samb-tuley; that is to say, a ship was arrived, but others said
no, for men seldom come naked from a ship.

When I came before deaan Trongha, I perceived he did not recollect me, I
offered to kneel and lick his feet, but he would not permit; saying, be
he who he may, he is a white man, and they shall never lick black men’s
feet. At length, his brother informed him who I was: no sooner had he
heard it than he rose up, and embraced me with abundance of joy and
friendship. When we had been seated some time, and I had given them an
account of my travels, he told me, I was still a very unfortunate man;
for they were in a very poor state and condition, and I should be
miserably mistaken, if I expected to live happy there. I told him, it
could not well be worse than it had been with me all along, and I was
determined to live with him all my life long, if he pleased to admit me
into his service, unless he would be so indulgent to me as to send me
home when a ship came. He told me, I should fare as he did himself; for
he looked on it as his duty to relieve a white man in distress, for the
favours he and his family had received from my countrymen. In short, he
received me with such tokens of friendship, and treated me with so much
tenderness, that my own father could not have shown me more compassion.
He lamented very much the deplorable circumstances to which his country
was reduced, and was extremely afraid lest the white men should know it;
for then, said he, they would never come to trade with us any more, nor
give me an opportunity of sending you to your native home.

When I had eaten and drunk with him, he took his leave of his brother,
being obliged to guard the slaves who were at work in the plantations,
lest they should be surprised and taken by small parties of their
northern enemy, who lay in ambuscade, in order to sally out, and carry
off what they could steal on a sudden, and so run away again. When we
were a little way out of town, we came to a spacious thicket of wild
canes, reeds, and rushes; in the midst of which were the plantations,
bounded on the other side with the great river Oneghaloyhe. Here were
plantains, bonanoes, sugar-canes, and rice, with all these the southern
country from whence I came were wholly unacquainted; but here were
likewise several things which I had seen before, as anbotty, anchoroko,
&c. These were but lately planted and sowed; the enemy having destroyed
all the plantations in the incursions they made, whilst deaan Trongha,
&c. were in the late war in Merfaughla. I began to suspect that he
intended to set me to work, but I soon perceived he had no such design;
for he gave me his gun, and told me since I was willing to be his
servant, all he should require of me should be to carry his gun, and
never to be the length of it from him, that in case of a surprise he
might have it at hand.

As we went homewards, some of our people climbed up tamarind trees, and
gathered abundance of the fruit. I asked them what they did with it. Eat
it said they. I told them, it was impossible to eat much of it, without
setting their teeth on edge. It is sour enough, indeed, said they, if we
do not put ashes to it to make it sweet. I laughed at them for their
ignorance, but when I came home there were platters full mixed with them
for our supper. The strings of the tamarinds, which are white, appearing
in it when thus mixed, I could not forbear comparing it to mortar with
hair in it; but when I tasted it, I found it was sweet beyond my
expectations. I could not, however, be rightly reconciled to it at
first, being prejudiced as men too frequently are, even against the
testimony of their senses. Deaan Trongha perceiving that I did not much
like my mess, assured me that this was always esteemed amongst them a
pleasant dish, when they had the greatest profusion of other things.
Sometimes, indeed, said he, we have nothing else to eat. I have seen
many odd things eaten, but nothing ever surprised me more than sour
tamarinds mixed with wood ashes, becoming sweet and palatable. Let the
chemists reason and philosophize upon it at their leisure, I can assure
them it is matter of fact; and can produce several gentlemen now living
in London, to testify the same who have seen me mix it. It did not
rightly agree with me, indeed, the first time I eat it; but after I was
used to it a little, I never found any inconvenience attend it
afterwards.

Deaan Trongha had two wives, who lived in separate apartments. He
divided himself pretty equally between them, living nearly as much at
one house as at the other, in order to prevent any jealousies on either
side, and to keep up a harmony between them. Now it is customary for
them to appoint every slave his proper mistress, to whose commands he is
peculiarly to attend; and it is her business to see what they want, and
give it them. He did not, however, appoint me any such service; but
said, that as I was a person in distress, and my lot by Providence was
cast amongst them, it was their duty to provide for all such; but as for
me, he had a more particular regard for my misfortunes, for the sake of
my fathers and brothers, (meaning Englishmen;) and for that reason, he
had ordered that I should be taken care of at both their houses, and had
free liberty to go to either of them at my pleasure, where I found the
best entertainment; and, indeed, as long as there was meat, I had my
proportionable share with them. Though he behaved himself with decency
enough to both of them, yet I observed the first wife was a greater
favourite than the other, upon which account, she was distinguished by
the title of his head wife. He was at her apartment when I came first,
and when these directions were given; so she immediately furnished me
with a pot or two, and calabash, &c. for my use; but as she had not
every thing I wanted, he sent a servant with me to the other, and she as
cheerfully supplied me with what my occasion required, chiding me in a
friendly manner for not coming sooner to pay her a visit: so I sat down
and had half an hour’s conversation with her; and to do them both
justice, their behaviour towards me was perfectly courteous and
engaging.

The next morning two messengers came from deaan Mernaugha; deaan Trongha
being desired to go and consult with the king on some affairs of
importance. When they were taking their leave, he would not let them
depart till he had killed a heifer to entertain them with,
notwithstanding provision was so very scarce; and here I found the same
generous manner of treating one another as was practised in Anterndroea,
for most of the people in town came about the house, and no one went
away without some portion of beef. As to their cookery, they have but a
slovenly manner of dressing their meat here, for the liver, as soon as
it was extracted, was thrown directly into the fire and broiled in smoke
and ashes, and the entrails were broiled likewise with but very little
cleaning. I had a piece of beef given me to dress at home, and we all
lived well as long as this lasted. When I went the next morning, the
deaan was dressing himself in order to go; for though he had no clothes
to put on, yet some time was spent in curling his hair and platting it
into knots. After he was shaved, the owley was brought out and dressed
to be carried before him, for he went in state. The friendship between
deaan Mernaugha and him not being over hearty or sincere, made him go in
more form than otherwise he would have done. I carried his gun after
him. We marched up an easy ascent of nearly two miles, when I perceived
we were near the sea; the descent on the other side extended to the
shore of St. Augustine-bay, where there were ships generally at anchor.
Here deaan Trongha showed me the spot of ground on which the English
built their houses during their residence in these parts. It was an
agreeable prospect to me, though at that time there were no ships. I saw
some canoes a considerable way out at sea; some men I could perceive
were striking and darting fish, and others in the water, as high as
their knees, at the same diversion; for the sand is almost flat, so that
one may walk at low water above a mile into the sea. The seacoast lay
almost north and south, but from whence I came, it lay east and west.
After we had passed through a wood, on a point of land, we came among
the towns which belonged to deaan Mernaugha. Every body stared to see a
white man naked, and at first took me for the Dutchman who had lived
amongst them, and who would have sometimes very odd freaks; but my fame
flew before me, and when I came to deaan Mernaugha’s, I was very well
known; for after the usual compliments were over, he asked “where was
the white man who came from Anterndroea;” I not being in sight, having
delivered my gun to my master. Whereupon I was called, and seated
amongst them. The king asked me about my travels, and the adventures I
had met with; and I very readily gratified him with my whole story at
large. A bullock was given to deaan Trongha, for the entertainment of
himself and his retinue.

At night there was a long consultation about the posture of affairs:
none were admitted to this august assembly, but a few principal men,
among whom I had the honour to be one; but to my no small mortification,
I heard deaan Mernaugha propose to send nine hundred, or a thousand
people, under the command of deaan Trongha into Merfaughla, to join with
deaan Crindo against deaan Woozington. This scheme was approved of, and
unanimously agreed to; the manner and time were both appointed, which
was not to be till some months after. When we broke up, deaan Trongha
told me the whole assembly had confidence in me; as knowing it to be my
interest to keep their secrets. But, says he, a more than ordinary care
is absolutely necessary at this juncture; for the common people abandon
us to live under other lords, if our proceedings do not please them;
though we aim at nothing but their own security and welfare. They have
not, however, the sense to know it, and will be for ever throwing
reflections on our conduct, and finding fault, though we lose our wives,
families, and cattle, and run all hazards to protect them. It is natural
for the refuse of the people to abuse their superiors; but yet governors
ought nevertheless to study the good of their country, and defend those
under their care from injuries and insults, without regarding such
reflections; but then those things which we very well know beforehand,
and they have not the sense to understand or judge of, ought never to be
divulged.

I assured him of my fidelity, but told him that what I heard gave me no
small uneasiness, since I was apprehensive that he would press me to go
with him; where my former master, Mevarrow, would very probably be,
whose barbarous treatment I had too much experience of, not to dread the
consequence of being again in his power. He replied, that could never
be; for they know (said he) that I am resolute, and that it would be
dangerous for any man to provoke me so far, since it might prove the
ruin of the whole army; for I am determined to protect you at the hazard
of my own life, and revenge with the utmost severity any affront that
shall be offered to you. I was not perfectly satisfied, but as I knew
him to be a man of strict honour, I had all the reason imaginable to
depend upon it. When I returned to my companions, they used their utmost
endeavours to sift out of me the purport of their council; but I told
them with a very careless air, that I stood at a distance, and did not
observe one word that passed.

Deaan Trongha took his leave the next morning, acquainting the king, his
nephew, that his owley had warned him in the night of some danger that
attended his town from the enemy, in case he stayed much longer. As I
was on this side the country, I desired to go and see Eglasse the
Dutchman. The deaan assured me he would make it in his way home. Eglasse
was very much surprised when the children came running to him, and
cried, “Arve verzahar!” that is, a white man is coming; for he knew of
no one in the country. One Efflep a negro of the West Indies, who was
left ashore by pirates many years before, lived not far from him, and
spoke nothing but English; for being very deaf, he never learned the
Madagascar language. He had two sons, however, born on the island of a
native mother, who spoke both languages tolerably well. When I
approached Eglasse, he pulled off his hat to me; but poor Robin was not
in a condition to return the compliment. At first he spoke Dutch to me,
but perceiving I did not understand him, he spoke a little broken
English; and I had as little to say for myself in that, as the other.
Thereupon I asked for an interpreter to speak English for me; which set
deaan Trongha and the rest a laughing at first; but they pitied my hard
lot afterwards, to have lived in a foreign country all the flower of my
age. But James, Efflep’s eldest son, carried on a conversation amongst
us to the entire satisfaction of every one then present. Eglasse pressed
me to live constantly with him; but I told him I would not leave deaan
Trongha on any account whatever. For he was a man of great generosity
and humanity; one, moreover, of great authority, and consequently able
to protect me. I desired, however, that they would procure leave of him,
to let me stay two or three days with them, which they did; and he as
readily agreed to indulge me a whole week. I had heard but an
indifferent character of Eglasse, with respect to his temper; he was
rash and passionate, and would threaten the great men, not excepting the
king himself, upon the slightest provocation, with what he would do as
soon as the first ship arrived. This ill conduct of his rendered him
distasteful to them; and for that reason I was cautious how I entered
into too strict an amity with him. And it will soon appear, that my
fears were justly grounded; for his continued indecent behaviour cost
him his life at last.

Having now taken our farewell of deaan Trongha and his retinue, the pot
was set on the fire by a slave named Toby, with a piece of salt beef,
and potatoes dressed after the English manner. In the mean time, Eglasse
ordered James to relate to me the history of his arrival and adventures
here; and this conducing to my purpose, which is to give such an account
of the various customs and manners of this island as may be useful to
traders and navigators, and pleasing to the curious, I shall only
transcribe here what he then told us.

“At a place called Masseleege,” said he, “on this island to the
northward, there comes once a year a Moorish ship that brings silk
lambers, and many other things to trade with for slaves. At this place
one Burgess, called captain Burgess, and Robert Arnold had a sloop;
Burgess, indeed, commanded, for Arnold knew nothing of navigation; one
was as rich as the other, and both were equally concerned in the vessel.
With this sloop they used to come to Augustine-bay and other places on
the island, in order to buy slaves and carry them to Masseleege against
the moor’s ship arrived. Eglasse sailed with them in this sloop. In one
of their voyages to this place, Burgess and Arnold fell out to that
degree, that the latter would stay no longer with Burgess; but
prevailing on Eglasse to come on shore for his companion, he brought all
his effects with him, consisting of several bags of dollars, a great
many guns, powder, shot, chests of clothes, beads, &c. amounting in the
whole to a considerable value. In a word, every thing that is proper to
trade with in these parts. He told Eglasse that in case he survived him
he should have all his effects; but their design was only to stay till a
ship arrived in which they could procure a passage to Europe. Whether
they durst go to England or not I cannot absolutely say; though I had
good reason to suspect that a great part of these riches were obtained
by piracy. There were two black slaves, this Toby and another, who in
the sequel of this story will be called Robin, who could speak good
English. These swam ashore the same night that captain Burgess sailed
away, and surrendered themselves to Arnold.

“It happened a little before Rer Vovvern’s death, (and which was,
indeed, the occasion of it,) that this country was invaded by two
enemies at the same time; and whilst the greater part of the lords and
people were marched off in order to oppose the northern enemy,
Woozington, who was a southern foe, came unawares upon us, having passed
the great river without being in the least suspected, and a bold general
of his, named Ry-Opheck, attacked the town and the king’s house about
midnight; Rer Vovvern himself was wounded in the thigh. Another party
was likewise coming against us, whereupon every one was for flying to
some shelter or other; as is not only customary, but indeed necessary in
such cases. Arnold and Eglasse, however, having great riches, were
resolved to defend them, and therefore armed themselves with guns,
pistols, and cutlasses; but they no sooner appeared at their door than
Arnold was shot dead on the spot. Eglasse was then glad to fly with his
two slaves, Robin and Toby, for they never left him. The enemy plundered
the house of what they saw convenient; which was all his wearing
apparel, or any thing like it, even his beds for the ticking sake; the
silver being black they knew not what it was, and therefore contented
themselves with throwing it about. As to the cattle which they found in
the pens they killed them all, for they had neither time nor strength
enough to carry them off; nor were they able to defend themselves when
once the country should make head against them. However, they took some
captives and marched off in as great a hurry as they came, lest deaan
Mundrosser, our present king’s brother, who is very well beloved by his
countrymen, and feared by his enemies, should fall upon them; for we
have not a greater man in war than he, deaan Trongha only excepted.
Ry-Opheck’s fears and haste were just and proper; for deaan Mundrosser
mustered an army in a few hours after, and overtook them before they
could pass the river. The sound of his shells added wings to their
flight, insomuch that they left their captives behind them; and he
brought most of our women and children again, so that our loss was
inconsiderable: for as to our valuable goods, we (who were apprehensive
of surprise, and well knew the manner of the country) had dug holes in
the ground and buried them there, and they had no time to search after
them. When my father Efflep, my brother, and I returned, we missed none
of our effects, but very much concerned and surprised to find Arnold not
only dead, but naked; but as to his dollars they lay neglected and
scattered up and down; till some of our people, who were no strangers to
their use and value, took up a great many and concealed them from
Eglasse. We threatened some of them, however, and made them refund,
complaining to deaan Mernaugha; but they were above half lost. Eglasse
was so confounded, that he never returned till some messengers, who were
sent out after him, met with him at last, and conducted him and his two
slaves home. He lives handsomely enough still, though he lost so much,
having a plantation of his own and three or four good milch cows; and he
is able to join with my father to buy an ox notwithstanding it is a very
dear time, a good one being worth now ten dollars. Our king, Rer
Vovvern, died in six weeks after, more with grief than of his wounds. He
was very well beloved, being a good man and a gallant warrior; he was
also a great friend to white men, but more especially to the English. I
must not forget, however, to tell you here is another family you must be
acquainted with too, and that is one Hempshire, a Guinea negro, who was
formerly among the pirates, but has been settled here some considerable
time. He has a very pretty woman to his wife, and also a daughter by
her. Though the man is both blind and poor, yet Eglasse makes him many
presents out of respect to his wife, as we imagine, for they are very
intimate.”

Here Eglasse interrupted James, on hearing his own name and Mrs
Hempshire’s too often, as he thought, mentioned together, and suspected
that James was telling me of their supposed amour; so he broke off the
discourse; though James said he was only expatiating on the
christian-like manner in which he behaved to Hempshire and his family;
but by this time dinner was ready. I found myself here a perfect negro
in my way of eating, for I devoured my meat alone which made them laugh
heartily; but what was a still greater mortification to me was,
Hempshire, his wife and child came to pay me a visit; and Eglasse and he
talked my adventures over in English, and it seemed like unintelligible
jargon which I could not form my tongue to imitate; insomuch that I was
apprehensive that I should never be able to speak my mother tongue
again. A few days’ conversation however among these people, gave me
hopes of recollecting it in time. Efflep and his sons were near
neighbours to Eglasse, where I was invited the next day, and entertained
in a very handsome manner after the English fashion, and much better
than at Eglasse’s. We had not only a couple of capons boiled with rice,
like a pilaw, but another dish of fried meat and boiled potatoes, served
up on pewter plates, so that I began to fancy myself in a christian
country. They also procured some toake for me, as Eglasse had done
before; but it was scarce, there being no honey to be got. This was made
of sugar-canes, which were likewise scarce at this time, and the toake
was much inferior to what we had to the southward; it was strong enough
however to make us a little gay and lively.

As soon as the week was expired I was determined to stay no longer,
notwithstanding they importuned me very much, assuring them I would
procure leave to come again in a short time: nor would I accept of a
guide, since I knew the way. When I came to the seaside I espied a sail
as I thought, though it proved nothing but a large canoe returning from
sea, where the men had been fishing. I waited till they reached the
shore, who seeing me white, though naked, came up to me, and a great
deal of conversation passed between us, they being very inquisitive
after my uncommon adventures. I gave them all the satisfaction I could,
and inquired if there were any likelihood of a ship’s arrival. Before I
took my leave they made me a present of as many fish as I could well
carry with me. When I came home to my own house, I picked out four of
the best, and went to wait on my mistresses, presenting them with two a
piece. Deaan Trongha coming home soon after, was surprised to find fish
there, and highly pleased that I was returned; but was so complaisant as
not to suffer me to lick his feet. He had been all day in the
plantations, pushing the work as forward as he could, that they might
not want for provisions when they came back from the wars; for every
body was busy and making preparations for it. He told me he had ordered
one of his wives to make me a cap; such as we usually wore by way of
distinction. I did not like the proposal, but there was no opposing it.
He gave out to his wives and people that their intention was to invade
deaan Morrochemek, a petty king in the adjacent mountains; this he did,
for fear some of his people should desert and alarm the country of
Merfaughla.

Upon my return home I found visiters in abundance, who flocked about me
for the sake of my fish; but as it was a customary thing, and what I
used to do myself, I could not take it amiss; so I shared them out as
far as they would go.

I slept but this one night in peace and quietness; for next morning I
was called up to attend the deaan, and carry his gun with me to the
plantation. At that time he had no project of great importance in his
head, but before noon a messenger came running in haste with the news,
that an army of ten thousand Saccalauvors (our northern enemies) were at
a town called Murnumbo, within ten or twelve hours’ march of us. Deaan
Trongha was too impatient to hear the whole story, before he ordered his
slaves to leave their work and go home; the hoes and spades were thrown
aside, and the lances taken in hand, every man running home and making
preparation for a march. Messengers were sent to Rer Befaugher, and all
the other neighbouring lords to give their friendly assistance. Some of
the principal men of each town were directed to stay at home, with a
sufficient force to defend their families and cattle, in case Woozington
should be at hand as he was before, in order to take the towns by
surprise, while the fighting men were all engaged another way. I went
home under the plausible view of whetting my lances, but with a
resolution of being out of sight, and, if possible, forgotten; which
succeeded to my wish, for they were soon on their march. When I was well
assured that they were gone, I went in a violent hurry to the head
lady’s house, asking for my master; and being informed he was gone, I
pretended to be in a confusion, and in all the haste imaginable to
follow him; but the women would not let me go; for they ordered the men,
who were left as a guard, to stop me. At length, with much ado it may be
supposed, I was prevailed on to stay, and sat down very contentedly
amongst the women. Most of the town, nay, the very children were there;
or round about the house. Their clamour, prayers, and cries for their
husbands, and idle tattle about the war, were troublesome enough; but
not so bad as running the risk of either life or limb, in fighting the
quarrel of a people, for whom I had no manner of concern.

At night I had several young female visiters, who supped with me on
carravances, of which my mistress had made me a present. Our
conversation was innocent and pleasant, though some of my gay readers
may perhaps imagine otherwise. But be that as it may I can assure them
(to the shame of christianity) there are more modest women in proportion
to the number of people here than in England; even such as would sooner
part with their lives than yield to a man’s embraces, unless they were
taken to wife according to the custom of the country; but such women as
sailors find for their turn, are only slaves brought down to the seaside
and dressed with beads and silk lambers, with no other view than to
allure their gallants and get from them what they can, and though the
gain they make of their prostitution is their master’s, yet most of them
are generous enough to present them with part of the fine things they
get from their cullies; but were these sailors to go up into the
country, they would not find it an easy matter to procure a mistress.
The conversation, however, I had with my young visiters, gave me some
melancholy reflections in bringing to my remembrance the pleasure I
formerly enjoyed in the company of my dear wife, whose beauty and
conversation were in my opinion far superior to any of these.

During the men’s absence, we had little else to live on than tamarinds
and ashes, a little milk only excepted; but in twelve days they
returned, and were received with all the demonstrations of joy
imaginable by the women. I went myself likewise with a good assurance to
welcome them home. Deaan Trongha, indeed, rallied me a little about it;
but his wife ingenuously confessing, that she hindered me from following
him, I heard no more of it.

The account they gave of their expedition was, that a general belonging
to Rer Trimmonongarevo’s army was at the place, but the messenger’s fear
augmented it to nearly double the number of men that in reality was in
it, for there were not five thousand in all. Our people were so
expeditious, that they secured a narrow pass, which the enemy designed
to have taken; and after a small skirmish or two, Rer Mimebolambo
withdrew to a plain and encamped, to whom Rer Mundrosser sent a
messenger to demand the reason why he (more especially) marched an army
into a country to destroy it, since his late king Rer Vovvern, had
relieved and protected him, when he fled from his uncle Rer
Trimmonongarevo, at his father’s decease; for Rer Mimebolambo’s father
was king of Morandavo, and this son of his was to have been his
successor; but there was a dispute between his uncle and him, several
years, till Rer Vovvern, at last, brought about a reconciliation between
them. Rer Mimebolambo replied in a few words, that those matters were
made up, that his uncle was king and he was under his command, and
therefore could not help it. We understood afterwards that deaan
Woozington had appointed to meet him and failed, however he was
unwilling to return home without doing somewhat, and attempted, for that
reason, to make an incursion and carry off a booty of slaves and cattle,
but was prevented. Our army followed them at a distance, to conduct them
safely into their own country, and then returned home.

But that part of the news, which was most agreeable to me, was that
deaan Mernaugha and they had agreed to defer for this season their
intended expedition with deaan Crindo against Merfaughla, for I always
dreaded the thoughts of going into Anterndroea, not only lest a ship
should arrive whilst I should be absent, which would be six or seven
months, but for fear of seeing my old master deaan Mevarrow; but these
fears, however, being dissipated for the present, I lent a helping hand
with a good will enough, in the fortification of the town, with such
stones as were here in great plenty. No one was exempted from work, the
women and children assisted according to their strength, and we made a
wall round the town, at least a yard thick and three yards high, with
loop-holes to look through, or fire out at, as occasion offered. As we
had no mortar the stones were only laid one upon another, and yet we
were about two months before we finished it.

Some of our principal men soon after procured leave to go into the
country to get honey, and hunt such wild cattle as they could find, of
which there were many on this side the river Oneghaloyhe. We looked on
ourselves to be perfectly safe at this time, it being between November
and April, when the river was swelled very large and there were no
canoes except here and there one, but it was impassable for an army.
With my master’s consent I accompanied them; we walked half a day very
briskly before we came to a proper place to bait at, and where we could
find ove (that is wild yams) or susers, which we found here in plenty;
but we had still a hard day’s journey to go to the place proposed for
our country habitation, and when we came there we had our house to
build. After our first arrival, which was in the evening, we took care
to get a good supper; two of us, who well knew the place, went to look
out for honey among the rocks, in the fissures or openings whereof bees
make their combs; the other two (for we were four in all) dug ove and
susers. Our companions succeeded and brought some honey, and we regaled
ourselves in an elegant manner. The next day by noon we finished our
house, which we thatched with palmetto leaves. The day following we
employed ourselves in getting some araffer, which is a pleasant liquor
that I had not tasted before; the tree from whence it flows is something
like a cocoa-nut tree but not quite so large, and rather a kind of
palmetto, called in their language satter. The long leaves or branches
are burnt off, and the trunk is left bare; then we cut off part of the
top of the tree, and with our lances or hatchets make a hole in the
middle, which in a short time fills with a liquid which issues as from a
spring. This may be sucked out with a reed till it is dry, yet it will
fill again the same day, and so continue for six or seven days before
the juice is totally exhausted. It is not like a sirup, but very sweet
and pleasant, and I never knew it give any one the flux, as some may
imagine, nor did any one of us meet with the least inconvenience from
drinking it. We wanted, however, some roast meat; so roving about the
next day, we espied a herd of about twenty of Hattoy’s cattle, and with
a little difficulty made ourselves masters of a bull. Now we lived
luxuriously; we made drinking cups of the bull’s horns; for by thrusting
them into the fire, and giving them a knock or two, the pith came all
out, and we were as well contented as some folks with fine glasses. It
is indeed surprising, though delightful, to see how plentifully
Providence has furnished this country with every thing, not only with
all the necessaries of life, but even with a delicious variety. If ever
any country flowed with milk and honey it is this; and with so much ease
are they to be had, that as the natives have no knowledge of the curse
of Adam and his posterity, so one would be tempted to think, as well for
this reason as from their colour, that they are not of his race, or that
the curse ever reached them, for they can get their living without the
sweat of their brows, or the least hard labour. Notwithstanding all
this, the follies and passions of men will too often lead them into
misery, though they have happiness in their power; in this fine country
their frequent quarrels with one another and open wars reduce them to
the greatest necessity in the midst of the greatest plenty. But they are
confined sometimes by so powerful an enemy, that they are afraid to stir
out of their houses to fetch what the land naturally produces; and this
was the then hard fortune of Feraingher, and the substance of our
conversation after supper; my companions having entertained me with an
account of the great power and strength of their country but a little
before, in the days of Rer Vovvern; and how deplorable its case was at
present, how they were obliged to confine themselves and get close
together, that they might be ready at a call to repulse an enemy, and by
that means abandon the finest and most plentiful part of the country.

We lived now, however, very happily, and in affluence, during our
continuance at our country-house; we made just such an oven as I have
before described, and baked our beef in it; then we went in quest of
some honey to carry home with us. In which, as I was better acquainted
with the nature of bees than they, I had better fortune, and got as much
as I could carry off. When our beef grew so far touched that we could
not eat it, we looked out for more; it was my good fortune in particular
to meet with a young heifer, which I drove into a thicket, and having
killed her, I hallooed to my companions. This we agreed to dress, and
carry as much of it home as conveniently we could; in the first place,
however, we baked the marrow bones, boiled the liver, and spread the
marrow on it, as a dainty morsel; and then we made up our enters, and
marched homewards as well satisfied as we were heavily laden, but not
being in haste, we travelled very softly.

We would not enter the town till midnight, lest we might be observed;
and now once more I wished for my wife to have been at home to receive
me. The next morning I waited on the chief lady with a horn of honey and
a piece of beef, who was highly delighted, but thought I had brought too
much; from her I went to the other where deaan Trongha was, and paid my
compliments to her. The deaan was very glad to see me eat a plentiful
breakfast, and was extremely pleased to hear me tell the various
circumstances of our sport; the others by this time, according to
custom, were come to present their lord with some part of what they had
got, by way of acknowledgment. As I was going home one met me who wanted
to buy some honey, it being rumoured about, that I had brought home a
large cargo; he gave me a fine silk lamber for a calabash of honey that
contained about two gallons. I thought myself very fine in it, and sure
I am, I was the first of the family who was ever dressed so much like a
Madagascar lord. Deaan Trongha told me, I had bought it cheaply enough
in conscience; for if honey had not been scarce it was worth four times
as much; silk is very plentiful in this country, if they would take the
pains to gather it.

Here, through ignorance, I committed an egregious error, for as deaan
Trongha was saying, the man bought the honey dear. I answered a little
too smartly. “If this war continue but three or four years longer, a man
will be glad to sell a child for such a calabash of honey.” The prince
took me up with some warmth, and said, “Then I presume you will leave
us, and go to some inland prince for a belly full of victuals.” I
assured him, however, that I would stay with him till he could send me
home in some ship or another; and that no other motive should ever part
us. Though he said no more, I found he was uneasy, and could not find
out the reason till after we returned from the plantation, at which
time, as we were walking homewards alone, “Robin,” says he, “you are not
aware, perhaps, that our people imagine you can conjure; and as you know
the torratos, that is, writing and reading, you can foretell things to
come. Now by your talking of worse times in our country than the present
before these illiterate people, they will take it for granted that it
will certainly be so, and you will so discourage them, that they will
all run away; for they would pay as superstitious a regard to you as to
an umossee, if you thought it proper to act such a part; since necessity
(for the reason I have told you) seems to require it at this juncture.”
I replied that, though I was conscious of my error, yet I could never
think they would take me for a conjuror, or one who knew things before
they happened; for if I had been possessed of that talent, I would never
have taken this last unfortunate voyage, in which I was cast ashore on
this island. “What you say is true,” says he; “but these people are too
ignorant to be instructed, and it is not in your power or mine to
convince them: and to make the attempt is but to give them an ill
opinion of us; they must be indulged in their superstitious notions, be
humoured, and talked to like peevish sickly children.” “As this is the
case” said I, “I beg pardon, and faithfully promise you to be very
careful of my words, lest they should prove any means of discouragement
to them for the future.”

In three or four days at most, our fine provision was gone; for I
distributed what I had, as is customary, among our neighbours; and then
we had little else but tamarinds and ashes. About three weeks after,
Eglasse and his man Toby came to pay me a visit, and brought some beef
and potatoes with them; for they knew our poverty. We had an odd sort of
conversation between Eglasse’s broken Madagascar, and my broken English;
but Toby, who spoke both languages, helped us out. He stayed with me all
night, and went the next day to deaan Trongha, and begged for me to live
with him five or six weeks, which was readily granted; so I shut up my
house, and in five or six hours arrived at Eglasse’s, where Efflep and
his two sons, James and John, gave me a hearty welcome.

I used to walk about to the adjacent towns with Eglasse, and met with
several of the natives, who could speak English tolerably; but here was
one of them, who, when a boy, used to go of errands, and transact
business for the English pirates, who frequented this place; so that he
spoke English as well as his native tongue. He was very rich, had three
wives, many slaves and cattle; he had also wearing clothes which
belonged to such persons as died there; for when any one was sent sick
ashore, he used to take care of them, and if they died, he had what they
left. His true name was William Purser, though the natives called him
William Poser. He always treated me in a very handsome manner, when I
went to see him; but he never offered me any clothes, nor did I desire
any. For there I should have behaved but awkwardly in an English dress;
and as I had now a fine lamber to wear after their manner, I was very
well contented.

I had been here above a month, before old Efflep died, and his son James
made a grand burial for him, after the manner of the country; which is
the same as in Anterndroea. He killed four or five beeves, to entertain
his friends who attended the funeral. The princes and lords do not kill
the beasts here; but a prince will eat any thing, even swine’s flesh,
though a slave should kill it.

I lived very well between Eglasse and James, till about three or four
days before I was to go home; at which time I was seized with a violent
fever which turned to an ague, and brought me down so low that I was
unable to stir out of the house. They sent a messenger to acquaint deaan
Trongha with my misfortune, and took as much care of me as they possibly
could; and James would now and then boil a fowl to make a little broth
for me. I lay once for dead, and Eglasse being abroad, Toby, who was
left with me, called in the neighbours, and all of them thought that I
had taken my last gasp; insomuch that they went home, and James was
consulting which way to bury me. But when Eglasse returned about two or
three hours after, he perceived me breathe, and James burning something
under my nose, I revived, indeed, but was not sensible for two days, nor
able to sit up for many more. Deaan Trongha being informed that I was
dead, sent a messenger to know the truth, who found me alive, but not
able to speak to him. After this I gradually recovered; the ague hung
upon me three months, and I was two more before I had strength
sufficient to go home; insomuch that I had a strong inclination to see
deaan Trongha: Eglasse, however, was willing to detain me as long as he
could: for now I began to talk English tolerably well, and was good
company for him as long as he lived; which was but a little while after
my recovery.

Five men having a cow to sell to Eglasse, asked me for him; and he being
in the plantation, I went and told him. He came away directly with me to
the men, and begged the favour of me to treat with them about the
purchase. They asked six pieces of eight, but insisted on four: I would
give them, however, no more than three. At last they said, if Eglasse
would give them the old lance which he had in his hand, they would take
the money. This alarmed me, they whispered, I perceived, two or three
times to one another; and having heard that Eglasse threatened the king,
deaan Mernaugha, I began to be terribly frighted, and told him in
English that they wanted the lance; and that I had good reasons to
suspect their behaviour; for the lance was not worth a meal of potatoes.
He, however, in a bravado, gave the man the lance: “Here,” said he, “we
won’t disagree; take the lance.” No sooner had he delivered it, than a
man came behind him, and with both hands pushed the lance in at his back
with that force, that it came out of his breast. I turned about at the
shriek which Eglasse made, and seeing the man pulling the lance out of
his body, I ran amongst the wild canes, which grew by a river side; and
the rustling I made appeared to me like the noise of pursuers. So that
it was some time before I could recover my senses; and when I did, I
still continued to listen with attention. In a short time I heard some
persons call after me, which proved to be James, and his brother John. I
was almost afraid to trust them, but seeing no other company, I came out
in tears to them. They told me that deaan Mernaugha had contrived
Eglasse’s death for threatening him so often; but that as I was an
Englishman, and belonged to deaan Trongha, I need not fear any thing,
for they could have killed you (said they) before you fled, if they had
been ordered so to do. This I thought was true. “Then” said I, “he may
imagine, perhaps, that I shall tell the captains of ships at their
arrival, that he kills white men; and under pretence of danger, may
think it expedient to kill me too.” But they assured me as I was an
Englishman he durst not do it; and that the executioners had told him
so.

I went home with them, where lay the wounded corpse all naked. They
seized likewise on his goods, cattle, and on his two slaves, Robin and
Toby; and stayed in the town all night. The next morning they came to
me, and requested that I would go to the king along with them. “If I
were not afraid” said I “I would, were it on no other account than to
beg the body to bury it.” They answered, the king was so far from doing
me any harm, that he would be glad to see me, and they were well assured
he would grant my request; and, perhaps, give me some share too of
Eglasse’s goods. Upon this, James and I went; and calling on William
Purser, took him along with us. When I entered the town my heart misgave
me, but I considered there was no receding. Deaan Mernaugha was sitting
at his own door, with a great many people round about him. I approached,
and falling prostrate on the ground before him, licked his feet
according to the custom of the country; which the people were surprised
at, having never observed a white man ever to do so before. He permitted
me, indeed, at first; but soon after bid me rise, and not be afraid; for
he would not hurt a hair of my head.

He then ordered Eglasse’s cattle to be brought before him, and commanded
them to take a white cow (not a bullock) and tie her to a tree. After
that the owley was brought out, and an altar was erected, as before
described, by placing the owley across two forked sticks, about six feet
high, upon a beam; when this was done, the cow was killed; then the king
rising from his seat, took a green bough, dipped it in the blood, and
sprinkled the owley. In the next place he took a small quantity of the
fat, and some of the sweet scented gum, and burnt them under it, making
the smoke ascend to the owley. After that he took two cutlasses, and
whetting them one against another (as a butcher does a knife and steel,
but not so quickly) he began his prayer to God, and the Lords of the
four quarters of the world, and to his forefathers by their respective
names, ending with his grandfather who made the oath with the English
captain; an account of which deaan Trongha had before given me. His name
after his death was Munguzungarevo. The form and manner of his prayer
was this, or to this effect.

  Bless me, O deaan Unghorray, thou Supreme God. Bless me, O you deaan
  Meguddummateem. Bless me, O you deaan Antyfertraer. Bless me, O you
  deaan Aneebeleesby. Bless me, O you deaan Antymoor. Bless me, O ye
  [here he repeated several other names of his forefathers] but more
  especially, O you deaan Munguzungarevo; bless my family, and this
  kingdom; for I have had regard to your oath and the man whom I have
  now slain is not an Englishman, but of another country; neither would
  I have put him to death were it not for my own preservation; since he
  often threatened to take away my life, whenever any ships should
  happen to arrive.

Whilst he was praying, his slaves were cutting up the beef; when he had
done, he ordered me to take the whole breast; and then he divided the
rest among the people. He was pleased to say, that I had none of that
barbarous disposition which some white people have; for he looked upon
me as a native; since I had long accustomed myself to the manners of
their country. I had no great inclination to take his beef, but
recollecting that Eglasse’s destruction was too much owing to his own
ill conduct, I thought it was safest to appear pleased with his offer.
Robin, the slave, was given to the executioner; but James bought Toby of
the king. I begged leave to bury the body, which favour was readily
granted me: and we returned back to James’s house. The next morning two
messengers came from deaan Trongha to inquire into the truth of this
story; for it had been reported that I was killed; and in case it had
proved so, they were ordered to go directly to deaan Mernaugha, and
demand satisfaction of him, he being fully determined to revenge my
death; but as it was otherwise, and they had no instructions relating to
Eglasse’s case, I went home with them.

At my arrival I was received with as much joy as if I had been a friend
of the last importance to them: I went soon after to the chief lady’s
house, where the other was then present, though she had not been there
in half a year before. Deaan Trongha seemed very well pleased likewise,
and made me give a particular detail of my own severe sickness, and the
tragical end of poor Eglasse; saying, at the same time, that I had so
many fortunate escapes, that he did not think I should die in their
country; but that it would be my lot once more to see old England. Here
he repeated his promise to send me thither. In the interim, however, he
ordered my house to be repaired, the cattle having eaten up most of the
thatch; and provisions to be given me not only for the present, but for
the time to come; for he had lately a good harvest, so that we lived in
more affluence than before.

One day I asked leave to pay a visit to Rer Befaugher; for in times of
danger from enemies, none went out of town without permission. As I was
passing by a river, and walking down to it, I perceived the track of an
alligator, which gave a great check to that inclination, and there being
two or three houses at but a small distance from it, I was going towards
them to beg a little water; but a young woman who was going with her
calabash to dip for some, desired me to stay, and she would supply me
with as much as I would drink; I told her I would accept the favour, but
as she went into the water up to her knees to fill her vessel, an
alligator with a spring caught fast hold of both her thighs, and dragged
her into the stream; but as she kept her head and hands above water, I
threw one lance away, and ran to her assistance with the other; which
she took hold of, and pulled her to me with all my might, but the
alligator still keeping his hold, we called aloud for help. At length I
got hold of her hand, and she directing me where the creature lay, I
struck him with my lance, and wounded him; but not so deeply as to
oblige him to let go, till a second stroke. By this time proper
assistance came, and we brought her off safely with two large wounds
only, made with his long jaws, and sharp teeth. She was now perfectly
naked, for she had lost her lamber in the struggle; but that was not
worth regarding. We saved her life, and every body was highly pleased
with that. Rer Befaugher entertained me in a very courteous manner, and
having gratified his curiosity, in hearing a short narrative of my late
dangerous adventures, I returned home.

The people were ordered to get ready to march in three days at farthest;
and the umossee was employed to prophesy of the success of the war. Upon
this he took some sand, tossed it about, and made several scrawls with
it upon a board. At length he bid them look for a tree that was
perfectly upright, and after that for a black and baldfaced cow, which
being found, and brought to the tree, was killed; then the umossee took
some of the blood with his hand, smeared the tree, and invoked not only
the demons, but the spirits of deaan Trongha’s forefathers; calling on
them all to arise and hear what he had to say; which was to this effect.
That their grandson, deaan Trongha, was going to war against their most
implacable enemy, the king of Merfaughla. In the next place, he ordered
two men of equal strength to cut the tree down with hatchets, one to the
northward, and the other to the southward, and to give stroke for stroke
with each other; saying if the tree fell toward the former, bad success
would attend their enterprise. Those of the vulgar sort who were then
present, stood gaping to swallow, as it were, every divine word, that
came out of the mouth of this wonder-working prophet. How the mistake
happened, I can not say, but the tree fell to the northward, though it
was beyond all doubt intended to fall the other way; for when deaan
Trongha perceived it, let us cut up the beef (said he) with a smile, and
be merry; that is the best part of the ceremony. We forgot to observe,
that what little wind there was, was to the southward. We should have
chosen a more proper time. He strictly enjoined, however, all present to
say nothing at home to the women of what had passed: so we told them at
our return that the tree fell to the southward; in order that they
should tell their husbands the same story.

This conduct of deaan Trongha’s confounded me in a suspicion, which I
had entertained for some time, which was this: that some of these lords,
who are men of sense, keep one of these umossees with a political view,
and only to amuse the ignorant populace; who here, as well as in other
parts, must be cajoled in their superstitious notions, and allured by
such artifices as political governors know how to practise to advantage;
though they themselves regard but little what their conjurors say, of
their talking with, and having familiar converse with the demigods and
spirits.

Here now was a seeming ill omen, and too many of the vulgar sort had
seen it, to be trusted with the secret; for which reason an expedient
must be found out to avert and disannul it. The demons must be consulted
and addressed a second time, to procure their favour and protection; so
away goes the umossee, invoking again and again, and conjuring till he
conjured me into the wars. A bird, called tuluho, which is something
like our pheasant, but smaller, and very scarce to be found, must be
caught dead or alive; then a sea-crab, and a variety of other things,
which he particularly named. These he blended all together, muttering
incantations all the time. Then he bound them up in a clout, which was
afterwards fixed on the top of a stick about the length and bigness of a
walking-cane. This was a charm which was to prove destructive to the
enemy. This he called the elodge; and this was to be carried in
solemnity before the army. But who should be a proper person to be the
bearer was the next question; and the demons were to be again consulted
on this important part of the affair; who were pleased to reveal to him,
or (which is all the same thing to stupid bigots, who implicitly rely on
whatever he shall say) that no one was qualified to carry this charm,
but he who had no relations living on this island. Now from my former
observations, I used frequently to contemn these umossees, and smile at
their conjurations; and after this hint, I need not, I presume, urge
many words to demonstrate from whence his pretended revelation came,
though he was pleased to father it on the demons, or demigods; or
whatever other name we English may call them. For, to do the man
justice, he had not the impiety or assurance to introduce deaan
Unghorray, or the Supreme God, into any part of this religious farce.

“Upon this declaration of his,” said deaan Trongha, in my absence,
“where shall we find a man without some relations!” “That,” says he, “I
cannot tell, but this is the mind of the demons, and they would never
direct it, were there no such man to be found; you must therefore
recollect yourself. Now I think of it,” says he, “there is your white
man Robin is the only man, I dare say, who is qualified for that
important office;” “but then,” said deaan Trongha, “notwithstanding he
may be such a man, yet it is not proper for him to go, besides I have
given him my word he shall not go against his inclination.” “Why then,”
said the umossee, “you must find out some other person more proper if
you can.” Having done his business away he went, leaving the deaan in no
small perplexity, who was a man of strict honour and a punctual observer
of his word. Whereupon he sent for me, and told me, it was in my power
to be very serviceable to the whole country, but more especially to
himself, and that I should be gratefully rewarded for my compliance with
his request; but he insisted first on my promise. “If it be not to kill
a man,” said I, “I should be proud of an opportunity to oblige you.” He
then told me ingenuously the whole story, and that it could not possibly
be helped, or else he would not have asked it of me. I paused a while,
but upon a short recollection, said, all I feared was what I told him
before; but since there was an absolute necessity for it, I should
readily acquiesce. “Hereupon,” said he, “I will protect you, and take as
much care of your life and health as of my own.” And immediately ordered
a slave to attend me, and all things necessary to be got ready for me. I
was to carry this charm, called the elodge, in my left hand, at about
three or four stones cast distant from the army, during their march, and
at night pitch it at the same distance from the camp, pointing it toward
the enemy’s country, then wash myself and mix among the crowd wherever I
pleased. This was to be done till we should have an engagement with
Woozington’s army; I was to have ten beeves and two slaves for my
trouble. The vulgar imagine that this charm has a poisonous quality, and
that was the reason I was to wash before I came near any of them; but
deaan Trongha told me privately, that he knew well enough I did not
think it any way pernicious. “No sir,” said I, “I am very well assured
there is neither harm nor good in it, and they shall see me lick it
before their faces if they please, which none of them would venture to
do for a hundred oxen. I can never think,” said I, “that you yourself
have that confidence in it, as you tell them, but you see the ill
consequence of making use of these conjurors; for the common people are
so strongly persuaded of their power over them by these charms, that
were your own life to be in danger, you must do what this imaginary
prophet says his demigods direct, though you were to carry this
yourself.” “What you say,” said he, “is very true, and were I to refuse
to let you carry it, they would refuse to march; or if they did, would
charge me with every miscarriage consequent upon it.” “Yes sir,” said I,
“but there is still a farther danger, for had the umossee but courage
and cunning enough, you have put it in his power to make even yourself
subservient to his directions; under the pretence of their being the
orders of the demons. And it is but his saying his demons or spirits
have ordered such or such a thing to be done, though it be even against
yourself, they durst not disobey his orders; for he has them all at his
beck, if he did but know it.” And here I cannot but reflect, that not
only Madagascar, and other heathenish countries are possessed with this
vice of superstition; but even christian nations have been, and are yet
too much tainted with it: of this and its mischievous consequences,
there have been many flagrant instances.

Soon after we marched out of town, I had a slave, like other great men,
to carry my mat and provision for me, and was furnished with every thing
I could reasonably desire. Now came the umossee, and put the elodge into
my left hand, and I marched in state before them. The next day we joined
Rer Befaugher, and two days after that, Rer Mundrosser; James, the son
of Efflep, and his man Toby, were both in the army, so that we had good
company every evening, as soon as I had fixed my elodge and washed
myself. We passed the great river Oneghaloyhe, wading through a ford,
which lay a great way higher than where I passed it before. Here our
people stocked themselves with beef; for we frequently halted at noon,
on purpose to give them time to hunt Hattoy’s cattle.

When I came to the river where several alligators lay, though I had my
firebrand in my hand, yet I would not venture to pass over by myself.
Then the umossee came up to me and said, I need not be afraid, for
whilst I carried the elodge, the demons would protect me from all harm.
I laughed at him and told him, “I was well assured he did not imagine
that I gave any credit to his assertion, neither have you any such
notion of its power; but if you have, do you carry it over here, and
either go with me or before me.” However, though he had more wit, I
forced him to fetch two guns, that I might discharge them into the water
to make the alligators retreat; and then I went over. We saw several
people who belonged to two petty princes not far off, and were hunting
here for their diversion; as they were not enemies, our people had
abundance of discourse with them. Though we passed through a very
mountainous wilderness, yet we lay but two nights in it, for they knew a
much nearer way than I did when I came alone. When I saw Vohitchfutey, I
returned in a very melancholy mood into the camp; insomuch that deaan
Trongha took notice of it, and asked me, what I ailed? I told him, we
were now drawing near to Anterndroea, which had been a scene of misery
to me, and I had terrible apprehensions of deaan Mevarrow. But he
cheered me up, and said, they durst not venture to injure me, and he was
very well assured that they would not attempt it, as well out of fear,
as out of respect to him.

The next day we arrived at Madamvovo, the river at which I used to water
my cattle, when in deaan Murnanzack’s country. This was ordered to be
the place of rendezvous, and deaan Murnanzack with his brethren, and
their forces all met here. Deaan Afferrer soon took notice of me, and
when I went to lick his feet he lifted me up and seated me by himself,
asking deaan Trongha at the same time how I came to him? I was desired
to tell my own tale, which accordingly I did to his satisfaction. He
said, I had taken a great deal of pains for liberty, but it was no more
than he would have done himself under the same circumstances; and wished
me all the good success imaginable.

Deaan Crindo and his sons came the next day, and deaan Mevarrow and his
brother along with them. Though I was sorry to find he was recovered of
the yaws, yet I ventured to go to him, when I found his brother was with
him. After the usual ceremony of licking their feet, they said they were
glad to see me, and asked me why I left them? I pretended, in case he
would give me my wife, to return as soon as the army parted. Whereupon
both told me, she would not marry any other man, but continued
constantly to lament my absence. This drew unfeigned tears from me, and
here I must confess, that if a sincere conjugal affection be a weakness
in man, I must own, let the world think as it pleases, myself guilty of
that weakness. These tears, however, as it proved afterwards, were the
happy means of deceiving them, and of my escape from danger. And had my
shedding them been a piece of artifice only, it might carry its own
justification with it; since I had good reason to fear he would have
murdered me privately, when he perceived I either contemned or hated
him. At night I let deaan Trongha into the secret, lest he should
suspect I was carrying on some sinister design in visiting Mevarrow.
Here I met with my old trusty friend, who had all this time kept my
secrets. He told me likewise, that my wife continued inconsolable, and
repented every day of her life that she did not go with me.

In about three days, the army, which now consisted of about four
thousand men, marched, and I went before them with the elodge. On the
day following we entered the country of Merfaughla, and here the army
divided into three parts as in their former expedition, and marched with
much more circumspection than before, for we were in an enemy’s country;
I still marched in the front. As we were passing between the two woods,
a volley of shot was all on a sudden discharged at me; but the enemy ran
away as soon as they had fired. They were a small party in ambuscade, on
purpose to lay hold on such opportunities. The shot whistled about my
ears, and some small boughs that flew off from the trees striking me, I
could not immediately tell whether I was wounded or not. However I
stopped, and was determined to proceed no farther. Deaan Tradaughe, who
was the nearest commander, ordered me to go on; but I peremptorily
refused, unless they would send a party to march before. The umossee too
came, and talked to me in his old conjuring dialect; and with the same
success as he did at the river. At length deaan Crindo came, and
commanded me to go on, declaring he would otherwise compel me. I was
terribly nettled at the haughtiness of one, whom I had so much reason to
hate, and boldly told him he was a proud prince, and that I thanked God
I was not under his jurisdiction. “It is true,” said he, “or else I
would take care you should go no farther.” Deaan Trongha was now come
forward, and asked what was the matter? To whom deaan Crindo complained
of my being both obstinate and saucy. He answered, it was unreasonable
as well as cruel to desire I should be exposed to danger at that silly
rate; and as to the man’s pertness, said deaan Trongha, you forget he is
a white, and as good as any of us all. In short, deaan Crindo was
obliged to let a hundred young men go before me, and in good time truly
it was; for there were several such firings at us that afternoon from
small ambuscades.

Two days after this we came to the river, not only where we had encamped
before, but fought and defeated deaan Woozington, and killed his brave
general Ry-Opheck. Here we encamped again, and as no enemy appeared,
most of us were for plundering the country; but deaan Trongha persuaded
us against it, and advised us to march still on, in order to find the
enemy out, if possible, before they divided their forces into small
parties. As for my part, I did not care how soon we came to a battle,
for then I should get rid of the elodge.

At length when we had marched four days, a body of the enemy of about a
thousand appeared on a plain before us, and deaan Trongha drew out his
countrymen to fight them. The umossee came up to me, charging me to
march before my master with the elodge, and to throw it towards the
enemy as soon as the engagement began. We marched forwards, and they
advanced, though but slowly to meet us, for they had a secret design.
Deaan Trongha, as they wanted, drew near, and they still kept firing,
though at a distance; however, it was fight enough for my purpose, as
being a fair excuse for throwing away the elodge. I did it with
alacrity, and returned forthwith to the camp; for I had neither gun nor
lance to fight, and was glad at my heart to be eased of so troublesome a
post. The enemy withdrew into a wood, and our people eagerly followed
and fired at them, till the general, who, with eagle’s eyes, looked
round about him, notwithstanding the heat of the action, and discovered
a long train of fire-arms on a rising bank of earth, among the trees and
bushes. Upon that he immediately called out to his people to stop,
discovering, moreover, a great number of men concealed in a ditch, that
was cast up for that purpose, so he marched back without the loss of one
man; for there was no fighting in an unknown wood, and with an unknown
force.

Deaan Woozington was, doubtless, one of the most subtile artful men on
the island, for though he had not force enough to face an army of four
thousand men, and his country was ruined, yet he found out ways and
means to be revenged in the severest manner; nor did my valiant master
deaan Trongha, notwithstanding his great conduct and bravery, escape his
resentment. Our beef being all spent and no enemy to be found that would
fight, parties were sent out in quest of cattle and slaves, and returned
with good success; though the principal generals, that is to say, deaan
Crindo, deaan Murnanzack, and deaan Trongha continued in the camp. Some
scouts, however, who had discovered where a large herd of cattle were,
coming in, Trongha would go out himself to fetch them; deaan Crindo,
indeed, advised him against it, but he would not hearken to his counsel.
So about a hundred of the Anterndroeans, with a like number of his own
people went with us, for I determined to go, but, Providence designed
otherwise, I was taken with a violent pain in my thigh. I went out with
them, however, for I was very loth to stay behind him; but my pain
increasing, the deaan would not permit me to proceed, and I was forced
to hop as it were back, for I could scarcely walk, and never saw this
great good prince more; for in three days’ after, three men brought the
melancholy news of deaan Trongha’s death, as follows.

About sunrising, a man informed the general, that a party of about fifty
of the enemy appeared upon the plain; whereupon he marched his little
army out of the wood towards them, and soon saw their number increase;
he was resolved, however, to attack them. Here he was guilty of a piece
of ill conduct, forgetting that the Anterndroeans were good for little
else but bush-fighting. When they came nearer, they saw another party,
and though soon after a third appeared, yet there was no retreating.
Some of the Anterndroeans, it is true, ran away, and others concealed
themselves in the high grass; so that there were but threescore of his
own Feraignher people, stood with him to oppose some hundreds. They
maintained the fight, however, half the morning; the general received
two wounds without falling, but at length, a third killed him. By this
time there were not above twenty of his party left, and they resolutely
forced their way through the enemy, of which number were those, who gave
us this account. The Anterndroea men who skulked in the grass, were most
of them killed; for the grass there being very long, and very dry at
this time of the year, the enemy set fire to it, and it ran like
wildfire, scorching the men who lay concealed under it; so that they
were obliged to rise, and most of them were overtaken and cut to pieces.

The death of this great man was an inexpressible loss to the whole army,
and by all was sincerely lamented. It was, indeed, a mortifying stroke
to me; and I was inconsolable, not knowing what calamities might befall
me in this country. Rer Befaugher did not return till ten days after, at
which time, though he brought a good prize of cattle and slaves, yet his
joy was all damped at once with the news of his brother’s decease; which
was so shocking to him, that he was not composed enough to talk of any
affairs of the army till the next day. This unfortunate accident obliged
me to carry on the deceit with Mevarrow, by assuring him that I would
come privately to him, as soon as the army broke up; but I was very
uneasy till I had a favourable opportunity of communicating my whole
project to Rer Befaugher, and of begging his protection, which he
readily granted. Whereupon it was agreed that I should absent myself two
or three days before their separation, in order to blind deaan Mevarrow,
and make him think that I ran away from the Feraignher people and fled
to his town before him; when, in reality, I and my man only went by
night to a place appointed, and stayed till Rer Befaugher and the rest
came to us.

The several parties who went out for plunder returned; and after the
cattle were divided, which were some thousands, besides slaves, the army
decamped. The Feraignher people did not see the Anterndroeans home, as
they did before; but took their leave here, and went directly to their
own country a much nearer way. I and my servant, as was privately agreed
on with Rer Befaugher, went away, and met them according to appointment,
to the great surprise of all the people; for there had been a diligent
inquiry made after me, every one imagining that I was lost. Rer
Befaugher made such a clamour with deaan Mevarrow, and some others, that
deaan Crindo gave him two slaves to pacify him, lest a quarrel of
dangerous consequence should have ensued. One of the slaves, who was a
young man, Rer Befaugher made me a present of. I was somewhat surprised,
not knowing immediately what he meant by it; but telling the whole
story, and saying, that both were by right mine, I was satisfied; he
called my slave’s name Sambo. It was near a month before we passed over
the river Oneghaloyhe, spending our time gaily in hunting, eating, and
drinking, making but very short marches. We did this out of a charitable
design to feed our captives; for we had ruined their country to that
degree that for many months they had very little to subsist on; so that
the poor wretches looked dismally thin.

When we came within one or two days’ journey of Rer Befaugher’s, the
cattle were divided; and such as had two or more slaves presented one of
them to their lord, in conformity to the same law and custom which is
used in Anterndroea, as I have before related. This I thought a proper
time to mention to Rer Befaugher what I was promised as a gratuity for
carrying the elodge; and told him the fatigue and hazard I underwent did
very well deserve it. He said, there would have been no objection
against it in case deaan Trongha had lived: however, he would go to
deaan Mondrosser and see what he said to it. He returned soon with five
cows, and some short time after that a girl slave was sent me; but as I
had already a man, who was as much as I wanted, I desired to have two
cows instead of the girl, which request was readily complied with. My
cattle I intrusted to the care of my man Sambo.

When we arrived at Rer Befaugher’s town, I left my cattle with my slave,
and went to deaan Trongha’s town to visit his widows. There I found a
melancholy scene. The eldest lady would fain have persuaded me to live
with her; but I told her I was not safe unless I was under the
protection of some such great man as Rer Befaugher was; but I would
embrace every opportunity of coming to see her, and would for ever
testify the veneration I had for the memory of her dearly beloved lord,
as well as my gratitude to her for all former favours.

Upon my return I met my man Sambo, who informed me that he was going to
build me a house; Rer Befaugher had provided one for me, and gave him
likewise the necessary furniture for it. When I paid my respects to Rer
Befaugher on that account, I was informed of deaan Crindo’s death, which
(according to the relation of some who came from his country after us)
was very sudden and unexpected.

Deaan Woozington, with what forces he could get together, kept always
within a day’s march of us, having spies for ever out to observe all our
motions every way, and who were going and returning alternately to and
from his little army with intelligence of what they observed; so that he
knew very well when we parted from the Anterndroean people. They were
still too strong for him, so that he was obliged to wait some time
longer for an opportunity of executing his revenge, and accordingly
followed them at a considerable distance till they arrived at Madamvovo;
where deaan Murnanzack, and brethren, Afferrer and Mussecoro, parted
from them in order to go home; and this was the crisis that he then
wanted. So waiting but one day more, till they were at too great a
distance to assist each other, he attacked deaan Crindo in the night,
and killed him with a great number of his people, and put the rest to
flight, deaan Mevarrow narrowly escaping; and this he did so
expeditiously and so successfully, that he had time to withdraw into
Merfaughla with most of the cattle which they had taken from him.

Deaan Mundumbo, indeed, upon his father’s decease, endeavoured to act as
king; but he had neither courage enough to maintain his claim, nor was
he so much beloved by the people to stand in competition with deaan
Murnanzack. He wanted some of those valuable qualities which his father
was possessed of; for it must be acknowledged that Crindo was undaunted
in war, and had the spirit of authority at home, which alone supported
his dignity, and made him useful to his country. Murnanzack had his
uncle’s magnanimity in war, and his majesty at home, besides all the
human and social virtues; and was, in reality, a truly great man: so
that Mundumbo was obliged to fly into Antenosa, till matters were
accommodated; and what became of either of them I never heard, for not
long afterwards I was moved into another country at a farther distance
from Anterndroea.

Rer Befaugher entertained me as handsomely as his brother had done. He
had but one wife, with whom he had cohabited nine years, without any
issue. This was a great misfortune, especially as she was a very
agreeable, good-natured woman, and behaved herself after so endearing a
manner, that he preferred her to all the women in the world. In short,
she was universally respected, and extremely kind to me. As three of my
cows gave a considerable quantity of milk, and as they furnished me with
carravances and Guineacorn, I and my man Sambo lived well enough. This
continued all the rain-time, and though we planted and sowed, yet we
never stayed to reap. For,

News was brought by some people who lived at a great distance, that
deaan Woozington was marching toward us with a numerous army. Spies were
sent out to observe them, who at their return told us, that according to
the best computation they could make, there were about three thousand
under arms, and within three days’ march. Deaan Mernaugha hearing this,
gave us orders to send all our cattle, wives, and slaves to the river
Feraingher, which runs on one side of deaan Mernaugha’s town. I was so
careful of the little stock I had, that I attended them to the river;
and went immediately to James’s house, (the son of Efflep,) where I met
with Hempshire, his wife, and daughter. Two days after, upon information
that Woozington had passed Oneghaloyhe, we were ordered farther
northward to Murnumbo; where in less than three days we were alarmed
with fresh news of an army of Saccalauvors being just ready to attack
us; whereupon we were obliged to retreat immediately, and Woozington, as
we were informed, not having penetrated so far as the river Feraingher,
we made an attempt to go there again; but the Saccalauvor army was so
near us, that we were forced to fly for our lives, and leave all our
cattle behind us, and make the best of our way to the river. Those of
our people who had any arms made a running fight of it, in order to save
the women and children; though we reached the river, yet they were in
sight of us by this time. As for Hempshire’s wife she ran away from him;
so out of compassion I took him by the hand, and hurried him into the
very same cane-thicket where I fled at the death of Eglasse. We had not
long seated ourselves there, before we heard some women and children
shriek out, who were taken prisoners at a very small distance from us in
the same thicket; which put us into the utmost consternation, for we
could expect nothing but instant death. We had not been long under these
frightful apprehensions before I espied the enemy. Upon which we got up
to run, but knew not whither; one of them, however, fired, and shot poor
Hempshire in the back; of which wound he died upon the spot. I was more
nimble, and got out of his reach; but just at the entrance of the
thicket I met another, who ran directly at me. He took a lance in order
to throw at me, but I called out to him to save my life, and told him I
would go with him. As he saw I had no weapons (for I had neither lance
nor gun) he bid me come forward; so I went and licked his feet according
to custom, and owned myself his slave. Whereupon he told me, that he
would spare my life, since I was a white man, and was unarmed.

He carried me with him into the body of the army, and the news was soon
spread abroad, that a white man was taken prisoner; insomuch that the
general heard of it, and thereupon my conqueror and I were both sent
for. Upon my kneeling and licking his feet, he asked if there were any
body about him who could speak either English or Dutch? but he was
surprised to hear me address him in his own language. He asked me
abundance of questions with regard to the strength of deaan Mernaugha;
the number of his people, and a thousand other things of the like
nature; all which I avoided answering as artfully as I could for Rer
Befaugher’s sake. However, after the examination was over, he gave the
person who took me another slave in exchange, at which I was somewhat
better pleased than before; for it was a miserable thing indeed to be
the slave of a slave. My new master ordered me to follow him, which I
did whilst they marched, though that was not long; for soon after they
encamped on the banks of the river. This was the best and finest camp I
had ever seen in this country, for all the tents were very good. As soon
as the general’s tent was erected, he desired me to sit down, and inform
him by what accident I came upon the island; and how it came to pass,
that, as I was a white man, I spoke their language with so much freedom.
I gratified him with a long detail of my whole history, to which he
listened with great attention; and we had abundance of discourse
concerning my surprising adventures. After he saw that I had supped,
(for I did not eat with him,) he gave one of his head officers strict
charge to see that I wanted for nothing; and when one of his people
advised him to set a guard over me, he said, there was no danger of my
running away; for as white men have no home on this island, all places
are alike to them; and they will stay with those longest who entertain
and feed them best; and he was well assured that the people of
Feraignher, at that time, were in no capacity to oblige me. And his
notion was very just, for so heartily did I feed this evening, having
eaten no beef for a long time before, that I was very sick. And when I
came to reflect that ships came to this country, and the poor state and
condition of St. Augustine-bay rendered it very improbable that they
should come to trade there, I found, that by this Providence, I had more
hopes of getting sooner to England here, than at any other place I had
ever yet been at: and the general was right in his notion, for I had no
business to fly or desert since I could not mend myself. Having free
liberty to go where I pleased, my curiosity led me to see if I knew any
of the captives; and upon examination I met with Hempshire’s widow and
daughter, Toby, and Robin, and Sambo, my own man; I shook him by the
hand, and told him I was a slave now as well as he. He said, I am sorry
for it; for I had much rather have served you than any one else; and
sure I am I shall never live so well again.

When the general had fully gratified his curiosity in inquiring after my
affairs, I had likewise as strong an inclination to know who was my
master, and was informed that he was dignified by the names of Rer
Towlerpherangha and Rer Vove. It is a custom here for persons of
distinction to have two names; and as the last is the most in use, I
shall hereafter distinguish him by that only. He was grandson to Rer
Trimmonongarevo, king of Saccalauvor; though called Yong-owl by the
Europeans, and Morandavo from a river of that name. Rer Vove intrusted
me to the care of one Guy, who was a considerable man, and a relation
(though at some distance) of the king’s. All the great families in this
country have a general name of distinction, which they value themselves
upon; as most of our European gentlemen do on their coat of arms.

We continued here two days, in hopes that deaan Woozington would in that
time have penetrated through the country on that side, and have joined
us; but we were informed that Rer Befaugher, by his good conduct, had
blocked up some passages, and so well defended others, that he was glad
to withdraw without effecting any thing to the purpose. On this news,
our general retired to Murnumbo, pleasing himself with hopes that deaan
Mernaugha would be foolish and hot enough to follow and fight him.
Mernaugha, however, wisely chose to sit down for once contented with his
present loss, rather than hazard all for the gratification of his
revenge, which might be more justly deemed foolish pride and passion,
than real valour. Rer Vove perceiving no more could be done when he had
continued here about seven or eight days, till the parties ordered out
were returned, marched homeward, and instead of putting a guard over me,
as he did over others, gave me a blunderbuss, and made me guardian
general over several of my late country folks, giving me full commission
to shoot the first who should attempt to run away.

I had several under my care, but more particularly Hempshire’s widow,
and three other women, who, as I attended them one evening into a
private recess in a wood, told me, “it was a great mortification to them
to be guarded by one who so lately fought for, and defended them;
telling me, moreover, that it was no great difficulty for them to find
means of making their escape, in case I was but willing.” “You are
right,” said I, “and it is your interest, as you have families; besides,
you may possibly be sold to some ships:” which was what I heartily
wished for, as my interest was contrary to theirs. I told them,
moreover, that “I would never have gone from Feraignher, if I had not
been forced away; but since the good providence of God had thought fit
thus to dispose of me, I would not oppose the divine will, nor act
inconsistently with my own reason, for I was well assured of better
provision here than in Feraignher, in its present unhappy state,
especially as I had lost all the cattle I had, though my stock, indeed,
was but small.” I assured them, however, that I would never mention what
they had proposed, which they, being under fearful apprehensions, begged
that I would never disclose the secret; neither did I, but looked a
little more circumspectly after them than I did before.

Though our marches were but short, yet we soon arrived to the confines
of Saccalauvor, where there were no inhabitants. It is a delightful
country, and I saw a great variety of monkies, baboons, virjees, and
wild swine, &c., in abundance, but very few, or none of Hattoy’s cattle.

About three days afterwards we passed by divers towns, which belonged to
Rer Mimebolambo, alias Moiang Andro; it being the selfsame country which
Rer Vovvern, late king of Feraignher, procured for him by treaty, of his
uncle Rer Trimmonongarevo. In the towns and meadows there were abundance
of humped cattle, and such as were much larger than any I had ever seen
in the island before, but was informed these were kept near home for
private use; that the prince and lords took care to have their principal
stock of cattle a great way farther to the northward, and in such
numbers, that they could not tell how many they had. Of the truth of
which I was soon afterwards very fully convinced. Our forces now
dwindled away apace, since numbers went daily home as they came near to
the several towns to which they belonged, without taking any formal
leave of the general, since they had no pay to take, or any to demand;
for every one being conscious to himself that it is his interest to join
with his neighbours in preventing an enemy from committing plunder, no
one ever murmured at their generals for leading them forth to war, it
being their own cause, and not the general’s, in which they engage; for
if they found their lords proved imperious and tyrannical, they would
refuse to go with them, since they could easily remove and live under
others. They fight for their own security and ease, and when they get
any plunder from their enemies, they think themselves sufficiently
rewarded.

Moherbo is the principal town, or rather city, and royal residence of
the king, who is our general’s grandfather, to whom, as in duty bound,
we paid a visit before he went home. When we arrived within a mile or
two, three messengers were despatched for form sake, to give him notice
of our approach, and to learn his royal pleasure, who made answer, “that
if Rer Vove should come, he was very ready to receive him.” Hereupon he
put his people in order, and appointed fifty men to stand in the front
and discharge their guns; and then fifty more to relieve them; the
shells all the time sounding. When we came within sight of the king, who
was sitting with his courtiers and people round about him, we heard
their shells sound and drums beat; this, their congratulatory music, was
but a dull empty sound; in some measure, indeed, like their country
tubs, which are made of a light tree hollowed very thin, and covered
with a calf’s skin that is dressed much like our parchment. Both ends
are beaten at once, one with a stick, and the other with the hand.

This king lives in a more splendid manner, and has a gayer retinue than
I had ever seen before. He has twenty or thirty several houses, or
rather a large court enclosed with palisades in the town; but as it was
not large enough for the reception of so many people, he sat on this
occasion without the town. Our first fifty men advanced like
morris-dancers, and fired their guns very regularly one after another;
and upon their retreat, the other fifty advanced. After this, the
general stept forwards, and bending one knee, licked the king’s. Several
principal men bowed likewise their knees, but licked his feet. This
ceremony over, a mat was spread at about four yards’ distance, and the
general with three or four of the chieftains sat down, and Guy was
amongst them. As for my part, I stood behind my master with my
blunderbuss.

This prince, Rer Trimmonongarevo, made, as I thought, a very odd and
formidable figure, whether it was because I had heard many stories of
some of his rash and barbarous proceedings, which had prejudiced me
against him. His dress was very singular, and such as I had never seen
before; his hair was plaited in ringlets, beginning at the crown of the
head; then another range of knots was bigger than the former, and so
downwards, every lower circle was larger than the upper; on several of
these knots of hair hung a large quantity of fine beads. Some part of
his fore-headpiece of beads hung almost over his nose, among these were
several gold ones. He had a very fine gold necklace about his neck; over
his shoulders hung two strings of beads, and several of them gold, in
much the same manner as our aldermen of London’s chains; on each wrist
about six manelers of silver, seeming large enough to weigh nearly three
dollars apiece, and four rings of gold on his fingers. Nearly twenty
strings of beads, closely set, were twisted round his legs; a silk
lamber hung over his shoulders, loose like a mantle, and another, as
usual, twisted round his waist. He was an old prince, not less, by what
I could understand, than fourscore years of age at least, yet of a
robust and healthy constitution. His colour was rather tawny, like an
Indian, than perfectly black; his eyes fierce, and his whole appearance
formidable; or the singularity of his dress and character made me
imagine so; he soon took notice of me, and asked Rer Vove if I was the
white man he had taken prisoner? and what was my name? He called to me,
“Robin, mehove a toee,” which is come hither. I then laid my blunderbuss
down, and approached him with my hands lifted up and closed before me.
As soon as I got to him I fell on my knees, and licked first one of his
feet and then the other, as the common people did before me. He ordered
me to sit by him, but not on his own mat neither. He asked several
questions in relation to my first coming on this island, and informed me
that he had a white man of his own; “but he is an Englishman,” said he,
“and whether you can speak that language, or not, I cannot say.” I told
him I was an Englishman myself. I began to cheer up, and have a little
more courage upon this agreeable news; and was surprised that my master
had not mentioned this circumstance before. I asked the king how long
his white man had been with him? and what his name was? “Six or seven
years,” said he: “his name is Will.” Upon this, he ordered a man to call
him immediately, who brought word that Will was gone out of town, and
would not be back in less than three or four days; so finding the king
enter upon some new discourse with the general, I withdrew to my former
post.

Soon after we went to a house which was ordered for our reception, where
I was discharged from guarding his slaves; for he did that, as he told
me afterwards, only to try my fidelity, since he knew very well, if I
had not been honest, they would have all got away; but as he was
convinced I did him justice, he had a post of much greater importance to
intrust me with. By this time, came in Ry Chemotoea, the king’s
principal wife, and the grandmother of Rer Vove, my master. She was the
largest woman I had ever seen in all my life. When she sat, her breasts
hung down to her lap; she walked but little, being generally carried on
a kind of bier on men’s shoulders. She had a numerous retinue, besides
slaves, who brought four calabashes of toake; two of honey, and two of
sugar canes, together with six baskets of rice. The king sent ten
beeves, four of which were very large fat oxen. As soon as Ry Chemotoea
was gone, we sat down to drinking the honey-toake, till Rer Vove was
perfectly intoxicated, and fell asleep, at which time three slaves came
from his grandmother laden with presents; one with a fat capon boiled,
for they made capons here; another with a pot of dried rice; and the
third with a basket, a wooden dish, and a spoon. This was the best
supper I had seen of the natives dressing, and I had my share of it; but
for all this good cheer, I could not forbear thinking of this Will, the
Englishman, and was very much concerned that we could not stay till he
came home.

The next day we marched homewards, and though it was two days’ journey,
yet we hastened to come in as early as we could the second day, because
of the great triumph we were then to make. The solemnity of which was
much the same as I have described in other places, and consisted in
their wives licking their feet, &c.

Rer Vove’s house was nearly eight yards long, and about six broad, built
of boards, as all the great men’s houses are in Saccalauvor.
Notwithstanding they have no saws, with a great deal of labour, however,
they hew out boards very even with their hatchets. The language is much
the same with that in other countries, except as English in Yorkshire,
or the west of England, where each place has a particular dialect, and
some small difference in its pronunciation.

My post here was a grand one, for I was constituted captain of my
master’s guard. There were palisades all round his house, and at the
portal, or gateway, was a little house for several young men of a higher
degree to lie in, who were his guard, and over whom, as I said before, I
was appointed chief, but this did not last above a month; at which time
he thought proper to go a shooting wild fowl, and took no one but me
with him. In our private conversation, he told me how vicious the people
of Saccalauvor were grown within a few years, as their country grew
rich; and that young men living so high, and drinking such large
quantities of toake, induced them frequently to lie with other men’s
wives, by which means murders, and several other misfortunes, have
ensued. “As for my part,” said he, “I have no reason, indeed, to suspect
my wife Ry Kaley; however, to prevent all jealous thoughts for the
future, I will intrust her to your care, and desire that she may never
be absent from your charge by night or day, on any pretence, how
plausible soever, unless she be with me. I am very well satisfied she
will not take this amiss, and you have no occasion to regard any one
else.” I returned him thanks for the favourable opinion he had of my
integrity; and assured him I would take the same care I had done
hitherto, in the due discharge of my duty to him in all things, wherein
he thought proper to command me; but I was afraid, lest some of his
trusty old servants should envy me my post, and insinuate to him things
prejudicial to his honour and my care. “Upon that account,” said he,
“you have no cause for fear, since it is always expected here, that
marks of favour and distinction be shown to white men.” When we came
home, he broke his mind to her, with much such another apology as he did
to me. She prevented him, however, from asking her consent, apprehending
in a moment what he aimed at; so saying, “I desire nothing more than
that you will take all the measures you think proper, in order to retain
the same opinion of me you always had; and in case Robin is to be my
guardian, I will submit with pleasure to his directions; and from
henceforth, Robin,” said she, “I will never be out of your sight, but
when I am with Rer Vove himself; and as I am now under your
jurisdiction, be sure you discharge your trust as you ought, and don’t
imagine that you can displease me by the strictest observance of your
orders. On the other hand, I propose abundance of pleasure in your
conversation, by telling me stories of your uncommon adventures.”
Indeed, she gave me good grounds to think she was not displeased with
me. It was my business to attend her on all occasions. Sometimes,
indeed, her women slaves were with her, but we were oftener by
ourselves, and that too through her own contrivance; and whether my
master had, in reality, so great an opinion of her chastity as he
pretended, I cannot determine; but I found her to be a very gay, wanton
lady, and was forced to exert all the art I was master of, in order to
keep her out of other company, as well as to preserve my own innocence.
However, as my life lay at stake, I was resolved to be true to my trust.
It was full three quarters of a year before I got rid of this
troublesome office; during which time, my master took a fancy to another
woman who had lately been divorced from a cousin of his, and made her,
if we may call her so, his supernumerary wife. He was extremely fond of
her at first, but soon quarrelled with her, used her ill, turned her in
short quite off, and returned with as much indulgence as ever to my
charge, Ry Kaley, again.

Not long after this, Rer Vove proposed to take a tour to the northward,
for his pleasure, and to take a survey of his cattle; so ordering his
furniture to be removed to his head slave’s till his return, our house
was locked up, and away we marched. We were a large company of us, Ry
Kaley, his wife, his friend Guy, with several other attendants, besides
slaves. It had rained very hard for some time before we set out; so
coming to a small river, which was considerably swelled with the floods,
the people made a halt, not caring to push forwards with too much
precipitation, lest some alligators might have come up into the marshes,
as is customary, and return again to their old haunts upon the fall of
the waters. As the river was shallow enough to wade through, I was so
fool-hardy as out of a bravado to lead the way. Two fine dogs, that were
my master’s favourites, went into the water along with me, but kept
close to my heels, one on each side of me, for the dogs are very
apprehensive of alligators. I was up to my belly in the water, or
thereabouts, when an alligator, all on a sudden, gave such a spring at
the dog on my left side, that the monster’s nose struck me down. The
alligator, dog, and I vanishing, as it were, at once, our people took it
for granted I had been carried off; but rising at a small distance and
finding myself not hurt, I went directly over; upon which they all
followed me. For if a noise be made by a great number of people, an
alligator will sink, like a stone, to the bottom, and lie without the
least motion, and though you tread on him, he will not stir an inch. As
we took our journey for pleasure only, we had no occasion to fatigue
ourselves, so we marched but slowly. In a few hours we arrived on the
banks of a very large river, called Mernee. Here we came to a town
inhabited by a people of a different species, as it were, from the rest
of mankind, and of a language peculiar to themselves, though they can
speak the general language if they please. Their customs too, and
manners, being as different as their persons, of which I shall give a
particular detail, according as I was farther informed soon after.

Rer Vove gave orders that one of the houses of these Virzimbers, which
is the name they are generally known by, should be made clean for him,
and all the old furniture be removed; and as for us, who were of his
retinue, we might shift as well as we could. There are very few
Saccalauvors care to lie in any of their houses, for fear of an insect
like a cow-tick, called poropongee, which is frequently found upon
cattle, and this insect is found nowhere else; but these people breed
them, on purpose to make their houses shunned by the Saccalauvors; for
the Virzimbers, till very lately, were under no government, and often
changing their habitations; so that upon their first settlement here,
the natives used to come into their houses, and take away whatever they
saw convenient; imposing most shamefully upon them, till the king, under
whose protection they are at present, redressed their grievances upon
hearing their complaints. These poropongees will make those who are
bitten by them sick, sometimes for six weeks, or two months together;
sticking close to the skin, or penetrating into it for a long time; but
when a man has been once tormented by them, and has overcome the
sickness, he never has it again, though he lies among ever so many of
them; or, at least, like persons who have had the small pox, they never
fear a return of their distemper. These Virzimbers are very subject
likewise to what they call colah, which is a kind of the yaws, a disease
which has been described before. It is so frequent, however, here, that
a third part of the people of a town are sometimes spotted like lepers,
with dry scabs. We continued here but one night, and passed over this
large river in canoes the next morning.

About half a day’s march from hence lives Rer Moume, king
Trimmonongarevo’s eldest son, and uncle to Rer Vove, to whom we went to
pay a visit. Messengers, for form sake, were sent before; an agreeable
answer being received, we approached the town, and found him sitting for
the shade sake, in great state under a tamarind tree, as it was
excessively hot. He is a very great prince, and extremely well beloved:
there were twelve wives, and a great many other people then with him.
When Rer Vove, accompanied by his wife Ry Kaley, came to him, they
kneeled and licked his knee. After which she soon withdrew among the
women, but he sat down on a mat near his uncle. All his aunts in
general, except one who was blind, came to him and licked his shoulder,
for they had not seen him since his return from his expedition at
Feraignher. The toake went about plentifully, and some was given to our
principal people, among whom I was constantly with Guy, who had a
particular regard for me. My master, however, being not a little proud
of his white man, called to me in broken English, for he had just enough
to say, “Come hither;” or, “How do you do?” When Rer Moume saw me; “Were
it not for his hair and eyes,” said he, “I should scarcely have known
him to be white, his skin is so scorched with the sun that it is as
swarthy almost as my own: Ry Anzacker there, is as white as he.” And, to
confess the truth, there was no great difference in our complexion. This
was his second wife, and sister to deaan Tokeoffu, king of Munnongaro,
alias Masseleege. Rer Moume was of a copper colour, rather than a black.
Though he had no visible distemper upon him, yet he had lost the use of
his limbs, and though he had no swelling in his legs or sores about him,
and looked well to all outward appearance, yet he could not stand
upright. This misfortune was supposed to be brought upon him by poison,
which was given him by one of his wives with a treacherous intent to
kill him, she having been a captive, and the consort of a neighbouring
prince who opposed him, and was killed in battle. He sat on a square
seat, or throne, made on purpose for him, but so low that he could rest
his legs on the ground if he thought fit.

Perceiving I could speak their language, he was extremely delighted with
me, for he was a good-natured, courteous man, which I have just reason
to acknowledge: for by his compassion I was redeemed from the hardships
of slavery during my continuance here; and, at last, dismissed in a
friendly and genteel manner, and by his means sent home to England. The
whole discourse now turned on me and my surprising adventures; the
women, too, bore a part in the conversation, and expressed their pity,
saying, they should be glad to have me among them, and should think they
could never do enough for me, if I would oblige them with the agreeable
stories of my travels. But this happy time was not yet come, I was to
undergo a few more fatigues first, though my state of slavery did not
continue long.

My master, Rer Vove, was a gay young man, who pursued his pleasures and
was guilty of some vices, like many of our young noblemen in Europe, was
always in action, full of fire, and as his constitution was very warm
and sanguine, he would be guilty of too many of the follies which youth
are prone to. As to his stature he was very tall, for in an army or
crowd he might be distinguished at a distance, being a head taller at
least than most of the people; however, he was exactly proportioned and
well-shaped, his legs and arms were finely tapered. I was obliged
sometimes to assist him in his love adventures, of which a pretty
remarkable, as well as dangerous one, was on this journey; as follows:—

No sooner had he parted from his uncle, than he determined to visit his
cousin, Rer Chemunghoher; but coming near his town, and being informed
that he was gone from home as far as Moherbo, a thought came into his
head to send his wife one way, whilst he took another under a pretence
of business, and to meet about four days after, advising her at the same
time to go through some towns of the Virzimbers, who always make one
present or another to those of the family, according as their abilities
will permit. His attendants, or the greatest part of them, were ordered
to accompany his wife; and as for me, whom she expected to have been
left her guardian, he bid follow him. When we were at a sufficient
distance from the people, he told me he had a secret to communicate to
me of no small importance, and desired, likewise, my assistance in a
particular affair, which he proposed to put in execution. “You know my
fidelity,” said I, “and are sensible that I would scruple nothing but
the commission of murder to serve you.” “It is nothing of that nature, I
assure you,” said he, “but the consequence may prove fatal if you do not
act with discretion: Rer Chemunghoher, in short, has married one who was
my consort before Ry Kaley; and, on a quarrel, I put her away a little
too rashly, and my kinsman also married her in too much hurry, or we
should probably have agreed again. The woman I still have an affection
for, and as her husband happens to be abroad, I have some thoughts of
your procuring me an interview with her. There is a Maurominter, that is
to say, a black man of any other country, who can speak English; you
shall pay him a visit, by which means you may come to the speech of
her.” I was fond of this opportunity to see this English Maurominter;
and for that reason I readily agreed to his proposal; and having my full
instruction, and a man for my guide, I left my master at a small
village, about two hours’ walk from Rer Chemunghoher’s town, and
proceeded immediately on my errand.

Lewis (for that was his name) received and entertained me in a handsome
manner. He was born, he said, in Jamaica, followed the sea, and being
taken by pirates was set on shore at St. Augustine-bay, where he lived
some time, but the troubles of that country coming on, he, as well as
many of the natives, came away, not only for their security, but for
more plentiful living: so that between the affairs of Feraignher and
England, we had subject matter of discourse enough for a long time. His
wife going out, I took the opportunity of asking him, if he could
possibly introduce me to their lord’s wife? He, knowing the story,
guessed at my intention, though I told him no more than what was
requisite for my purpose. He went accordingly to her, and she sent word
she would come, which she did soon, with one maid only to attend her. I
was a good excuse enough for her to say her curiosity led her to see a
white man. Lewis and his wife withdrawing, and she saying I might freely
speak before her maid, whom she could trust with her life, I soon
delivered my message, and told her how disconsolate Rer Vove was ever
since he came near the town: I found her, in short, as eager for the
interview as himself, and she appointed that very night in a wood at a
convenient distance. As soon as she returned home she sent her maid with
some toake to me; which, when Lewis and I had drank up, I went with the
good news to my master. And as it proved a fine moonlight night, we soon
came to the place assigned; though by going over a river, and through a
plantation where there were dogs, and they barking, the owner had like
to have discovered us; for the wild hogs often making great havoc in the
night, they are very attentive if their dogs do but stir.

I left them in the wood, and went to Lewis, for whom she waited. He
conducted her through a breach made in the palisade, for the gate was
always guarded, and I conducted her to her gallant. Her maid accompanied
her with a capon, some rice, and a calabash of toake. They embraced each
other with all the passion imaginable; the maid, indeed, was for serving
up the supper, but they had affairs of greater moment to talk of first,
which we plainly perceiving withdrew, and diverted ourselves for some
time as well as we could. In about two hours we heard him whistle, which
was the signal for our coming, when we supped all together. Our bellies
being full, Lewis and I roved about at a distance, and left them again
till it was daybreak. “Now, Robin,” says he, “we must do as the wild
boars do, get a great distance from the place where they have been doing
their mischief.” So crossing the river again, we walked about till noon;
when a man was to come and bring us some provisions. As I was looking
out sharply, and listening for the token, which was a whistle, I
approached him, but the fellow being silly, and knowing nothing of a
white man, threw down the meat, and a whole calabash of toake, and took
to his heels. As soon as he got home he told his mistress, that he saw a
white spirit, and it ran after him for the meat, which he was forced to
leave behind him. This gave us some diversion the next night, when she
came again: a capon, rice, and toake were brought this evening likewise;
and I could not forbear rallying my master on having patience enough now
to sup, and regale himself with toake as soon as it came. When we had
drank plentifully they bid us go and watch at a distance, and find out
some amusement or other to pass away the night. And, indeed, had we not
made ourselves merry, and been as agreeable to one another as such an
occasion required, the night would have seemed very long and tedious. We
slept a little towards daybreak, and when I went to them they were not
up; however, they soon arose, and took their leave too, by rubbing their
noses together, and drawing their breath like persons who take snuff.
After this they parted well satisfied for the present.

It was now broad daylight, so that when we attempted to go over the
plantation the same way as we came, the people were up; and as we were
both remarkable persons, he by his height, and I by my colour, the very
seeing us at a distance would have been enough to betray the whole
secret. We had no way, therefore, to take but through a thicket of
thorny wood. I went first upon my knees, and beat them down with a
stick, and my master followed. Though our shoulders bled in many places,
which we did not regard at first through eagerness, and when we did it
was to little purpose, for it would have been as bad to have retreated.
So, in short, we went through; but on our arrival on the other side of
the river, we stood still to look on one another, and perceiving how
miserably our hides were scratched and torn, we could not refrain from
laughter, though we were severely mortified. We still endeavoured to
find out private ways, being as much ashamed now as we were afraid
before of being seen. As soon as Guy saw us, he could not forbear
smiling. Rer Vove told him, we had been hunting a wild boar, and by
pursuing him too eagerly into the thickets, we got scratched in this
piteous manner. “It is much more probable,” said Guy, “a wild woman, and
the right owner pursuing you too closely, you were glad to escape to the
first wood you came at.” Ry Kaley grew a little jealous too upon the
occasion, but we laughed it off.

We being all met again, we proceeded to the northward, where the cattle
are all kept. This is as fine a country as ever I saw, and the best
stocked with all the necessaries of life. These people never go forth to
war, but constantly employ the whole of their time in taking care of the
king’s and their lord’s cattle: they have plenty likewise of their own.
The king’s cattle are marked with the stamp called chemerango. Here are
such numbers of them, that it is not known within two or three thousand
how many belong to him. Some of these oxen are scarcely able to walk for
age, and others are so fat they cannot stir. They never milk above the
fourth part of the cows, though the place is populous, and as large as
some king’s dominions. They have a great many towns, and many Virzimbers
dwell among them. The chief town is of large extent, where the principal
herdsman keeps a great court, and has full power and authority to decide
all controversies, and punish any offender without appeal. When we saw
him, he made as grand a figure as a king, and was sitting with his
attendants about him in the same manner. However, he arose to kiss Rer
Vove’s knee, (not his feet,) as a testimony of his more than common
respect for him. He had eight thousand head of cattle of his own, and
near three hundred slaves. He made my master a present of five of his
own, and fifteen of the chemango’s. He seldom, if ever, goes out on
foot, but is carried on a bier on men’s shoulders. He is very old,
indeed, having been cow-keeper to Rer Trimmonongarevo’s father, deaan
Lohefute.

Butter and cheese might be made here in plenty, were there but people
who understood the art of it, for the cows give abundance of milk,
though not altogether so much as ours do in England, but then they
continue it longer; summer time in this hot country being the worst for
the cattle. In this place, however, there are so many rivers, brooks,
and springs, that they are never incommoded with such droughts as they
sometimes are in Anterndroea. Here are tallow and hides too in
abundance, but few think it worth their while to regard them. Several
other commodities are to be found here which are worthy of notice: wax
is so plentiful that it is thrown away; there is iron too in many parts
of the country, as well as here, and the natives are no strangers to the
making of steel. Here is copper, likewise, of their own production, of
which they make mannelers. In some of the most mountainous and inland
parts of the country they have silver, and know how to make ear-plates
of it, and mannelers: so that I have the highest reason to think the
country produces it, as well as it does a white metal, much like our
British tin, or tutanag; nor is there any reason to doubt that gold is
to be found here. Here are many other things, but as I cannot give a
satisfactory account of them, I pass them over in silence. But,

I must not here omit to mention the several sorts of silk, of which
there is plenty in every part of the island where I have been. Some is
of a brownish colour, others of a white; the outside is full of small
pointed prickles; the cod or bag is nearly three inches long, and shaped
like a nine pin; at the top, when we take it, there is a hole, out of
which I have extracted a blackish worm; but I am not able to describe
it, or the manner of its transformation, as the common silkworm: this I
know, that there are no mulberry trees. The silk of these worms is found
upon three or four several sorts of trees; for when they spin they
cleave to the thick branches or body of the tree. I have seen the people
on their knees, pull the cod out to a great length, which they tease to
pieces, and then spin it with a spindle, made of bone, and a rock-staff;
after that they weave it as they do cotton, and it makes not only
pretty, but very fine lambers. There is some trouble in the management
of it, which is all the reason I can offer for their making so little
use of it. In this part of Saccalauvor, where the cattle are kept, is a
tree called rofeer; which is of singular service to the middle sort of
people to make lambers of. The leaf is like that of a cocoa-nut tree,
but longer by two feet; they take off the outer part, and put the other
to dry for two or three days together, which is then thin and white like
a long shaving. After that they moisten it again, and split it into
threads, which they knot in a very neat manner, and weave into cloth:
some of it is frequently dyed, and made into lambers striped. This tree
bears a fruit that much resembles a damson.

After Rer Vove had taken a review of his cattle, and left behind him
about two hundred of them, which he got by this journey, we returned
home to plant rice; for men of the highest distinction here look after
their plantations themselves, and take care to furnish their families
with proper provisions. He had not been long at home, before some
business called him to Moherbo, and through Guy’s artifice and
intercession I got leave to accompany him, for I had a strong
inclination to see the Englishman. He soon perceived I was his
countryman, and we were more overjoyed to see each other, than relations
are who live ever so distant. His name was William Thornbury, he had
been nine years in the country. It was his first voyage; for he was then
a boy, who like me, was resolutely bent on going to sea; but a hard gale
of wind arising suddenly, drove their ship from her anchors, and whether
some pirate was in sight, or what was the real cause he could not tell,
but they never returned, leaving him with the surgeon and another man
ashore; the two last in a few months died with grief, and he was left
alone. The king took what small quantity of goods their captain had left
on shore, and sent immediately for Thornbury. He went, and his majesty
very kindly told him he had no occasion to fear any thing; for he would
take care he should not only be supplied with whatever he wanted, but
that he would, moreover, send him home by the first vessel. In all which
he was as good as his word, nor ever attempted to make a slave of him,
as Mevarrow did of me; so that when we compared our hard destinies, mine
was much the severer of the two. He went to the king’s eldest wife for
some toake, in order to treat me with it, which she readily granted.

I have already given the reader an idea of this king’s person: as to his
hasty temper and cruel actions I had heard much talk of them before now;
William Thornbury, however, let me more fully into his character. I
found, upon taking in the whole detail of him, that glory and ambition
were his principal aim; which he looked upon to consist in the wealth
and prosperity of his country. For Saccalauvor was neither richer nor
more powerful than other countries till his accession to the regal
state. But he having expelled both his brothers upon his assumption of
the supreme dignity, one of them, as I have mentioned before, fled to
Feraignher, and got possession of part of the country to the southward;
the other, accompanied by about eight hundred men, passed through the
fine country where the cattle are kept, and where the Virzimbers at that
time resided, moving still farther to the northward, and settled on that
river which the Europeans at this time call Masseleege. The Virzimbers
fled from him on his first approach, but finding that his intentions
were peaceable, and that he was only seeking a place of refuge for
himself, they returned to their habitations, and lived under his
jurisdiction. Here he established a kingdom almost as extensive and
powerful as his brother’s; which his son, deaan Tokeoffu is now in the
possession of. Rer Trimmenongarevo understanding his brother had thus
happily settled himself, sent ambassadors to propose an amicable
alliance between them; which he, being a good-natured man, readily came
into; hoping God, and his deceased father deaan Lohefute, would forgive
his brother, and for the future bless them both.

Rer Trimmonongarevo now caressed some of the Virzimbers, and gave them
towns on the banks of Mernee. He was very generous likewise to his own
subjects, and made considerable presents, not only of cattle, but slaves
to those who had suffered losses in his service; but more especially he
took all the engaging and political ways he could devise to tempt people
from other countries to come and live in Saccalauvor. I have already
mentioned his courteous treatment of the Feraignher people whose
families had been taken in war; restoring all the captives and cattle to
such masters and relations as would come and settle in his dominions. By
this means they are grown not only vastly populous, but rich, and the
people live in plenty as well as peace; they reverence and adore him, in
short, as a tender and indulgent father of his country. But see now the
danger of submitting implicitly to the arbitrary will and pleasure of
any man; even though he has many useful and great virtues to recommend
him. People by such means become slaves to the man who is not in every
respect a hero, but attended with human frailties, and subject to
passions less governable than in men of lower station. Superior
greatness is his view, which explained, is advancing his prerogative
beyond that of his predecessors, and showing that he can determine
according to his own will more absolutely than any of his
contemporaries. Absolute power is what all ambitious princes aim at, and
thirst to enjoy it. This the world may see is the darling passion of the
vicious great; and this was the misfortune that attended Saccalauvor; at
least that part of it which was under the immediate jurisdiction of Rer
Trimmonongarevo: for the other lords, his sons and nephews, were as
humane as those in any other part of the island; but the authority he
had usurped had made him so haughty and imperious, that to show he could
act as he pleased, and was not to be governed by the traditional laws,
when an ambassador or any strangers were at his town, he would order
some one or other of any two contending parties to immediate execution
for very trivial faults, and sometimes for none at all. This barbarous
disposition, however, did not appear till he was sufficiently
established in his government; and then several instances of his cruelty
were too conspicuous. By these vile actions he lost the love of many of
his subjects, who withdrew to live under more humane sovereigns. Some
quite abandoned the country, and went to his brother’s son Toakoffu;
though they might have been tolerably safe with his sons and nephews.
And this is the only remedy which these people have against arbitrary
power; for they have no notion of a _jus divinum_, as we call it, nor
think themselves obliged by the laws of religion to suffer any
impositions. The lords likewise have contracted a very laudable and
humane custom of being extremely fond of relieving such as are
distressed, even though there has been enmity before. This was deaan
Crindo’s son’s case when he fled to Antenosa, and this very king’s
brother, Rer Mimebolambo’s, when he fled to Feraignher; and to this
generous virtue my own deliverance was principally owing.

I was one day in this king’s presence when there was a crowd about him,
and upon his coughing and fetching his breath a little uneasily, the
people fell immediately prostrate on the ground. The reason, as I
understood afterwards was, because not long before, in such a fit of
short breathing, he took up a blunderbuss and discharged it among them
without speaking a word, or making any other excuse, when he had thus
killed two or three of his attendants, than “why did they stifle him?” I
never saw such abject slavery on the island before; and yet to do him
justice I must say he was far from being in all his actions and
resolutions a bloody tyrant; for, two or three instances of severe
executions only excepted, which he ordered out of ostentation, his other
barbarities were only now and then the effects of his inordinate
passion; which, indeed, grew worse as he advanced in years. It must be
acknowledged that he directed corporal punishments oftener than were
practised in any other country. Here was during my residence amongst
them, a woman who complained to him against another for robbing one of
his wives, who was her mistress; but upon examination the accuser was
found a very sorry creature, and one whose ears had been cut off for a
former misdemeanour. Some ambassadors being then present, the wicked
wretch made choice of that time to accomplish the end of her malice the
more effectually; for as the people expected a bloody decision, so it
happened; yet one can hardly pronounce it was unjust though very severe;
for after hearing, with a great deal of patience, all that she alleged,
and inquiring into every minute circumstance of the case, he ordered the
base accuser to be carried off and killed directly. The person so
unjustly accused desired to have the liberty of being the executioner
herself, with which he complied, and gave her a sword for that purpose.
She soon overtook the proper officer, who, seeing the king’s sword, held
the criminal while the other cut her throat. These are instances
sufficient to show the virtues and vices, as well as the singular
disposition of this extraordinary king.

During my stay here I saw William Purser, the interpreter, and several
others of Feraignher; and among the rest my old friend Ry-Nanno, (Rer
Vovvern’s ambassador to deaan Crindo, who was the first that directed me
to Feraignher,) came to pay me a visit. He lived as great as in his own
country, having voluntarily followed some of his family who were taken
prisoners.

Rer Vove was now on his return home, and my countryman and I were to
part, which we did with no small reluctance; yet not before we had given
each other full instructions where to find our respective friends,
whoever should be so happy as to reach England first, which proved to be
his good fortune.

Some few days after we were got home the two Amboer-lambo ambassadors,
who were at Moherbo, being on their return into their own country, and
passing through our town, Rer Vove prevailed on them to stay a night
with him, and allotted them a commodious apartment, to which they
invited me, and seated me on their own mat between them. Their
curiosity, they said, led them to inquire after the manners and customs
of my country in general, and of my own adventures in particular. I
gratified them in the best manner I could, or rather so as they were
best capable of understanding me. For as to the largeness and grandeur
of our court, city, fleets, armies, &c., on all which I expatiated, they
would give no credit to it, and looked upon it only as a mere romance.
In my turn I asked them where their country lay. They told me it was a
mountainous inland place, divided into two kingdoms, called
Amboer-lambo, which were governed by two brothers. They had vast large
ears, with silver plates in them that glittered like comets. I was very
desirous to know how they came so. They informed me that when they are
young a small hole only is made at first and a piece of lead put into
it; when the wound is healed they have a small spring-ring put into it,
which extends it by degrees, and after this another, till the hole is as
large as they think convenient; then they place these silver plates in
it, which are neatly made, and exactly fitted to the hole, with great
precaution for fear of breaking it. Some of these holes in their ears
are so large, that a woman may put her hand through it. They have
several artificers among themselves who make these ornaments. The poorer
sort, they said, who could not afford silver, had them of tutanag; which
they call ferochfutey. They came into this country to trade chiefly in
iron, of which they make abundance; however, they bring great quantities
of silk likewise. Their vallies are very foggy and marshy, unwholesome
for cattle, and not fit to be inhabited, so that they buy cattle. The
mountains are so stony, that they have scarcely earth sufficient for the
foundations of their houses. They told me moreover, that Rer
Trimmonongarevo will not sell them any guns, nor suffer his people to
supply them with fire-arms. Before the Europeans had stocked the island
with guns, they were too strong for the Saccalauvors in deaan Lohefute’s
time; but this king is at present too powerful. They have (they said) a
trade sometimes to Mattatanna and Antenosa; but not sufficient to
furnish them with arms and ammunition. I observed, that metals of all
kinds were commodities they dealt in.

Hitherto I lived pretty well; and indeed for about three months
afterwards; at which time a ship came to Yong-Owl to trade. Her name (as
I have since been informed) was the Clapham-galley, captain Wilks
commander. Those who had slaves to sell carried them down to the
seaside. My master was likewise preparing some for that purpose; the
thought of it almost transported me, yet I could not tell how to make my
request known. At length I made my application to my friend Guy, and
having expostulated the case with him and his wife, I prevailed on him
to solicit my master that I might be sent down and sold to the captain;
he made the motion accordingly one evening in my absence. And it was
happy for me that I was abroad, for had it not been for the mediation of
some friends he would have found me out and shot me directly. As soon as
I came to him he ordered me to deliver him my gun, saying, I was a
prisoner of war, and a slave too; and he would make me know as much. As
for Will. he was an unfortunate youth indeed, and was left by mere
accident upon the shore; there is a wide difference between his case and
yours. Upon which he called his cook; “Here, Mechorow,” said he, “take
care of this white captive; and see that he, like other slaves, obeys
your orders.” Mechorow did not fail to observe his instructions, and was
the severer upon me, because there was a time when I had authority over
him. He frequently made me carry an iron pot on my head, when Rer Vove
and his wife took their pleasure on the islands in the middle of the
river Mernee; where one while he would go to kill wild fowl, and at
another to destroy alligators. But before the ship set sail I
endeavoured to inform the captain by this stratagem. I took a
satter-leaf, which was about two inches broad, and a foot and a half
long, and marked upon it these words following. Robert Drury, son of Mr
Drury, living at the King’s-Head in the Old Jewry; now a slave on the
island of Madagascar in the country of Morandavo, or Yong-owl. I desired
the favour of one who was going to the seaside to deliver this leaf to
the first white man he saw; but when he returned I asked him what answer
he had? “None at all,” said he, “for I suppose the white man did not
like it, since he threw the leaf away; though I am sure it was as good,
if not better, than that which you gave me. ’Tis true, I dropped yours,
but then I pulled one of the best I could find from off a tree.” My
heart was ready to break at this disappointment; whereupon I turned from
him, and went directly into the woods to vent my grief in tears. I heard
soon after, that Will. Thornbury was discharged; I was then in some
hopes that by his means my redemption might be accomplished. But to my
no small mortification I soon heard the ship had sailed, and not one
word of me mentioned. This drove me almost to madness, and what could be
the reason why the captain should take no notice of me, I cannot
conceive; for Will. Thornbury, doubtless, would have mentioned me to
him.

Not long after this I was taken with a violent pain in my bones; which
at first I took for a cold. But it increased to that degree that I could
not walk without crutches. This disease continued three months
successively, and then I began to have large boils or blotches break out
all over my body; my neighbours soon perceived it was the colah or yaws;
and Rer Vove sent me to a Virzimber’s house on the banks of Mernee, in
order for a cure. They took the bark of a tree, of which I do not
recollect the name, steeping it in water. With this they washed and
bathed me every day, which in a few weeks made my bones much easier; and
in a few weeks more the blotches died, and wore away; after which I
recovered my strength apace. I lived with these Virzimbers in all about
six months.

These people are almost of a different species from the others. Their
heads are of a peculiar shape, the hinder part and the forehead are
almost as flat as a trencher: but this I imagine to be unnatural, for it
is framed thus by a daily pressure of their children from the cradle.
Their hair is neither so long nor so woolly as that of the other
nations. Their religion, likewise, is widely distant from other
people’s. They have no owleys in their houses, but pay an awful regard
to the new moon, and to several animals; namely, a cock, a lizard, and
the like. Whether they think these creatures have spirits or not, or
demons that attend them, I cannot determine; for whenever they
discoursed among themselves, it was in a peculiar language, to which I
was so much a stranger, that I was not able to give a sufficient reason
for these particulars. When they seat themselves to their meals, they
take a bit of meat, and throw it over their heads, saying, “There’s a
bit for the spirit.” In the next place, they cut four little bits more
and throw to the sovereigns or rulers of the four quarters of the earth.
This is the constant practice of such as have any regard to religious
ceremonies, but there are too many who neglect it, as some in Europe,
and look on saying grace at their meals, as an idle fashion. They dress
their victuals much more agreeably than the other people; for they
always boil plantains or potatoes with their meat, and make good soup,
and well thickened as they do in Europe.

They make curious earthenware, such as pots, dishes, and jugs, glazing
them both within and without; and are very ingenious artificers in many
other particulars. Though their ingenuity was superior, yet I could not
perceive they ever formed themselves into regular kingdoms, or into
large commonwealths, but herded together in towns; each town being a
distinct and independent republic, which too often produced quarrels and
bloodshed, one little town standing in opposition to another. There
being no general law or government which could settle their just claims,
or determine any unhappy dissensions between one town and another; till
they in this part made Rer Trimmonongarevo their patron and protector,
whilst others put their whole confidence in deaan Tokeoffu. There are
more of them as I have heard, in other parts of the island, scattered up
and down, who shift their habitations; which these were wont to do
formerly. ’Tis no easy matter to determine whether these are not the
original natives, or first inhabitants of the land. I observed here,
that difference in religion was looked upon as no crime, nor any offence
to one another. Moreover, that they, like the others, have no priests.

Having now in great measure recovered my strength, I began to reflect on
the misery of returning to my former slavery; and for that reason, after
some conflict with myself, I determined to run the risk of throwing
myself at Rer Moume’s feet, to beg his protection, be the consequence
what it would; death being preferable to perpetual slavery. Having
imbibed this notion, I desired my landlord one morning to put me over
the water in his canoe; for I would willingly pay a visit to a friend on
that side, it not being above two hours’ walk to Rer Moume’s town.

At my arrival I found him sitting under a kind of pent-house, with his
wives round about him. I laid down, and licked his feet, then rising
upon my knees, I lifted up my hands, and sued to him for mercy and
protection from the ill treatment of my master Rer Vove; he having made
the most abject slave of me, for only desiring a friend to beg of him to
sell me (not to make a present of me) to my own countrymen; that I might
see my dear parents once more, from whom I had been absent so many
years. My master insisted that I was his slave, his prisoner of war,
though I was there no otherwise than Will. was here, a poor unhappy
creature wandering about till I could find an opportunity to get to my
native country, and was no enemy of his, neither was I taken in arms.
Should you deliver me up to him, he would doubtless kill me, and there
will be an end of all my sorrows; but I live in hopes of finding mercy
from you. I soon perceived that my mournful tale affected him; for the
tears stood in his eyes, and some of the women actually wept. He bid me
rise, and be assured that he would not deliver me up to Rer Vove.
“Should my kinsman (says he) want slaves to do his work (though I know
the contrary) I will send him two or three in your stead. Be not afraid,
I will both protect and provide for you.” Then turning to one of his
consorts, “Here Ry Anzacker,” says he, “do you from henceforth be
Robin’s mother; and take care he wants for nothing. All I shall desire
of you (said he to me) will be to look after my chest of arms, which are
a hundred or more in number; and see that my flints and shot are all
kept in order, and you shall have servants too to do the work.” Then
calling a slave, he gave him directions to build me a house next to my
mother’s within the palisade. In two days I was a housekeeper. Ry
Anzacker proved very kind to me, and I never walked out without my gun
in my hand like a freeman.

In a few days after several messengers came from Rer Vove to Rer Moume.
I was by when, in their lord’s name, they demanded his white slave. Rer
Moume examined them first, to know if what I had told was matter of
fact; and when he found it was, “I am sorry (said he) my kinsman is so
rash and thoughtless a young man to act after this manner. Did any one
ever see before a white man a slave to a black man’s cook-slave; unless
it was among the worst of brutes in that unpolished country Anterndroea?
It was a very unjust thing to force him from Feraignher; and when he was
here, it would have been the part of a wise and honest man to have
presented Robin to the English captain, and made a merit of taking care
of him. In so doing he had done a generous action, and it would have
reflected an honour on himself, and on us all. He should recollect the
many benefits we have received from the English, and that we were
insulted by all our neighbours, till they furnished us with arms. Here,
take this woman-slave, and give her to him; she is able to do more
service than Robin, in case he wants work from him. As for my part, I
shall make no slave of him, I’ll assure you; he may go when he will, and
live where he will; even with Rer Vove, if he thinks proper; and does
not care to live with me. However, I shall not consent to that, unless I
am well satisfied of his being more courteously treated. Here, take the
woman in his stead.” They came again the next day with the woman, and
renewed their yesterday’s demand; to which he gave an answer in direct
terms, that they should not have me.

I was treated here in a most courteous manner by all the king’s wives;
but particularly by my mother, Ry Anzacker; they taking great delight in
the many stories I told them of my misfortunes and adventures. I used
frequently to go with Rer Moume to a spacious lake which had islands in
it, several miles round, called the Kereendea. This place was formerly
drowned by the Mernee’s breaking its banks. Rer Moume was always carried
in a vehicle, not much unlike a sedan; and had a canoe large enough to
hold twenty men, in which was a seat made on purpose for him, he not
being able to sit, as other people did, upon the floor. Several other
canoes of ten and five hands, and some small ones of two, used to
accompany him. Our principal employments were fishing and fowling; in
which the Virzimbers are very dexterous, making nets of various kinds,
and also fishhooks for angling, which was Rer Moume’s favourite
diversion. His son, Rer Chulu, would often divert himself with killing
alligators; and the weapon he generally used was a harpoon, with a head
fixed on it, and a rope fastened to the steel and staff both. Being thus
furnished with tackle, they paddle along the water towards the
alligator, whom they generally espy at a distance; for they keep their
noses above water, and appear like a floating cake of cowdung. When they
come within ten or a dozen yards of him, he sinks to the bottom, and
crawls a good way before he stops; but his path is discovered by a
bubble that rises up, and where it stands they strike; for they will lie
flat on their bellies with their sides pressed out, where they hear a
noise; so that they are often stabbed with the harpoon. Though should it
light on their backs, or heads, it will make no more impression than it
would on a rock. The Virzimbers make a net of ropes, with large meshes,
and with these they sometimes take them; they also take them with snares
made of spring-sticks, which draw up a noose in a rope; these they place
at the mouth of a rivulet, or small canal. And by these methods I have
known Rer Chulu and his company kill twenty or thirty alligators in a
day.

Rer Moume made me a present of three cows, which calved in four months.
He asked me why I did not marry? I told him I could not well maintain a
wife, and that at present I lived very well, and much better than I
could with a woman to provide for. He said, it was not looked upon as
decent for a man to live single; and as for her maintenance, I’ll not
only put it in your power to do that, but recommend one to you likewise.
So as I perceived he was serious, I was soon persuaded; but with this
proviso, that he should not compel the woman, but ask her consent, and
leave it to her own choice; to which he readily agreed. So sending for
one who was an attendant on my mother, he opened the case to her and
told her she should be my wife if she thought fit; and bid her speak her
mind freely; for he did not intend she should submit to it through any
compulsion. But with an air of cheerfulness she said she approved of the
motion. Upon this Ry Anzacker took her back again, to dress her up very
fine with beads, and a new silk lamber, &c., and presented her to me. I
desired that the prince would make a formal marriage of it, by taking
hold of her hand first; and then asking us both, if we gave our mutual
consent? And then by giving her hand into mine: all which he readily
gratified me in, with abundance of affability and good nature, and was
very merry; as the women were, likewise, according to custom on such
occasions. The ladies attended us home, but not empty handed; for they
gave us a large quantity of such kind of furniture as we principally
wanted. The prince too gave me the day following a plantation with rice
and potatoes, &c. growing upon it, and fit to dig. He gave me, moreover,
a slave, a boy about sixteen years of age; and in a short time, he sent
me with others to fetch away some cattle from a man, who, upon
examination before him, had been found guilty of stealing several from
his neighbours; for which facts he was fined twenty beeves. This was the
first time I was ever sent on such an errand, though not the last; and
people of the best rank are fond of this employment; for they never fail
of a good present for their trouble. He gave me, likewise, a cow with
her calf, and a young bull of three years old. Whenever I went on any
such occasions afterwards, I never had less than one beast for my
labour, and sometimes two; so that I grew rich and sent most of my
cattle four miles off, agreeing with a man to give him the tithe calf of
such as he should rear for me, keeping three cows only at home for milk.
So that now I lived as happily as the country could afford me; nay, so
much to my satisfaction, that had I not a desire to see my parents once
again, I question whether I should ever have taken any pains to get to
England; and even when I wished for it, I was perfectly easy; since I
was assured that Will. Thornbury would inform my friends where I was,
and how the world went with me.

Some months after this, Rer Vove sent word that he purposed to pay his
uncle a visit; upon which I went directly to Rer Moume, and told him, I
was going for three or four days to pay my respects to his son Rer
Chemunghoher. “I know (said Rer Moume) what you mean, but you have no
occasion to fear Rer Vove; for he shall never have you against your
will.” And at the same time he persuaded me to stay and see him, which I
did. After some previous discourse about business, and they had drunk a
cup or two of toake together, he cast his eyes on me, and told his uncle
he was surprised that he should use him in so uncivil a manner, as to
detain his slave. Rer Moume replied, he was not conscious of keeping any
slave of his from him, and if he would nominate the person, he should be
instantly restored. “Why there he stands,” says Rer Vove. “I hope (says
the uncle) you don’t mean Robin, the white man. Is he a slave of yours?
I am ashamed of your imprudence to say so. Is it not to the white men,
but more especially to his countrymen, the English, that we are indebted
for the riches we enjoy? We, who formerly were insulted by the
Amboer-lambo people, and other nations around us, are by these
Englishmen’s guns made too powerful for them; and by the beads,
looking-glasses, &c., which they bring in plenty, our late enemies are
fond of our friendship and traffic. And don’t you think it a fine story
for Will. to tell, that one of his countrymen, who happened to be
shipwrecked in this country, was made a slave of by a black lord of
Morandavo? But to satisfy you that I don’t treat him like a slave, he is
at his liberty to go this moment where he pleases; and take his wife,
his slave, and his cattle with him; nay, back with you, if you can
prevail on him so to do; and give me your word and honour that you will
make him a freeman.” After this manner he argued with his nephew, and
reproached him with indiscretion as well as inhumanity, by treating a
man in distress with too much severity, till he convinced him of his
mistake; insomuch that he desired I would come and see him in the
evening, which I did. At my entrance into the house I licked his knee as
a testimony of my respect; but not his feet, to let him see that I knew
I was a freeman. He used many arguments to induce me to live with him,
and made me very large promises; which, probably, he might have
performed: for he was no vile person, but only too rash and
inconsiderate. He also set Guy to influence me, if possible, who made
use of one engaging argument; namely, that Rer Vove intended to travel
into the dominions of other princes, out of curiosity to see their
various manners and customs. I told Guy the true reason why I would not
consent to it; which was that I was much nearer the sea now than when
with them; and that I did not question but Rer Moume would send me home
by the first ship that came. After this I sat and drank toake with them,
then took my leave, and was returning homeward, but Rer Vove followed me
and desired I would never mention his amour with his kinsman’s wife;
which I assured him I never would whilst I lived in the country; and so
we parted good friends. It will not be improper, I presume, to make one
cursory remark here, which is, that this gay young gentleman was highly
to be commended for so readily conceding to his uncle’s arguments,
attending to what he said with reverence, and being convinced by reason.

Thus I lived with Rer Moume as easy and happy as he could possibly make
me; and the only misfortune that now attended me, was my residence in a
foreign country, But my hard destiny had still one melancholy scene or
danger more to affright me with before I left this island; and it was as
horrible and shocking to human nature, as any I had hitherto undergone;
and the more so, because altogether unexpected, not only by myself, but
by every one else; which was thus introduced. There lived at Moherbo,
one Francisco, an inoffensive man, born in the East Indies, of
Portuguese parents; but as black as most of them. He had lived here many
years to his satisfaction, never proposing to remove from off the
island; he had been taken by pirates, who, at his request, set him
ashore. This man, though a surgeon (as he said) by profession, had a
mechanical head, especially to carpenters’ and joiners’ business, and
had furnished himself with tools for his purpose; and used frequently to
oblige the princes and lords with making them chests, &c. Rer Moume sent
and desired him to get leave of Rer Trimmonongarevo to come and make him
one; which he did. As this artificer spoke the Madagascar language
freely, we were agreeable companions. He told me, as part of his secret
history, that he was violently in love with a young woman, whose
parents, though they were not inclined to the match, did not positively
give him a denial. After he had stayed here nearly two months, and
finished what Rer Moume had to do, he was dismissed with a generous
reward.

When he had been some months at home, with Rer Moume’s leave I went to
visit him at Moherbo, and found him very ill and melancholy, his
mistress in his absence having married another person, which he took to
heart. He had made her several presents during his courtship, and
received her promise of marriage, which, on his ill treatment, he
demanded of her parents again, and on their refusal complained to the
king; he being in esteem and always near his person. His request was
rejected, the king saying, he would never compel parents to dispose of
their children against their inclinations. Upon which, Francisco said
indiscreetly in the king’s hearing, that as soon as he was recovered of
his illness, he would leave Moherbo, and live under Rer Moume. I had
been here but a few days before he began to gather strength, and then he
and I went to the king’s court. As I was standing by him the king cast
an angry eye upon me, and asked, who that white man was with his gun
upon his shoulder? Francisco answered, “It is Rer Moume’s white man, who
came to give me a visit.” “Is it so,” said he, “then I know what he
wants. Come hither. What is your business here, pray?” I, being
conscious of his barbarous disposition, answered in a faint and
trembling voice, “Only to visit my sick friend.” “Yes,” replied the
king, “your friend there, in my hearing, said he would go to your master
Rer Moume, as soon as he was recovered, and I suppose you are come to
conduct him thither; but I will spoil your project. Here, Mesoro,”
calling to the officer, “take this white slave to the place of
execution, despatch him presently and bring his gun to me.” The people
were struck with surprise as well as myself; however, I was led out for
execution, and multitudes followed me, some of whom desired to shake
hands with me, and take their leave of me, which the executioner
permitted. I was so shocked with the tiger-like leap which this savage
brute made at my life, that I became stupid, not knowing whether I was
in a dream, till I came to the place of execution, where I saw the bones
of several wretches lie unburied. Rousing from my lethargy, I began to
weep piteously, and to pray to God to receive my soul. What a shocking
turn of fortune was this! that one who but some few minutes before was
surrounded by his friends, one whose mind was innocent and free from
evil, whose actions were inoffensive, and of whom no man could justly
complain, should, in a moment, be doomed to die an ignominious death by
the hands of a common executioner, like a vile malefactor, on no other
account, than to gratify the resentment of an old, doating, choleric
savage. While I was thus bemoaning my hard fate, and the people pitying
my deplorable case, instead of falling on the monster, and freeing
themselves and me from his tyranny, a voice was heard at a distance,
“Stay, stay, don’t kill Robin.” The words were soon repeated, and the
messenger came forward with orders to bring me back; at which the people
gave a general shout for joy. When I came before the king, not only his
principal wife, but the rest of them were on their knees, with tears in
their eyes; nay, some men too were expostulating with him, telling him
he would bring irretrievable ruin and desolation on his country; the
fatal effects of which his great grandchildren would certainly feel,
when the white men should hear of his barbarity to one of their
countrymen, who had done nothing to deserve it. This, at length,
assuaged the heat of his fury; telling me I might thank my friends, or I
had been dog’s meat by this time. “However,” says he, “I will mortify
your pride still.” “Here,” says he to three men, “take him fettered as
he is, and carry him and his gun to Rer Moume, and pray tell my son I
expect he should treat him like a a slave as he is, and not let him
strut about like a lord, with his gun upon his shoulder.” Hereupon, I
fell prostrate on the ground and licked his feet, the people making
signs to me so to do. Upon this he bid me thank his women; I then paid
my respects to Ry Chemotoea and two or three more, and did so with all
sincerity, for it was to their entreaties I owed my life.

We went directly on our journey, and every town we passed through, the
people asked with astonishment, what crime the white man had been guilty
of, that he should be thus bound? To whom my guard without palliating
the case in the king’s favour told the truth, for which every one seemed
to pity me, and resent the king’s ill usage of me. At night when we came
to lie down to rest, they asked me whether I would have my hands untied
or not? I asked them what were their orders; they said, “their orders
were to keep me bound.” “Then,” said I, “though it is somewhat painful
to me, yet you shall not hazard your lives for my ease.” So I lay as
well as I could all night, and the next day travelled in the same
manner; every now and then looking behind me with fear, lest he should
change his mind, and send some one after us to despatch me, for I could
not think myself safe till I saw Rer Moume again.

As we walked along, my guards told me I was the first who ever returned
alive from the place of execution; which I could not but impute to an
all wise and overruling Providence. They told me likewise, that he
stabbed one of his chief wives, though when his passion was over he
repented it, for yielding to an effort of nature, whilst his head was in
her lap with intention to sleep. Another instance of his inhumanity,
though attended with some justice, was, in ordering one of his own sons
to be extended on a mat, and his throat to be cut before his face, for
being too free with one of his wives.

We could not reach to our journey’s end this evening by two hours’ walk,
so we rested, and the next morning we set out early and arrived safely
at our town; where the people were all surprised to see me thus bound
and guarded. Some ran before to inform the prince, who, before we came
within his palisade, was sitting with his wives and several others round
about him in great expectation. As soon as the men were seated, they
told their message; I stood all the while with my hands bound behind me.
After he had examined into the affair, and found how the case was, his
countenance fell, the tears one while stood in his eyes as he viewed me
with pity; anon he frowned with indignation, the women too shared in my
distress. “And is this all,” says he, “the poor man has been so severely
used for? Robin, come hither, I will show you how much I regard my
father’s advice in this case.” Upon which he unloosed my hands, and
ordered one of his attendants to fetch him a fine silk lamber, which he
would make me put on directly; then taking my gun from the men, he gave
it me again; and made me a present besides of six cows. I told him the
messengers had been very civil to me, for which he not only thanked
them, but made them a present of an ox. “It is my father, I own,” says
he, “who has done this: for that reason I shall restrain my resentment
and say little of it; but had any other man, though a near relation,
nay, my own son, acted in this manner, he should have felt the weight of
my anger.” My wife came and licked my feet, expressing both her concern
for my ill treatment, and her joy for my return. This was about fifteen
months from the first time I came to Rer Moume.

I was now possessed of nearly thirty head of cattle, and lived in
affluence and ease. I killed a young bullock, and the part I kept to
myself I flead, and salted after the English mode; of the tallow I made
as good candles as I could. That part which I gave to my neighbours had
the skin on, for we have the same friendly customs here as in other
parts of the island, neither do their manners differ, except in the idle
custom of the royal families killing cattle. Here they eat swine’s
flesh, and think it as good as other provision. Rer Chulu kept a pack of
dogs on purpose to hunt wild boars, but they are not of the hound kind.
Their religion is the same exactly, and their superstitious regard to
unlucky days and hours, implicitly believing all the umossee tells them;
insomuch, that numbers of poor children are privately murdered, who are
born on an Alhaida or a Jumor, which are Sunday and Friday; for when I
came on board the ship, I carefully remarked how the days answered with
ours; and found that Alhaida was Sunday; Alletenine, Monday; Talewter,
Tuesday; Alarrerbere, Wednesday; Comemeeshey, Thursday; Jumor, Friday;
and Sarbuchee, Saturday. Though these denominations are used throughout
the island, yet they regard no one day more than another, only as they
imagine some to be lucky and others unlucky, for they have no notion of
a sabbath amongst them. Rer Moume, having lost the use of his limbs,
sent all over the island for the most famous umossees he could hear of,
to consult with them for relief; they being physicians as well as
prophets. One of them, during my stay here, confined him for two months,
bathing, sweating, and cupping him to little or no purpose; however, he
made him ample satisfaction for his trouble, as he did all others who
did him any service.

I lived with Rer Moume about two years and a half in all, at the end of
which term, news was brought that two ships were arrived at Yong-Owl to
trade. I was overjoyed to hear it, and flattered myself that W.
Thornbury had not forgotten me. They stayed there several days, and
slaves were sent to be sold, and guns and other goods were returned for
them. I was at a loss how to break my mind to Rer Moume, hoping he would
say something to me of his own accord; but as I was sitting with him one
evening, two men came in with a basket of palmetto leaves sewed up, and
delivered it to the prince; who opened it and finding a letter, asked
the men, what they meant by giving him that? “The captain,” they said,
“gave it us for your white man; but we thought proper to let you see it
first.” “Pray,” says he, “give it him all.” “Here, Robin, your
countrymen have sent you a present, what it is I don’t know, but to me
it seems of very little value.” Accordingly I took the basket, and with
the letter there were pens, ink, and paper, in order for my returning an
answer. The superscription was this:

            “To Robert Drury, on the island of Madagascar.”

I was so astonished, that at first I had not power to open it,
concluding I was in a dream; but at length, recovering my surprise, and
after a little recollection I opened it, and found it came from captain
William Macket. The contents whereof were to the effect following:—

“That he had a letter on board from my father, with full instructions as
well from him as his owners, to purchase my liberty let it cost what it
would. And in case I could not possibly come down myself, to send him
word the reason of it, and what measures he should take to serve me.”

Rer Moume perceived that my countenance changed whilst I was reading the
letter, and asked me what was the matter? I told him, that the captain
desired to speak with me, and that my father had sent for me home, and
hoped that he would please to give his consent. “How do you know all
this?” says the prince, “can you conjure?” Then turning to the
messengers, “Have you, pray, heard any thing like this?” “Yes,” said
they, “it is all the discourse at the seaside, that Robin’s father sent
both these ships for him, and more than all this, the king your father
expects him there with your leave, and desires to see him before he goes
to the ship.” Rer Moume took the letter, and turning it over and over
said, he had heard of such methods of conveying intelligence to one
another, but never actually saw it before, and could not conceive which
way it could be done without conjuration. I endeavoured to demonstrate
to him, as well as I could, how we learned in our infancy the characters
first, and then we put them together. “But,” says he, “I presume you
have no inclination to leave us now, since you live here so much at your
ease; you have several cattle and a slave, and if you shall want more
you shall have them, you shall have too as many wives as you please, and
be a great man.” I begged him to make my case his own, and that he would
please to consider whether he should not be desirous of seeing his
parents and native country, had he been absent so long as I had? “I
think I should,” he said, “and therefore I will take it into
consideration, and ask my wives’ advice about it, and give an answer in
the morning.”

My readers may easily imagine what a night of disorder this was to my
mind, agitated with hopes on one hand and with fears on the other;
however, I took care to attend him as soon as ever he was stirring, and
seated with his wives about him. After he had looked steadfastly on me
for some time, “Robin,” says he, “I have opened your affair to my wives
here, and your mother Ry Anzackar, and one or two more, consent to your
going, but the rest are all against it; however, let them speak for
themselves, it is out of respect to you that they are desirous you
should continue amongst them.” Upon this, I turned towards them, and
without waiting to hear what they had to offer, begged them to consider,
as they were mothers, whether or no, if a child of theirs was in a
strange country, they should not have an earnest inclination to see him,
and he them? Hereupon the prince told me, if I was willing to stay, he
would all along, as he had hitherto done, treat me like his own son, but
he would not make use of compulsion, so that if I was resolutely bent on
going he would dismiss me. Moreover, he told me, that my slave should go
with me; that as to my cattle, they were mine to dispose of as I
pleased. I replied, if he was so good as not to take my cattle from me,
though they were in fact his own, they might still remain there as they
were marked for mine; for I was fully determined to make one voyage more
here, in hopes of having it in my power to make him some amends for the
great care he had taken of me, by bringing a ship to traffic with him;
(and in this I was very sincere, and afterwards as good as my word.) I
asked him if he thought proper to demand any consideration of the
captain for my freedom. He answered, nothing; but if my friends would
make him a present of a good gun, he should accept of the favour, and
call it Robin in remembrance of me. This noble, generous answer, and so
prince-like, gave me such transports of joy, that I immediately kneeled
down, and licked his feet with the utmost sincerity, as justly thinking
I could never express my gratitude enough to this good, this indulgent
prince. He would not dismiss me instantly, but did in a day or two
after; and ordered the messengers to be taken care of in the mean time.
When the day of my departure came, I had one remaining difficulty to get
over, and that was the parting with my wife, the women of the prince’s
family, and himself, which I did with as much reluctance, as when I left
my natural parents at my departure from them; and they discovered an
equally tender affection for me; he would not, however, let us go empty
handed, but ordered an ox for our subsistence on our journey, and
appointed likewise two of his own people to accompany the other two; and
then we set forward.

I had yet one suspicious circumstance still to pass over, and that was
to call on Rer Trimmonongarevo: this gave me no small uneasiness; but
when we came near Moherbo, we were informed that he was gone to a place
within an hour’s walk of the seaside. As soon as I approached him, he
instantly made an apology for his too warm constitution, and confessed
that he had sometimes done mischief in his passion, but hoped I would
excuse him for what had passed; and said he was loth to let me go till
the ship was near upon sailing, lest I should prove detrimental to the
trade. I told him, I had no complaint to make, since his son had been so
indulgent to me; and that if he pleased to dismiss me at my friend’s
request, they would take it as a favour; but should he detain me, when
they knew I was so near, I did not know what ill consequences might
ensue thereupon. He kept me, however, this night, but dismissed me with
his blessing the next morning; praying that God and the demons would be
my guardians, and send me safely to my native country. So I licked his
feet and took my last farewell of him, and of this odd and filthy custom
likewise.

When I came down to the seaside, the first man who spoke to me was
William Purser, my old acquaintance in Feraignher; he came away to live
in more security and plenty, as well as several others; and was at this
time interpreter for the trade. Here were several houses, but such as
the English call huts, erected by the inhabitants at a small distance
from the factory, for the more commodious selling of milk and other
provisions. There I met Mr Hill, the steward of the Drake, captain
Macket’s ship, and two or three more of their crew, who took me for a
wild man; and in a letter he sent off by a canoe to the captain, he told
him the wild Englishman was come. I desired William Purser to inform
them that I could speak but little English; and though by the
conversation I had with William Thornbury I had regained some, yet I was
frequently puzzled for words to speak freely for several days. Captain
Macket soon came on shore, and captain Bloom with him, for here were two
ships, the Drake and the Sarah. I gazed at them as intently as if I had
never seen a white man dressed before; and what added to the wildness of
my appearance, was, that I had nothing on but my lamber; my skin being
swarthy and full of freckles, and my hair long and matted together, I
really made a frightful figure; but they soon restored me to my original
form, Mr Hill cut my hair off, and ordered me to be shaved, and dressed
in a neat seaman’s habit, light and fit for the country. The captain
asked me what ransom was expected for my freedom? I told him nothing but
a gun for a present, to be kept in remembrance of me. He thereupon
picked out a handsome and very good Buccaneer gun, as also some powder,
flints, and case of spirits, as a present to Rer Moume. He gave likewise
knives and beads to his two men, and a small gun to the messengers who
went for me. For my own part, I presented the captain with my slave
Anthony. After this he gave me the following letter from my father.

                          “To Robert Drury, on the island of Madagascar.
                                  “_Loughborough, February 27th, 1715._
                            “Son Robert Drury,

  “I am informed by one Mr Thornbury, that he left you in health on the
  island of Madagascar, which I was glad to hear; my very good friend,
  Mr Terry, hath a friend, commander of a ship, the bearer hereof, that
  hath promised to do all he can to get you your liberty; I therefore
  desire you to do the captain all the service you can in the country;
  and so doing you will oblige our good friend Mr Terry, and your
  ever-loving father till death,

                                                           “JOHN DRURY.”

About three days after I went on board; but the sea and change of diet
made me very sick for some time; after which the two captains went to
Rer Trimmonongarevo, and I with them, in order to settle some matters in
relation to the trade. It is a general custom all over the island for
the king of each place to make terms, and settle one universal price, to
which all the people are obliged to conform; and this method is,
doubtless, not only very commodious, but prevents all quarrels and
disorders. They presented the king with a fine gun, gilt and japanned. I
was the interpreter, and though I carried on the correspondence, my
dress had so altered me in these few days’ time, that he had no notion
who I was, till upon inquiry who that Englishman was who spake so well
their language, he was told it was Robin.

A few days after, there came messengers from Rer Moume, desiring the
captains to come up the river Mernee, for he had a great many slaves to
sell, but being lame he could not take a long journey; however, he would
come down to the banks of that river, to a town near enough for trade.
It was agreed that the Sarah should go, so they ordered a long-boat out
to sound before them; I went on board, and we sailed with a gentle gale,
but could find no convenient harbour or road in the mouth of the Mernee;
however, there was a convenient place for anchoring, in a saltwater
river, about three leagues on this side; from whence the two captains
and myself went up in the boat a considerable way, till a canoe took us
in and carried us to the town, where Rer Moume with his wives and people
were waiting for us. Until I kneeled and kissed his knee, he did not
know me, for my behaviour and grateful acknowledgments for his past
favours, he and they soon recollected me, and were extremely glad to see
me. Here we continued five days successively, bought all the slaves they
had, and agreed to send our long-boat once a week as long as we stayed;
and then they went on board, weighed anchor, and returned to their
former road at Yong-Owl, where there arrived that very day a third ship,
that belonged to the same owners, called the Mercury, captain White
commander; he had eight or nine natives of Dillagoe in Africa on board
him, who lived very merrily; they were all freemen, and went with him
the whole voyage, six of whom lived to see their native country the next
voyage he took, in which I was with him. Soon after this a ketch came
in, which was fitted out in order to cruise off the coast, and be
serviceable in several affairs; captain Henry Macket, the captain’s
brother, was the commander of her; another ship was still expected, but
she did not arrive till we were at Masseleege, otherwise called
Munnongaro; they now agreed to separate for the more speedy despatch of
business. Captain Bloom accordingly had his choice, which was to go to
Port Dauphine, and captain Macket to Masseleege, where we arrived in a
week’s time, and went several leagues up a great river, called
Munnonbaugher; we had a fisherman for our pilot, who informed us that
the king’s town was but about three hours’ journey up the country. The
captain asked me, if I would venture to go there; I readily answered,
that I would, and that I was not apprehensive of any danger; so the
fisherman setting us ashore we went forward. Before we had gone far from
the shore, the fisherman told me the king was gone out to war. Whereupon
I flew into a great passion, asking him why he imposed upon us; he said
the king’s wives would trade with us. I told him, we did not want
provisions; and as for slaves they had no authority to dispose of them.
The man, however, prevailed on me to go to their town, assuring me that
four white men lived there, who came from the island of St. Mary’s.
“Then, I presume, they are robbers of ships,” said I. “No,” he replied,
“not now, for they have lived there several years; their names are
captain Burgess, Zachary, John Pro, and Nick.” So I walked forwards with
my gun on my shoulder, and the man carried another. I had also several
knives and beads, which the captain gave me to buy provisions with,
though I knew how to live without buying any victuals, yet I took them,
as thinking they would be agreeable presents.

When I arrived at the town, a man ran before and informed the king’s
head consort, whom I shall call queen, that a ship was arrived, and that
one of the white men was coming to see her. At my arrival, a mat was
ready placed for me to sit down on; no sooner was I seated, than I heard
the queen ask for some of the white men to be interpreters between us,
and one ran that moment to fetch them. I soon convinced her, however,
that I wanted no assistants, and delivered my message, as ambassador
from the captain, saying, “I was afraid no trade could be carried on, as
the king was absent.” She said, “she expected him in a fortnight, and as
there was a great number of slaves to be sold, she desired me to prevail
on the captain to stay till his return.” By this time, came in two white
men abreast, making a formidable and hostile figure; upon which I cocked
my gun, laid the other by me, and planted myself directly before them.
One was John Pro, a Dutchman, who spoke good English; he was dressed in
a short coat with broad plate-buttons, and other things answerable, but
without either shoes or stockings. In his sash, he had stuck a brace of
pistols, and held one in his hand. The other was in an English dress,
and had two pistols in his sash, and one in his hand, like his
companion; they spoke to me in English, with the usual compliment, which
I returned; but Nick looked me wishfully in the face, and after a short
pause, took hold of my hand, saying, “Robert Drury, how have you done
these many years? My name is Nicholas Dove,” said he, “I am one of the
four boys who were saved with you when our ship’s company were massacred
in Anterndroea; and the very same of whom no tidings could be given in
the conference between deaan Crindo and king Samuel.” Upon this, I went
home with them after I had finished with the queen, in order to know
whether captain Macket would think proper to stay so long or not. John
Pro assured me it would certainly be well worth his while; that there
were a great number of slaves whom they wanted to dispose of; that the
king, deaan Toke-offu, was a very honest fair-dealing man, as well as a
great prince, and would return in a short time, though not so soon, he
feared, as the queen said. They were gone to encounter with a king to
the northward, and about five or six thousand of them went all the way
up the river in canoes, that were large enough to contain about thirty
men a piece, with their proper accommodations in them, to make fires and
dress victuals, and such as I had never seen any where else. I wrote a
letter to the captain the next morning, and sent it by the fisherman, in
which I gave him a full and particular account of what had passed. In
his answer, he desired me to send some men to carry him up to the town
on their shoulders, in a hammock affixed to two poles.

John Pro lived in a very decent manner, and his house was furnished with
pewter dishes, a standing-bed with curtains, and all other things of the
like nature, except chairs; a chest or two, however, served for that use
well enough. He had an outhouse on purpose for his cook-room, and
cook-slave’s lodging, storehouse, and summer house; all these were
enclosed in a palisade, as most of the great men’s houses are in this
country; for he was rich, had many cattle, and several slaves. Nicholas
Dove, indeed, was not near so rich. In the evening came captain Burgess
and Zachary: I soon understood that these were the sloop’s crew, to
which Arnold and Eglasse the Dutchman belonged; and, therefore, gave
them the best account I could of their fortune in Feraignher.

Nicholas Dove, however, told me more than I knew before, viz.—That he
ran away and got to Port Dauphine; that after the expiration of two
years, he got to Mattatanna Road, in a large canoe, and there entered
himself on board a pirate, that cruised principally among the Moors,
from whom they frequently took great riches, and carried them to St.
Mary’s. This place having a good harbour, they made it their settlement
and general rendezvous. It is a small island, but three leagues from
Madagascar, in the latitude of 16 deg. 33 min. south; but as their ship
grew old and crazy, and none of the Moorish ships, which they had taken,
were fit for their business, they being also vastly rich, they removed
to Madagascar, made one Thomas Collins, a carpenter, their governor, and
built a small fort, which they defended with their ship’s guns; but here
they led most licentious and profligate lives, stealing whatever they
could come at, and ravishing the wives and daughters of the natives:
living by this means for some time in a state of perpetual war. Upon
this, I could not forbear reflecting that deaan Mernaugha was not so
much to be blamed in ordering Eglasse to be killed for threatening him;
since he had, doubtless, a competent knowledge by some means or another,
to what a crew of vile abandoned wretches he once belonged. Nicholas
Dove said, they had not gone out a pirating for nine years successively,
contenting themselves with building a sloop by this governor’s
assistance, and soon after left him and others, and settled here, where
they had continued ever since. By him I understood that Mr Bembo got
safe to England; but captain Drummond was killed before he could get off
the island, though the particular manner and occasion, he could not
inform me; but they told me one remarkable piece of news, namely,—that
this captain Drummond was the very man, for whose murder, and his crews,
one captain Green, commander of an East India ship, was hanged in
Scotland; whether it be truth or not, I cannot determine. All I know of
the case I have already related, and can only observe, that the time,
the name, and the circumstances of his being here, where no news of him
could be had for several years, give just grounds for the supposition.
But to return to my history.

The queen sent me a calf for a present, and I in return, gave her a few
knives and beads; I went to the shore with John Pro, to welcome the
captain to the town. His surgeon, one Mr Strahan, was with him. The
queen entertained them as elegantly as she could, and mutual presents
passed in form.

We returned that evening to the ship, and built a house the next day for
the more commodious carrying on of trade. The natives perceiving we were
determined to stay, they built several others near it, to accommodate us
with rice, milk, fruits, and other necessaries. I went frequently up to
the town to hear what news I could, but it was a month or more before
the people came back from the wars; they came down the river in canoes,
as they went up, and met with great success. At length the king arrived
with the corpse of his brother, who was killed in the fight. He deferred
his burial for nearly a fortnight, till he had settled all his affairs
with us, and had given audience likewise to his brother’s ambassadors,
who were waiting for him.

As soon as captain Macket heard of his return, he came up to town again
with a large retinue, and his trumpeter sounding before him. They went
to J. Pro’s house whilst I attended on the king, with whom I had some
very familiar conversation, as he had often heard of me; in the
conclusion whereof, he told me that he desired the captain’s patience
till he had sent for his people about him, and put himself in due order
to receive him, which, in about two hours’ time, he did; and then all we
white men, as well captain Burgess, and the rest, as those who came with
us, marched two abreast, the trumpeter sounding before the captain,
having a crowd of black mob after us; the shells blowing, and the drums
beating at the same time in the king’s palisade by way of compliment. As
deaan Toke-offu well knew how to treat white men, he had ordered two
stools for the captain and surgeon to sit upon. After the mutual
compliments were reciprocally passed, I being their interpreter, the
manner of trade was soon settled and adjusted; and then the captain made
a present to the king of a gun or two, &c., and the king presented him
with a slave, &c. He gave me likewise a girl of twelve years old, whom I
sold immediately to John Pro. The captain had thoughts of taking his
leave this afternoon, but the king prevailed on him to stay till the
next day, in order to make his court look the more grand when he
received the ambassadors.

Accordingly, the next day, we were seated in order, when the ambassadors
came with a numerous retinue, making just such an entry as Rer Vove did
before his grandfather, when he returned from the wars. Some capering as
they advanced, and firing their guns, and then retreating; others
advancing in their places and doing the same. When the principal
ambassador approached, he kneeled upon one knee, and licked the king’s
knee, saying—

         “Tyhew an deaan Unghorra en Zaftana Lohefute.”
                         That is,—
         “The Supreme God bless the progeny of deaan Lohefute.”

Others came after him, repeating the same words. This done, business was
now no more talked of, but the remainder of the day was spent in
compliments and drinking of toake; but our captain took his leave, and
made all the haste he could to despatch the affairs of trade. The next
day they sent down several slaves to sell, and captain Macket fitted up
Burgess’s sloop, and sent her to fetch the ketch from Yong-Owl; during
which time, the Henry, captain Harvey, commander, arrived; a ship of
five hundred tons’ burthen. While we continued here, deaan Toke-offu’s
brother was buried, and all the natives shaved off their hair, which is
the usual manner of their public mourning all over the island; and he
who does not comply with this, is looked upon as disaffected to the
government. When a private person dies, the friends and relations only
do it.

It was about the middle of October when we arrived here, and the 24th of
November before the king returned; but by the beginning of January, we
had purchased more than our cargo of slaves, so we left part of them
with the Henry, which remained after us. We sailed from the river
Munnonbaugher in Munnongaro, or Masseleege, and arrived at Yong-Owl,
where captain White was trading, not having then got his complement of
slaves. On the 20th of January we departed from thence, and bid adieu to
the island of Madagascar.

We did not touch at the Cape of Good Hope, but at St Helena, where I
went ashore, and took all the care I could of the slaves who were sick.
From thence we went to Barbadoes, where we stayed a week, then weighed,
and sailed to Jamaica, where we delivered our cargo. The captain was not
only tender of me whilst on board, but supplied me with money likewise
at every port we came to, though by the little knowledge I had of its
use, I committed several mistakes, which were subjects of laughter and
merriment. As to liquors, I could scarce relish any, since I had lost
toake, to which I had been so long accustomed. I was taken sick here,
which proved very chargeable; but the captain sent me ashore, where, by
his kind orders, I wanted for nothing. Whilst we were here, the Mercury,
captain White from Madagascar arrived, but we were ready to sail with
the fleet, under convoy of the Winchelsea, which was a forty-gun ship.
On the 5th of July, we departed from Jamaica, beating through the
windward passage. Under the Crooked Islands we saw two sloops, which the
Winchelsea endeavoured to speak with, and imagining them to be pirates,
struck his pendant, in order to look like a merchant ship, which
deceived them so far, that the largest sloop gave chase, and hoisted a
black ensign and jack; but finding her mistake, thought proper to alter
her course, and stand in for the land again. Though the man-of-war could
not follow her, yet our captain, whose ship was a good sailer, and
mounted sixteen guns, did, and exchanged several broadsides with her. He
stood close under the land, and as night came on, got away from us, but
had the assurance to rob two of the stern-most ships in the fleet.
Moreover, they threatened to tie captain Macket to the main-mast of his
ship, and burn him, if ever they met with him again.

Not long after this we had the misfortune to run foul of the Winchelsea,
which, tacking about unexpectedly, staved our bow to the water’s edge,
and carried our foremast quite away; the man-of-war lost his head and
sprit-sail-yard. We must all have been inevitably lost had the sea run
high, but by good providence it was fair weather; so by the assistance
of the Winchelsea’s crew and some others, we kept the water out, but
were forced to go back to the Crooked Islands, and they accompanied us,
where by the help of them, and some other ships, our breach being made
up, we proceeded on our voyage; and on Saturday, September 9, 1717,
arrived in the Downs, after I had been absent from my native country
sixteen years and about nine months. Here, by the captain’s direction, I
went ashore, he having first supplied me with what was necessary for my
journey to London; yet did I not set forward till I had returned God
thanks in the most solemn manner for my safe arrival, and for my
deliverance from the many dangers I had escaped, and from the miseries I
had so long undergone.

It may not be improper in this place to inform my readers by what a
wonderful providence my father came to hear of my being alive in
Madagascar. My brother was one day at the Crown alehouse, at
Cherrygarden-stairs, in Rotherhithe, where William Thornbury was in the
next box; and hearing him talk of that island to his friend, he said, he
had a brother cast away there several years before, and should be glad
to hear some tidings of him. Thornbury replied, he had never seen but
one white man upon the island, and his name he had forgotten. My brother
thereupon mentioned several names, and at last Robert Drury, which
Thornbury no sooner heard, but said, that was it, and that his father
lived at the King’s-head, in the Old Jewry.

When I came to London, (it being Sunday about three o’clock in the
afternoon,) I thought it improper to go in sermon-time to the
King’s-head, in the Old Jewry, the house in which my father lived before
he retired into the country, but went to the Bell alehouse, (then the
British coffeehouse,) at the lower end, and desired to be admitted;
assuring the master I was but just come on shore. He seeing me in a sea
jacket, and hearing me speak in broken English, took me for a foreigner,
and let me in; asking me what countryman I was, and from whence I came?
I told him an Englishman, which at first he would scarcely believe, till
he recollected me by the questions I asked; namely, who kept the
King’s-head? Whether John Drury did not keep it some years ago? He told
me, that John Drury went to live in the country, and left it to his
brother William, who died some time since; and that his widow kept the
house. “How!” said I, “is William Drury dead?” “Yes,” answered he, “and
John Drury his brother too died about a year ago.” This news so dejected
me, that I burst out into tears, and afterwards bemoaned my hard fate
before him; by this he perceived who I was, having heard of my being
abroad, and of my friends expecting me soon in England. Hereupon he
asked me, if my name was not Drury? I answered, it was, and that I had
been unfortunate for many years; I was like to continue so, since my
father was dead. As an addition to my sorrow, he told me, moreover, that
my mother died with grief not long after she heard of our shipwreck, and
that my father had married again. After sermon I went to the
King’s-head, where they soon discovered who I was, and were overjoyed to
see me; and there I had a full account of our whole family affairs. I
found my father had left me two hundred pounds, and also the reversion
of a house at Stoke Newington, then in the occupation of Mr Richard
Beardsley. I stayed in town till I had visited all the friends I could
remember, and then went to Loughborough to see my sister, and other
relations, where I met with a very friendly reception, after they
imagined I had been lost so many years before.

As soon as I had settled my affairs there, I returned to London. Captain
Macket continued still as kind to me as ever, and said he would take
care of me if things did not answer my expectations. He asked me to go
with him again to Madagascar, but I had then agreed to live with a
relation in the capacity of clerk, or bookkeeper. After captain Macket
was gone, and things did not answer as I expected, I agreed with captain
White, captain Macket’s friend, who was bound for Madagascar likewise,
to go the voyage with him, and assist him in the trade, which my
knowledge of the language and customs of the country had sufficiently
qualified me for. So having left all my effects in a friend’s hands
(except what I thought proper to take with me) I went on board the
Mercury, and we sailed from the Downs, September 13, 1718.




                      AFTER-VOYAGE TO MADAGASCAR.


When I was but a boy, I had learned the art of navigation in some
measure by going to India, though I had lost it again for want of
practice; yet, applying myself to a proper mathematician for farther
instruction, I soon recovered enough to enable me to keep a journal, and
give such an account of this voyage as may be useful to those who have
no knowledge of the island.

On the first of April, 1719, we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, where
we bought such provisions as we wanted, and on the tenth set sail for
Natal; on the twenty-ninth we saw the land, in the latitude of 29 deg.
20 min. south, to the northward of Natal, about eleven leagues off. We
sailed a west-south-west course along the shore, with a gentle breeze;
at noon the point of Natal bore south-west by west, about two leagues
distant; at two in the afternoon we came to an anchor in fourteen
fathoms’ water, within two miles of the point of Natal, it bearing
west-south-west. The current sets south-south-west and north-north-east.
Here we traded for slaves, with large brass rings, or rather collars,
and several other commodities. In a fortnight’s time we purchased
seventy-four boys and girls. These are better slaves for working than
those of Madagascar, being not only blacker, but stronger.

Captain White put six natives of Dillagoe on shore here, whom he took
with him the former voyage. They had two or three king’s dominions to
pass through before they came to their own country, and were under some
apprehensions of being intercepted. The captain, therefore, furnished
them with guns, ammunition, hatchets, and brass collars. Here I saw
several humped cattle, like those in Madagascar; but the natives have
short woolly hair, like Guinea negroes, and not like the people of
Madagascar.

On the seventh day of June, we made the land on the east side of
Madagascar. I went up to the mast-head, where, discerning high land to
the southward, I took it for granted that we were to the northward of
Port Dauphine; the captain, however, not relying on what I asserted,
hoisted out the boat, and sent me and the second mate in her towards the
shore to speak with any of the natives we could see. We rowed along the
shore a considerable time, till I discovered a small town, and some of
the inhabitants looking at us; but the sea broke so much three or four
hundred yards off the shore, that we dare not venture to put the boat
in; hereupon I pulled off my clothes and swam. Two of the natives
observing me, swam to my assistance, and walked with me afterwards to a
point about a mile farther, where they go off with their canoes. Here
the boat got in, and I persuaded one of the fishermen to accompany us.
This place is called Murnumbo, about ten leagues to the northward of
Port Dauphine. Here was a strong current and large swell against us. The
next day about sunset, we anchored in fourteen fathoms’ water, being
unable to get into the bay. The ruins of the fort bore west-south-west
of us, Cape Ramus south-west by south, and the point of the Seven
Virgins, or Seven Hammocks, east. The next morning we weighed, stood
into the bay, and anchored in three fathoms’ water; the French fort bore
south-east by east, the ruins of the church south-south-east; we were
within a cable’s length of the shore, on either side almost landlocked.
However, as there is sometimes a strong north-east wind, it is always
best to keep a good anchor and cable without.

Port Dauphine is in the latitude of 24 deg. 50 min. south. The bay into
which you must sail, is on the east side of the point. You must take
care of a rock on your starboard side. Your course to steer is
west-north-west. When you are in you will see the ruins of a fort on a
hill, called “the nose of the port;” you must keep close to this point
till you open the bay, and when the fort bears south-east by east, or
east-south-east, you may come to an anchor; and, if you will, may moor
your ship to the rocks. About two miles to the southward there is a
false bay, which may deceive strangers; therefore, as it is a rocky
place, great care must be taken.

I went directly on shore to the king’s brother’s town, and acquainted
him, that we were come to trade, but were in haste to be gone; and,
therefore, if they had any slaves to sell, he must despatch them down
forthwith. And this pretence must always be made, for they have no
notion of the expense that attends a long delay. Messengers were
immediately sent to the king, who sent word by an Irishman, (who had
deserted from one captain Ware,) that he would be with us the next day,
and came accordingly. This prince’s name was deaan Morroughsevea, he was
dressed in a coat and breeches, and had a hat on his head. The first day
was spent in the usual compliments, and making mutual presents. The
price was adjusted the next day; whereupon we built a factory, and
palisaded it round. The king soon returned, though we stayed here till
the nineteenth of July. At which time the captain sending me with some
presents to the king, I stripped off my clothes, and dressed myself like
a native, with a lance in my hand. I think it was not less than twenty
miles. The king was just going to dinner with salt fish, rice, and roast
beef, when I got there. He very courteously desired me to sit down and
partake of what he had before him; saying, all white men, except the
French, were very welcome; for they had killed his grandfather, and
carried an uncle of his away captive. After dinner he entertained me
with some toake, and a dram of brandy, and then dismissed me with some
presents to the captain, desiring we would return as soon as
conveniently we could, for he was going to war with Unter Morrow Cherock
to the northward, and hoped soon to have more slaves for us.

On the twentieth I came on board, and then we weighed, leaving four men
and the natal slaves behind us. Here we purchased one hundred and
thirty, and sailed with them to the Mattatanna Road; and on the
twenty-sixth we made the Thumb-cap off Mattatanna, and came to an anchor
within a league distance. Here is no going on shore in our boats, by
reason of the great bar that is there, and the sea always breaking upon
it; the canoes, however, came off to us, and I went on shore with them;
and after that to the king’s town, which was a great way up the river.
One ran before to inform him that the captain’s ambassador was coming:
whereupon he put himself in great order, and appeared in state. He
speaks English and French very well, and so do several of his family. He
told me I was welcome. But as captain Macket had been before us, and
bought three hundred and thirty slaves in less than twenty days, he
endeavoured to raise the price upon us. I soon informed him, however,
that I knew the country; and that if he had none to dispose of, I could
tell where to go to market. At last we agreed, and I sent the captain
word of what I had done. It was so dangerous going over the breakers,
that I did not care how seldom I went. I did not like the place, for
they were so harassed with a neighbouring enemy, that they were always
on their guard, and could not sleep in safety, nor get even common
necessaries; the country being in much the same state and condition as
was Feraignher when I lived there. The captain, notwithstanding this,
was obstinate; and after he had sent me a cargo on shore, as also a man
to assist me, sailed away to Don Mascareen, an island then belonging to
the French, and about one hundred leagues to the eastward.

As soon as he was gone, I removed my factory to the king’s town, as
thinking it more safe. I often lent the natives guns and ammunition to
repel their enemies, and once I went with them. I bought fourteen slaves
in three days, but finding provision dear, I went more artfully to work;
I agreed for the slaves they offered to sale, and left something as
earnest in their hands, but would not complete the bargain. Here I had a
scurvy trick put upon me, which I relate, that others may beware of the
like impositions. One night, notwithstanding all my care, I missed two
women slaves, who were fastened by the arms together. I complained
thereof to the king, who, pretending to know nothing of it, ordered
inquiry to be made after them, but to no purpose, till I published a
reward of six pounds of gunpowder to him who would restore them. The man
who sold them to me brought them again, pretending he had found the
place where they had concealed themselves, and demanded the reward. I
charged him with imposing on me, but not being then able to make good my
assertion, he complained to the king, who threatened me hard in case I
did not give the man the reward. I returned his menaces in warm terms,
offering to defend myself with my fire-arms, as I had six ready loaded
by me. What with tears and flatteries, the women confessed before the
next morning, that their first master had injured me, and misused them
after he had them again. I went to the king’s brother directly, and
assured him I would take care that no white men should ever trade there
for the future; but in the end, he desired I would speak with the king
first, which I did. He reconciled us before our ship returned, which was
in the middle of September, and then without captain White, who had been
dead and buried some time before at Don Mascareen. He went there to sell
slaves to the French, and buy up others for the West India cargo, but
there happened to be no call for any.

Captain Christal, who was then commander, sent one of his officers to
assure me I might depend on the same civility and friendship as I had
received from his predecessor, for he approved my conduct, and completed
the bargains I had begun, and brought my slaves on board.

Mattatanna in the latitude of 22 deg. 15 min. south, is a wild coast,
where our boats can at no time come ashore; these slaves, and those of
Port Dauphine are esteemed the best in the island. Before we went from
hence, I heard that deaan Morroughsevea of Port Dauphine, was killed in
the expedition he went on, after I left him. Before I proceed farther in
my account of this voyage, as I am now on the east side of the island, I
shall take notice of the principal places on it.

About seven leagues to the northward of Mattatanna, is Melancaro. Here
is a river with eight feet of water on the bar, which divides the two
kingdoms of Mattatanna and Tronghe. The inhabitants of the latter are
numerous and obliging, but cannot trade for want of canoes. About ten
leagues from Tronghe is Maninzarce; they would willingly trade with the
English, but as they have no canoes, and it is a wild shore, where our
boats cannot land, it is impracticable. About twenty leagues farther to
the northward is Mungaro; the natives whereof are always at war with the
inhabitants of Port St. Mary’s and the pirates. The king’s name is
Maulaunza. They have no canoes here, but if a captain would take some
with him from Mattatanna, they would gladly trade with him. St. Mary’s
is an island three leagues off the main, in latitude 16 deg. 30 min. and
has a good harbour. Here are about twenty white men, formerly pirates,
who now live on their ill-gotten treasures.

Antogeal is in the latitude of 16 deg. 15 min. Here is a clear deep bay,
keep the north shore on board. At the bottom of it, is a small island of
two or three miles in circumference, in which is a good harbour. The
Dutch had formerly a fort on it. Here are grampuses and whales, which
the natives have the art of taking. Barimbass is in latitude 15 deg.:
the inhabitants have canoes, and will come off at first sight of a ship.
The king is very courteous to white men, and takes pleasure in trading
with them.

Our next business was to go to Port Dauphine, where the death of their
king was confirmed; we found the country in sad confusion, and in no
condition for trading; so we took our men, slaves, and goods on board,
and proceeded round the southernmost end of the island.

The country next adjoining to Port Dauphine, or Antenosa, is
Anterndroea, where the Degrave was wrecked, and which was the melancholy
scene of my captivity. Joining to this is Merfaughla, which lies a
little to the southward, in latitude 26 deg. south. The want of canoes
in both these countries renders them incapable of trading. The next port
is St. Augustine-bay, in which is a fresh water river, with twelve feet
of water at spring tides; it flows south-south-east, and
north-north-west. Tulea lies seven leagues to the northward, and is a
very good harbour.

As you sail from St. Augustine-bay to Yong-Owl, there are several little
islands. The two first are in the latitude of 21 deg. about five leagues
distant from the main island. A little farther is a single island with
lofty trees on it; and still farther to the northward, there are three
sandy islands, with breakers between them. A north-east course carries
you clear and along shore, but keep in fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen
fathoms’ water. On the banks are nine, ten, or twelve fathoms’ water.
When you are past the sandy islands, the coast is clear to Yong-Owl.
This is an open road in the latitude of 20 deg. 20 min. There is good
anchoring in sixteen fathoms’ water, not above a mile from the shore.
There is no high land near the shore on all this coast, but there are
high mountains up the country. Munnonhaugher is a river which they call
Manzerroy, in which is fourteen or fifteen fathoms’ water. It flows east
and west twelve feet right up and down on spring tides: you go up the
river six or seven leagues to the usual place where they traffic. A
little to the southward of this is another river, called Luna, to which
a ship comes from Arabia once a year. This place is called Masseleege,
or the country of Munnongaro, whereof deaan Toke-offu is the sovereign,
and of which I have already given a sufficient account.

Our business now was at Yong-Owl, where we arrived on the 16th of
October; the captain went with me up the country to Moherbo, and took
his musicians with us. As soon as I came on shore, I was informed that
Rer Trimmonongarevo was dead, and Rer Moume succeeded him, and lived at
Moherbo. I sent a messenger before me to acquaint him that I was coming
to pay my duty to him, and had brought a ship to trade here pursuant to
my promise; but as soon as we came to a town on this side Moherbo, we
saw abundance of people pulling down a wooden house, in which the corpse
of Rer Trimmonongarevo was interred; the reason whereof, as the natives
told me, was as follows:—“That Rer Trimmonongarevo had appeared to Rer
Moume in the night time, and asked him why he put him above his father
Lohefutee? and he seemed to resent his son’s ill conduct, and ordered
his body to be taken up, and put lower than his father’s, and his house
likewise, which was erected for a monument to be levelled with his
father’s.” When I came to Rer Moume, he did not know me in my new dress;
I soon let him understand who I was, for I could not forbear to lick his
knees. His generous and humane deportment towards me, made me esteem him
as my father, and he was equally overjoyed to see me. His wives,
likewise, expressed their pleasure. I went to review my cattle, for,
according to his promise, he had kept them all for me; and as they were
now considerably increased, I marked the young ones with a particular
signet, for he insisted that they still are mine.

We got our whole complement of slaves here in ten weeks’ time, and
sailed from hence January 7. We touched at St. Helena and at Barbadoes,
from thence we proceeded to Rapphanick river in Virginia, where we sold
our slaves, took in tobacco, and then set sail for England. On the 11th
day of September, 1720, we arrived in the Downs.

Thus have I endeavoured to give a true and faithful narrative of what I
thought most remarkable in this island. I have seen the “Atlas
Geographicus,” which is, I presume, a collection of what has been
written concerning this island. And though there are some things
mentioned there, of which I give no account, I see no reason to depart
from any particular herein contained, or to make any additions. I have
related only what I saw, and know to be fact. There is an insect amongst
them I have not mentioned, called the scorpion, a troublesome animal,
and the only venomous creature I ever saw there. As to what is asserted
in the “Atlas” before-mentioned, that the natives are Mahometans, I have
read, since I came to England, some account of the Mahometan religion,
but can find no conformity or similitude in it to this of Madagascar; on
the contrary, Mahomet pretended to have familiar converse with God, but
these people would be shocked to hear that deaan Unghorray, their
Supreme God, ever conversed with the greatest monarch. There is one
custom I have omitted, and that is, their abstaining from their women at
certain times, as the Jews do. The Virzimbers, whom some imagine to be
the first inhabitants of this island, I have said before, differ in some
points of religion; but then it is to be understood in the forms and
manner of their worship and ceremonies, for they have owleys as others
have, and entertain the same notions of a Supreme God, the lords of the
four quarters of the world, spirits, &c.

                                                           ROBERT DRURY.

N.B. The author, for some years before his death, was to be spoken with
every day at Old Tom’s coffeehouse in Birchin-lane; at which place
several inquisitive gentlemen have received from his own mouth the
confirmation of those particulars which seemed dubious, or carried with
them the least air of a romance.




                                SEQUEL.


Very little is known of the subsequent life of Robert Drury, but that
little is satisfactory both in regard to his veracity and respectability
in his humble situation. On his return to England, he went in the first
place to Loughborough, in his native county, in which town he had a
sister and other relatives. He afterwards came to London, where he
obtained the situation of porter at the East India House; and it is said
that his father left him two hundred pounds, and the reversion of a
house at Stoke Newington. His extraordinary adventures procured him much
attention, and many curious persons were in the habit of calling upon
him at his house in Lincoln’s-inn-fields, then unenclosed; when he used
to amuse them by throwing a javelin in the manner of the natives of
Madagascar, who had taught him to hit a small mark at a very surprising
distance. Mr Duncombe, who died in 1769, the translator of Horace, and
editor of the works of his brother-in-law, Hughes the poet, had a friend
who had frequently witnessed this feat, and conversed with Drury, a fact
which is mentioned in the second volume of Hughes’s “Letters” by
Duncombe, page 258. Nothing farther is known of the life of Robert
Drury, nor has the time of his death been recorded.




                              A VOCABULARY
                                 OF THE
                          MADAGASCAR LANGUAGE.


          A

  All _earbe_
  alive _valu_
  ants _vetick_
  arm _vorecka_
  ask _munganton_
  aunt _l’rorvovvaranuke_
  above _ambunna_
  adding _tovoungay_
  adorn _merervaugher_
  advise _mearnorro_
  afar off _larvitch_
  afraid _mertorhocks_
  after _afarrong_
  aged _antichs_
  agree _melongore_
  aiming _munondroer_
  age _antitch_
  alone _earare_
  altar _fesoronegher_
  alter _youvoyea_
  amaze _chareck_
  anchor _tumborto_
  anger _maluke_
  angle _merminter_
  ankle _pucopuke_
  anoint _whosora_
  answer _mungonore_
  any body _lerhulu_
  appoint _mermutore_
  arm-pit _kelleck_
  archer _permawlay_
  arise _fuher_
  army _taffick_
  arrow _anucfalla_
  ascend _munonego_
  ashes _lavanuck_
  asleep _lentey_
  awoke _mertearro_
  argument _meanconne_
  alligator _voarha_


          B

  Body _jorzarmaner_
  boy _jorzarloyhe_
  brother _royloyhe_
  basin _lerveerferuchs_
  brass _sarber_
  black _minetay_
  bull _omebayloyhe_
  brains _bettu_
  breast _trotter_
  belly _troke_
  back _lambosick_
  beef _haner_
  bird _voro_
  belly-full _vinchy_
  beads _arraer_
  blood _raw_
  bandy _sekearf_
  boil _mundavy_
  broil _metonu_
  boil over _mundroer_
  butterfly _tondrotto_
  blunderbuss _bosse_
  bite _munghabecks_
  broke _foluck_
  buy _mevele_
  broth _ro_
  blow _chuffu_
  beat _fufuho_
  bullock _vosists_
  bitter _merfaughts_
  backbone _towler lambosick_
  bad _rawcthe_
  big _bay_
  bald-head _soroluher_
  barrel _brecker_
  bee _ranatcntala_
  before _ungulore_
  beg _mungortock_
  behind _affarro_
  bottle _folokuke_
  bosom _arrongher_
  beheaded _tompucluher_
  bullet _baller_
  bastard _sarray_
  by and by _andreck anna arny_
  broom _mermoffer_
  beard _somuchs_
  breath _onygha_
  bones _towler_
  beans _antuck_
  bed _keban_
  basket _harro_
  ball _hechurch_
  borrow _mungaborrow_
  book or paper _terra toss_
  buffuler _howlu_
  bee-hive _tohoke_
  bundle _mevorovore_
  blind _chemerheter_
  burning _mundavengher_
  bell _potchew_
  belly-ache _merrawrafu_
  bread _moffu_
  bladder _tervenneer_
  beauty _sengger_
  baked _tongoffu_
  bow _ranafalla_
  bark _hulitcharzo_
  barrel of a gun _cornu_
  burden _enter_


          C

  Child _annack_
  carravances _vungember_
  cocoa-nut _wooernew_
  cloud _rawho_
  cold _merninchy_
  calabash _vartarvo_
  copper _sarbermaner_
  cat _chacker_
  cow _omebayvovva_
  cattle _omebay_
  cheek _fawho_
  crow _quark_
  call _kyhu_
  clear _merlu_
  crooked _maluke_
  cock _kuholoyhe_
  capon _kuho vosist_
  candle _charreck_
  choose _mcchutors_
  covetous _mertete_
  cotton _hawsey_
  conjuror _umossee_
  climb _munganeeher_
  chest _sundoke_
  coffin _harzowonger_
  come _haveer_
  cock crow _kuhumunganu_
  chin _somo_
  calf _anuack an omebay_
  clout _seeke_
  clean _merrere_
  comb _morrotondro_
  common or plain _munto_
  coward _merwoozo_
  calf of a leg _veete_
  canoe _lacker_
  change _mernercollu_
  carry _entu_
  creep _lomorly_
  circumcised _meforer_
  cane _tangerer_
  caul _sassuchhaner_
  choke _bohair_
  cream _hendro_
  cannon _futore_
  cotton-tree _zare_
  chamelion _taw_
  cloudy _merauho_
  cloud _rauho_
  cry _tomonghe_
  cutlass _vearawrer_
  come here _mehoveatowe_
  civil _woocust_
  come down _mejuchore_
  come along _aloyho_
  cartouch box _fitter pinner_


          D

  Daughter _annackampeller_
  dark _myeak_
  dish _ampondrer_
  dog _amboer_
  dry _mungetterhetter_
  day _hawndro_
  dirty _merlauchs_
  drum _azzoloyhe_
  drunk _wooersekarfe_
  dead _morte_
  dripping _solick_
  done _effer_
  duck _cherere_
  deaf _merrengha_
  dust _lumbook_
  dew _aundew_
  door _varavongher_
  divide _vackue_
  drone _ferzimber_
  dream _munganofee_
  dropped _larchuck_
  dropped it _larchorho_


          E

  Earth _tonna_
  ear _sofee_
  eye _moffu_
  eyelids _voloheak_
  eyebrows _volohondring_
  elbow _hehu_
  enemy _raffaloyhe_
  eat _humonner_
  even _merer_
  enough _tondra_
  ell _hanarlavver_
  egg _tule_
  evening _arever_
  eight _varlo_
  eighty _varlofolo_
  eight hundred _varlozawto_
  eight thousand _varlo arevo_
  east _teenongher_


          F

  Father _royya_ or _arber_
  fence _faretchs_
  forehead _hondring_
  foot _feendeer_
  fruit _wooerarzo_
  finger _tonedro_
  fish _feer_
  fishing lines _tollevinter_
  friend _lonego_
  four _effutchs_
  five _deeme_
  fifteen _folodeemeamby_
  five and twenty _rowafolo deeme amby_
  five and thirty _talufolo deeme amby_
  five and forty _effuchfolo deemu amby_
  five and fifty _deemefolo deeme amby_
  five and sixty _enuingfolo deeme amby_
  five and seventy _fetofolo deeme amby_
  five and eighty _varlofolo deeme amby_
  five and ninety _seveefolo deeme amby_
  five hundred _deeme zawto_
  five thousand _deeme arevo_
  fat _vonedruck_
  flower _turvolo_
  flea _peer_
  fly _lawletchs_
  fickle _harraravvo_
  fool _addoller_
  fly away _tumeelingher_
  file _choffer_
  full _fennu_
  full moon _volormer autchs_
  fright _mertawhoutchs_
  fight _mealleer_
  fighting _mealle_
  fire _ossu_
  fishing _merminter_
  flint _offovarto_
  flesh _nofuch_
  fox _foser_
  forty _effuch folo_
  fan _fernimper_
  fly _tumeeling_
  feathers, or hair, _volo_
  fetters _parra-pingo_
  flame _lellar_
  flower, or blossom, _vonegha_
  flesh-fork _fundrambahaner_
  freemen _lovohitchs_
  fill it up _fennuyea_
  forget _hawlingho_
  flux _tonchoruck_
  fry _mungendy_
  flag _floy_
  flood _fororawno_
  fetch _mungolor_
  fist _fettock_
  fortunate _moss_
  fast _fortuchs_


          G

  God _deaan Unghorray_
  grandfather _rozackloyhe_
  grandmother _rozackampeller_
  grandchild _zaffu_
  guinea corn _ampember_
  ground _ton_
  gold _volarmaner_
  green _michne_
  goat _osa_
  get up _fahavvo_
  go _mundaher_
  go along _mundahanner_
  garment _sekey_ or _lamber_
  gun _ampegaurrutchs_
  girl _jorzorampeller_
  great _bay_
  goose _onego-onego_
  guinea-hen _congar_
  guts _tenaugh_
  get farther _mesorangha_
  grass _habbetchs_
  give me some _mungay may_
  give you none _chemung a may_
  give _youmayow_
  good _suer_
  guard _ambenner_
  grow _metombo_
  great way _larvitchs_
  gunpowder _pounday_
  not good _chesuer_
  get you gone _meangor_
  garlic _tonegulick_
  grindstone _sungherer_
  grind _sungheru_
  good while _ailer_


          H

  House _trangho_
  honey _tentala_
  heat _merfanner_
  hail _avandrar_
  head _luher_
  hair _volo_
  hand _tongher_
  heart _fu_
  hog _lambo_
  hook _vinter_
  horn _tondrook_
  hide _mevonoor_
  hyde _hulutchs_
  hungry _homerserray_
  hundred _zawto_
  hat _satook_
  hoof _hooto_
  here _inteer_
  hear _merray_
  hen _coohovovva_
  hearken _metinoor_
  hot _moy_
  hill, or mountain, _vohitcht_
  head-ache _luhermungalelu_
  husband _valley_
  hatchet _fermackey_
  halt _tarehu_
  how do you _whosuer_
  hunt _mungoro_
  hole _lavvack_
  how many _fera_
  hoe _soro_
  horse _suwaller_
  heel _hehu_
  hedgehog _sorer_
  hiccough _suecendrotch_
  hire _metombozzar_
  hark _metinore_
  hammer _furnurore_


          I J

  Jar _senevolo_
  idle _merwoozzo_
  jealous _mermerrothhe_
  jest _somoneger_
  joint _sandre_
  I won’t _zawho merloy_
  I will _atawuck_
  I’ll do no more _chemernowquere_
  itch _hauta_
  I _zawho_
  iron _ve_
  island _nosa_


          K

  King _panzaccar_
  kick _timpaughho_
  kill _vonu_
  kidneys _wooerhaner_
  ketch _sumboro_
  knife _messu_
  kite _perponge_
  knee _luhalleck_


          L

  Ladle _suddro_
  land _tata_ or _tonna_
  lance _luffu_
  lie down _mundraer_
  light _merzavvo_
  lightning _munghaluchs_
  lights _rabuchhaner_
  look, or see, _merchinsover_
  looking-glass _hachoro_
  low _eever_
  let go _ellyfoy_
  lie _mervanda_
  love _taark_
  little _kala_
  live _valu_
  lemon _voersarra_
  loss _lavo_
  leaf _ravven_
  lead _ferock_
  lips _soneghe_
  leg _tomebook_
  liver _attinhaner_
  louse _hough_
  long _lavvar_
  lend _mungaborro_
  lock, or key, _fungheily_
  lock of a gun _sophe ampegar satch_
  long while _alelur_
  locust _verloller_
  lizard _roso_
  left hand _tongher avveer_
  lean _merheer_
  looseness _ohorawha_
  lobster _orur_
  lick _lalouw_
  don’t love it _hallucht_


          M

  Man _loyhe_
  mad _tounzaccar_
  many _mawrow_
  maggot _oletchs_
  mother _ranna_
  moon _voler_
  men _hulu_
  milk _ronoonu_
  monkey _vergee_
  midnight _mutungalla_
  mouth _vovvor_
  muskmelon _wantange_
  mud _futuck_
  million _arrla_
  muskittoes _moco_
  morning _emerrawha_
  to-morrow _hummerrawha_
  mead _toak_
  marrow _manuccover_
  melt _tennoo_
  milt _arrachaner_
  mouse _varlarvo_


          N

  Nail of finger _oho_
  navel _feutch_
  nine _seve_
  neck _woozzo_
  ninety _seve folo_
  nine hundred _seve zawto_
  nothing _shemishe_
  night _aulla_
  north _avarruchs_
  needle _fingihts_
  no _charra_
  nose _oroong_
  nigh _merreena_
  net _arratto_
  nettles _fundrozo_


          O

  Oath _mefontorr_
  one _eser_
  old _antichs_
  ox _vositchs_
  oil _tongon tongher_
  open _sucorffu_
  t’other day _orertroung_


          P

  Potatoes _ovemarme_
  plantain _ounche_
  plantation _tateck_
  plant _fumbulayher_
  pap _nunu_
  partridge _hattacottoe_
  pine-apple _mernasse_
  pillar _ounder_
  plumb _lomoty_
  powder _poundey_
  point _metrondroer_
  pistol _plato_
  poison _vorick_
  prisoner _sambuch_
  pot _velongha_
  pipe _keloyhe_
  poor _rarroc_
  people _hulu_
  pepper _saccavero_
  plunder _mundravor_
  pitch _leta_
  pleasant _mertarva_
  pirate _kindoc_
  purslain _toyanomebaloyhe_
  periwinkle _dedder_
  pigeon _dahew_


          Q

  Quick _merlacky_


          R

  Rain _orer_
  rainbow _avvar_
  rammer _funhochuck_
  razor _feharratchs_
  red _maner_
  rice _varray_
  rich _manzarry_
  rise _fuher_
  rough _meraffu_
  run _lomoy_
  rope _tolle_
  runaway _leffer_
  ripe _mossock_
  ribs _towlertahazuc_
  right hand _tongher avanner_


          S

  Sand _fasse_
  salt _serer_
  sail _loy_
  son _annacloyhe_
  sun _andro_
  slave _andavo_
  steer _rorvovva_
  sugarcane _farray_
  sugar _serermarme_
  sweet _marme_
  star _verseer_
  spoon _suto_
  silver _volerfutey_
  scull _harrandluker_
  shoulder _soroke_
  sleep _meroro_
  shot _berseer_
  six _eanning_
  seven _feeto_
  seventeen _folofeetoambe_
  seventy _feeto folo_
  six hundred _eanning zawto_
  seven hundred _feeto zawto_
  six thousand _eanning arevo_
  seven thousand _feeto arevo_
  small _merlinick_
  sunrise _terrack_
  sunset _soffutch andro_
  small _oruff_
  small shot _pottchuck_
  spittle _eva_
  spit _mundorer_
  south _ateemo_
  sore _boy_
  sour _mervoyha_
  ship _sambo_
  stink _manche_
  strong _merharee_
  short _fuher_
  spirit _lulu_
  seize _samboro_
  shoe _hunghermaro_
  stool _feketrar_
  sick _merrawra_
  sky _longitchs_
  smooth _merlammer_
  sound, noise, or barking of a dog, _mungano_
  shoot _teferu_
  shave _haharu_
  soft _merlemma_
  smothered _settuck_
  smoke _lembook_
  smoke a pipe _metroher tobacco_
  shut the door _arradingho_
  sell _vele_
  sour milk _ronoonumandra_
  sea _reac_
  servant, sir _salamonger_
  snares _faundric_
  see _merheter_
  I see it _he tucko_
  shirt _commeser_
  seat _fetuaruc_
  speak _mevolengher_
  sweet scented _maungetchs_
  some _mishe_
  speckle _wander_
  shake _mungozooner_
  stay _munding_
  spring of water _vovo_
  spring of the year _sarrar_
  spring of a gun lock _allesoro_
  swim _lomong_
  shame _manghetchs_
  split _vaccu_
  small pox _creer_
  staff _zahharr_
  skin _huletchs_
  side _tohazuc_
  slender _merlenec_
  spinage _orngha_
  serpent _manerrander_
  snake _mary_
  spin _mundoroutchs_
  stand _mechangonner_
  steel _veoffo_
  steal _mungaulutchs_
  scissors _hette_
  snore _mearoutchs_
  sweat _lingetch_
  sing _meansaw_
  shore _tomeboho_
  spit _fermerlarzor_
  silly _mernay_
  sheep _oundy_
  spider _morrotongher_
  stone _varto_
  sink _tumborto_


          T

  Tamarind _keley_
  tankard _furnumerrauno_
  take _rumbessu_
  think _mevetchevetch_
  trumpet _anchever_
  thirteen _folotaluambe_
  three _talu_
  thunderbolt _apmy_
  thigh _fay_
  thunder _hotook_
  town _tannarr_
  thread _fola_
  thorn _forte_
  told _mungaborrow_
  tears _rawnomossu_
  tobacco _tobacco_
  toe _annackinc_
  two _roaa_
  ten _folo_
  twenty _roaafolo_
  thousand _arevo_
  thief _ampegalutchs_
  teeth _neefa_
  tongue _leller_
  tie _fahaugh_
  trigger _funghatchu_
  tail _ohe_
  land turtle _hachaffu_
  sea turtle _faunu_
  tall _lavvor_
  turn _metuleher_
  tell one, two, &c. _mungesau_
  tread _hechawho_
  through _torawho_
  thrive _munzarre_
  take _rumbessu_
  tutanag _ferockfutey_
  timber _harzo_


          U V

  Uncle _ranaloyhe_
  under _umbonna_
  udder _vorotchs_
  ugly _rawtche_
  vomit _mundoer_
  uncivil _chewoocust_


          W

  Water _rawno_
  water melon _woerzarvo_
  wax _luco_
  warm _moy_
  wave _onezur_
  wind _ornghin_
  wood _auler_
  white _fute_
  wild _melampo_
  what _eno_
  what’s this _eno toey_
  what’s the matter _eno zow_
  what are you doing _eno tough now_
  wadding _hueto_
  west _audreffer_
  wood for firing _hatoy_
  wonder _cherrec_
  work _mearsar_
  wife _walley_
  weary _mocoutchs_
  white man _verzarhar_
  wide _mertarcheths_
  whisper _bisabise_
  wasp _fundroso_
  wrist _soro_
  wise _merhehitchs_
  winter _fouser_
  whistle _fuke_
  weave _mernendru_
  wet _lay_


          Y

  Yam _ove_
  years _color_
  year _taough_
  yes _toquore_
  yonder _aruea_
  yesterday _umorla_


      DAYS OF THE WEEK.

  Sunday _Alhaida_
  Monday _Alletenine_
  Tuesday _Talorter_
  Wednesday _Alarrerbeer_
  Thursday _Commeeshe_
  Friday _Jumor_
  Saturday _Sarbueche_


                                THE END.

                                LONDON:
                         Printed by W. CLOWES,
                            Stamford-street.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed blackletter font in =equals=.


