





HIS DARLING SIN




 HIS DARLING SIN


 BY
 M.E. BRADDON
 _Author of "LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET." Etc._


 _ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
 Copyright in the United States
 of America, 1899_


 London
 SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON,
 KENT & CO. Ltd.
 Stationers' Hall Court




 Printed for the Author by
 Wm. Clowes & Sons, Ltd.
 London and Beccles.




HIS DARLING SIN.




CHAPTER I.

 "That small, small, imperceptible
 Small talk! that cuts like powdered glass
 Ground in Tophana,--who can tell
 Where lurks the power the poison has?"


There is the desolation of riches as well as the desolation of
poverty--the empty splendour of a large house in which there is no
going and coming of family life, no sound of light footsteps and
youthful laughter--only spacious rooms and fine furniture, and one
solitary figure moving silently amidst the vacant grandeur. This sense
of desolation, of a melancholy silence and emptiness, came upon Lady
Perivale on her return to the mansion in Grosvenor Square, which was
among the numerous good things of this world that had fallen into her
lap, seven years ago, when she made one of the best matches of the
season.

She had not sold herself to an unloved suitor. She had been sincerely
attached to Sir Hector Perivale, and had sincerely mourned him when,
after two years of domestic happiness, he died suddenly, in the prime
of life, from the consequences of a chill caught on his grouse moor in
Argyleshire, where he and his young wife, and a few chosen pals, made
life a perpetual picnic, and knew no enemy but foul weather.

This time the enemy was Death. A neglected cold turned to pneumonia,
and Grace Perivale was a widow.

"It does seem hard lines," whispered Hector, when he knew that he was
doomed. "We have had such a good time, Grace; and it's rough on me to
leave you."

No child had been born of that happy union, and Grace found herself
alone in the world at one and twenty, in full possession of her
husband's fortune, which was princely, even according to the modern
standard by which incomes are measured--a fortune lying chiefly
underground, in Durham coalfields, secure from change as the earth
itself, and only subject to temporary diminution from strikes,
or bad times. She needed a steady brain to deal with such large
responsibilities, for she had not been born or reared among the
affluent classes. In her father's East Anglian Rectory the main
philosophy of life had been to do without things.

Her husband had none but distant relations, whom he had kept at a
distance; so there were no interfering brothers or sisters, no prying
aunts or officious uncles to worry her with good advice. She stood
alone, with a castle on the Scottish border, round whose turrets the
seamews wheeled, and at whose base the German Ocean rolled in menacing
grandeur, one of the finest houses in Grosvenor Square, and an income
that was described by her friends and the gossiping Press at anything
you like between twenty and fifty thousand a year.

So rich, so much alone, Lady Perivale was naturally capricious. One
of her caprices was to hate her castle in Northumberland, and to love
a hill-side villa on the Italian Riviera, two or three miles from a
small seaport, little known to travellers, save as a ragged line of
dilapidated white houses straggling along the sea front, past which the
Mediterranean express carried them, indifferent and unobservant, on
their journey between Marseilles and Genoa.

It was Lady Perivale's whim to spend her winters in a spot unknown
to Rumpelmeyer and fashion--a spot where smart frocks were out of
place; where royalty-worship was impossible, since not the smallest
princeling had ever been heard of there; and where for the joy of
life one had only the sapphire sea and the silvery grey of the olive
woods, perpetual roses, a lawn carpeted with anemones, sloping banks
covered with carnations, palms, and aloes, orange and lemon trees,
hedges of pale pink geranium, walls tapestried with the dark crimson
of the Bougainvilliers, the delicate mauve of the wistaria; and balmy
winds which brought the scent of the flowers and the breath of the sea
through the open windows.

Lady Perivale came back to London in April, when the flower-girls were
selling bunches of purple lilac, and Bond Street seemed as full of
lemon-coloured carriages and picture-hats as if it were June. It was
the pleasant season after Easter, the season of warm sunshine and cold
winds, when some people wore sables and others wore lace, the season of
_bals blancs_ and friendly dinners, before the May Drawing Room and the
first State concert, before the great entertainments which were to be
landmarks in the history of the year.

How empty the three drawing-rooms looked, in a perspective of white and
gold; how black and dismal the trees in the square, as Grace Perivale
stood at one of the front windows, looking out at the smooth lawns
and well-kept shrubbery, in the pale English sunlight. She thought of
the ineffable blue of the Mediterranean, the grey and green and gold
and purple of the olive wood, and the orange and lemon grove sloping
down to the sea from her verandah, where the Safrano roses hung like a
curtain of pale yellow blossom over the rustic roof.

"And yet there are people who like London better than Italy," she
thought.

Two footmen came in with the tables for tea.

"In the little drawing-room," she said, waving them away from the
accustomed spot.

The spaciousness of the room chilled her. The Louis Seize furniture was
all white and gold and silvery blue--not too much gold. An adept in
the furniture art had made the scheme of colour, had chosen the pale
blues and greys of the Aubusson carpet, the silvery sheen of the satin
curtains and sofa-covers. It was all pale and delicate, and intensely
cold.

"My letters?" she asked, when the men were retiring.

She had slept at Dover, and had come to London by an afternoon train.
She liked even the hotel at Dover better than this great house in
Grosvenor Square. There she had at least the sea to look at, and not
this splendid loneliness.

"Well," she thought, with a long-drawn sigh, "I must plunge into the
vortex again, another mill-round of lunches and dinners, theatres and
dances, park and Princes', Ranelagh and Hurlingham--the same things
over and over and over and over again. But, after all, I enjoy the
nonsense while I am in it, enjoy it just as much as the other people
do. We all go dancing round the fashionable maypole, in and out, left
hand here, right hand there, smiling, smiling, smiling, and quite
satisfied while it lasts. We only pretend to be bored."

The little drawing-room--twenty feet by fifteen--looked almost
comfortable. There was a bright fire in the low grate, reflected
dazzlingly in turquoise tiles, and the old-fashioned bow window was
filled with a bank of flowers, which shut out the view of the chimneys
and the great glass roof over the stable-yard.

Lady Perivale sank into one of her favourite chairs, and poured out a
cup of tea.

"Toujours cet azur banal," she said to herself, as she looked at the
pale blue china, remembering a line of Coppée's. "Poor Hector chose
this turquoise because he thought it suited my complexion, but how
ghastly it will make me look when I am old--to be surrounded by a
child-like prettiness--_vouée au bleu_, like a good little French
Catholic!"

The butler came in with her letters. Three, on a silver salver that
looked much too large for them.

"These cannot possibly be all, Johnson," she said; "Mrs. Barnes must
have the rest."

"Mrs. Barnes says these are all the letters, my lady."

"All! There must be some mistake. You had better ask the other
servants."

Her butler and her maid had been with her in Italy--no one else; the
butler, elderly and devoted, a man who had grown up in the Perivale
family; her maid, also devoted, a native of her father's parish, whom
she had taught as a child in the Sunday school, when scarcely more
than a child herself, not a very accomplished attendant for a woman of
fashion, but for a parson's daughter, who wore her own hair and her
own eyebrows, the country-bred girl was handy enough, nature having
gifted her with brains and fingers that enabled her to cope with the
complicated fastenings of modern frocks, changing every season.

Lady Perivale's letters had been accumulating for nearly a fortnight,
and her intended arrival in London had been announced in the _Times_
and a score of papers. She expected a mountain of letters and
invitations, such as had always greeted her return to civilization.

Of the three letters, two were circulars from fashionable milliners.
The third was from her old friend and singing mistress, Susan Rodney:--

  "So glad you are coming back to town, my dear Grace. I shall call in
  Grosvenor Square on Wednesday afternoon on the chance of finding you.

 "Ever yours affectionately,

 "Sue."

Miss Rodney answered every correspondent by return of post, and never
wrote a long letter.

Wednesday was Lady Perivale's afternoon at home, and this was
Wednesday. A double knock resounded through the silence of the hall and
staircase; and three minutes later the butler announced Miss Rodney.

"My sweet old Sue," cried Grace, "now this is really too good of you.
Words can't say how glad I am to see you."

They kissed each other like sisters, and then Susan seated herself
opposite her friend, and looked at her with a countenance that
expressed some strong feeling, affection mingled with sorrow--or was it
pity?

She was Grace's senior by more than ten years. She was good-looking
in her strong and rather masculine way--her complexion of a healthy
darkness, unsophisticated by pearl-powder, her features rugged, but not
ugly, her eyes bright and shrewd, but capable of tenderness, her gown
and hat just the right gown and hat for a woman who walked, or rode in
an omnibus or a hansom.

"Well, Sue, what's the news?" asked Grace, pouring out her visitor's
tea. "Is it a particularly dull season? Is nobody entertaining?"

"Oh, much as usual, I believe. I can only answer for my own friends and
patronesses--mostly Bayswater way--who are as anxious as ever to get a
little after-dinner music for nothing. They have to ask me to dinner,
though. No nonsense about that!"

"It isn't the songs only, Sue. They want an agreeable woman who can
talk well."

"Oh, I can chatter about most things; but I don't pretend to talk. I
can keep the ball rolling."

"Do you know, Sue, you find me in a state of profound mystification. I
never was so puzzled in my life. When I was leaving Italy I wired to
my people to keep back all my letters. I was ten days on the way home;
and instead of the usual accumulation of cards and things I find one
letter--yours."

"People don't know you are in town," Sue suggested slowly.

"Oh, but they do; for I sent the announcement to the _Times_ and the
_Post_ a fortnight ago. I really meant to be back sooner, but the
weather was too lovely. I stopped a couple of days at Bordighera and at
St. Raphael, and I was three days in Paris buying frocks. Not a single
invitation--not so much as a caller's card. One would think London was
asleep. Isn't it strange?"

"Yes," answered Sue, looking at her with an earnest, yet somewhat
furtive, scrutiny, "it is--very--strange."

"Well, dear, don't let us be solemn about it. No doubt the invitations
will come pouring in now I am at home. People have been too busy to
notice my name in the papers. There are always new women for the town
to run after. Wives of diamond men from Africa or oil men from America.
One cannot expect to keep one's place."

"No," assented Sue. "Society is disgustingly fickle."

"But I am not afraid of being forgotten by the people I like--the
really nice people, the pretty girls I have cultivated, and who make
a goddess of me, the clever women, worldly but large-minded--all the
people I like. I am not afraid of African competitors there. They will
stick to me," said Grace, with emphasis.

Her friend could see that she was troubled, though she affected to take
the matter easily. There was trouble in both faces, as the friends sat
opposite each other, with only the spindle-legged Louis Seize tea-table
between them; but the trouble in Susan Rodney's face was graver than in
Lady Perivale's.

"Tell me about your winter," said Grace, after a pause, during which
tea-cups had been refilled, and dainty cakelets offered and declined.

"Oh, the usual dull mechanic round; plenty of pupils, mostly suburban;
and one duchess, five and fifty, who thinks she has discovered a
magnificent contralto voice of which she was unaware till quite lately,
and desires me to develop it. We bawl the grand duet from Norma till we
are both hoarse, and then my duchess makes me stop and lunch with her,
and tells me her troubles."

"What are they?"

"I should have put it in the singular. When she talks of her troubles
she means her husband."

"Sue, you're trying to be vivacious; but there's something on your
mind. If it's any bother of your own, do tell me, dear, and let me help
you if I can."

"My tender-hearted Grace! You always wanted to help people. I remember
your coming to me with all your little pocket-money that dreadful
morning at the Rectory when I had a wire to say my mother was dying,
and had to rush back to town. And my dear Gracie thought I should be
hard up, and wanted to help me. That's nearly ten years ago. Well,
well! Such things live in one's memory. And your father, how kind, how
courteous he always was to the holiday music-mistress, and what a happy
time my summer holidays were in the dear old Rectory!"

"And what a lucky girl I was to get such a teacher and such a dear
friend for nothing!"

"Do you call bed and board, lavender-scented linen, cream _à
discrétion_, pony-cart, lawn tennis, luncheon parties, dinner at the
Squire's, a dance at the market town--do you call that nothing? Well,
the bargain suited us both, I think, and it was a pleasure to train
one of the finest mezzo-sopranos I know. And now, Gracie," slowly,
hesitatingly even, "what about your winter?"

"Five months of books, music, and idleness. My lotus land was never
lovelier. But for a January storm, that tore my roses and spoilt a
Bougainvilliers that covers half the house, I should hardly have known
it was winter."

"And were you quite alone all the time? No visitors?"

"Not a mortal! You know I go to my villa to read and think. When I am
tired of my own thoughts and other people's--one does tire occasionally
even of Browning, even of Shakespeare--I turn to my piano, and find
a higher range of thought in Beethoven. You know I go the pace all
through the London season, never shirk a dance, do three cotillons a
week, go everywhere, see everything."

"Yes, I know you have gone the pace, since your three years' mourning."

"After Cowes comes the reaction, a month or so in Northumberland, just
to show myself to my people, and see that the gardeners are doing their
duty; and then when the leaves begin to fall, away to my olive woods
and their perpetual grey. For half the year I revel in solitude. If you
would spend a winter with me I should be charmed, for you like the life
I like, and it would be a solitude _à deux_. But the common herd are
only good in cities. I come back to London to be sociable and amused."

Miss Rodney rose and put on her mantle.

"Can't you stop and dine? I'll send you snugly home in my brougham."

Home was a villa facing Regent's Park.

"Alas! dear, it's impossible! I am due in Cadogan Square at half-past
six--Islington and Chelsea 'bus from Regent-circus."

"A lesson?"

"Two lessons--sisters, and not an iota of voice between them. But I
shall make them sing. Give me a scrap of intelligence, and I can always
manage that. Good-bye, Grace. Ask me to dinner some other night, when
you are alone."

"Come to-morrow night, or the night after. I have no engagement, as you
know. Let us see a lot of each other before the rush begins."

"Friday night, then. Good-bye."

They kissed again. Lady Perivale rang the bell, and then followed her
friend towards the drawing-room door; but on her way there Miss Rodney
stopped suddenly, and burst into tears.

"Sue, Sue, what is it? I knew you had something on your mind. If it's
a money trouble, dear, make light of it, for it needn't plague you
another minute. I have more money than I know what to do with."

"No, no, no, dear; it's not money," sobbed Sue. "Oh, what a fool I
am--what a weak-minded, foolish fool!"

A footman opened the door, and looked with vacant countenance at the
agitated group. Early initiation in his superiors' domestic troubles
had taught him to compose his features when storms were raging.

"The door, James--presently," his mistress said, confusedly, watching
him leave the room with that incredible slowness with which such
persons appear to move when we want to get rid of them.

"Very foolish, if you won't trust your old friend Gracie!" she said,
making Sue sit down, and seating herself beside her, and then in
caressing tones, "Now, dear, tell me all your troubles. You know there
is no sorrow of yours--no difficulty--no complication--which would find
me unsympathetic. What is it?"

"Oh, Gracie, Gracie, my darling girl, it's not my trouble. It's yours."

"Mine?" with intense surprise.

"Yes, dear. I meant to have kept silence. I thought it was the only
course, in such a delicate matter. I meant to leave things alone--and
let you find out for yourself."

"Find out! What?"

"The scandal, Grace--a scandal that touches you."

"What scandal can touch me? Scandal! Why, I have never done anything
in my life that the most malignant gossip in London could turn to my
disadvantage."

Her indignant eyes, her full, strong voice, answered for her truth.

"Oh, Grace, I knew, I knew there couldn't be anything in it. A wicked
lie, a cowardly attack upon a pure-minded woman--a woman of spotless
character; the last woman upon this earth to give ground for such a
story."

"Oh, Sue, if you love me, be coherent! What is the story? Who is the
slanderer?"

"Heaven knows how it began! My Duchess told me. I spoke of you the
other day at our _tête-à-tête_ luncheon. I told her about your lovely
voice, your passion for music. She nodded her old wig in a supercilious
way. 'I have heard her sing,' she said curtly. She waited till the
servants left the room, and then asked me if it was possible I had not
heard the scandal about Lady Perivale."

"What scandal? Oh, for pity's sake come to that, Sue. Never mind your
Duchess."

"Well, I'll tell you in the most brutal way. It seems that three or
four people, whose names I haven't discovered, declare they met you
in Algiers, and in Corsica and Sardinia, travelling with Colonel
Rannock--travelling with Colonel Rannock--passing as his wife, under a
_nom de guerre_--Mr. and Mrs. Randall."

"How utterly disgusting and absurd! But what on earth can have made
them imagine such a thing?"

"People say you were seen--seen and recognized--by different people who
knew you, in one or the other of those places."

"Travelling with Colonel Rannock, as his wife! My God! A man I refused
three times. Three times," laughing hysterically. "Why, I have had
him on his knees in this room; kneeling, Sue, like a lover in an old
comedy; and I only laughed at him."

"That's rather a dangerous thing to do, Grace, with some men."

"Oh, Colonel Rannock is not the kind of man to start a vendetta for
a woman's laughter. He is a laughing philosopher himself, and takes
everything lightly."

"Does he? One never knows what there is behind that lightness. What if
Colonel Rannock has set this scandal on foot with a view to proposing a
fourth time, and getting himself accepted?"

"How could he make people swear they saw me--me!--at Algiers, when I
was in Italy? It is all nonsense Sue; an absurd _malentendu_; my name
substituted for some other woman's. Now I am in London, the matter
will be put straight in an hour. People have only to see me again to
be sure I am not that kind of woman. As for Colonel Rannock, he may be
dissipated, and a spendthrift; but he is well-born, and he ought to be
a gentleman."

"Who said he was ill-born? Surely, you know that there are good races
and bad. Who can tell when the bad blood came in, and the character of
the race began to degenerate? Under the Plantagenets, perhaps. Colonel
Rannock comes of a bad race--everybody knows that. His grandfather,
Lord Kirkmichael, was notorious in the Regency. He left his memoirs,
don't you know, to be published fifty years after his death--an awful
book--that had a _succès de scandale_ six or seven years ago. He was
bosom friend of Lord Hertford, and that set."

"I did not trouble myself about his grandfather."

"Ah! but you ought! A man's family history is the man. Lord
Kirkmichael's grandson would be capable of anything infamous."

"The whole thing is too preposterous for consideration," Lady Perivale
said angrily. "I wonder at your taking it tragically."

And then, recalling that empty salver instead of the usual pile of
letters and cards, she cried, distractedly--

"It is shameful--atrocious--that any one upon earth could believe such
a thing of me. It makes me hate the human race. Yes, and I shall always
hate those horrid wretches I called friends, however they may try to
make amends for this insolent neglect."

There was no question of taking the matter lightly now, for Grace
Perivale burst into a passion of sobs, and was quite as tragic as her
friend.

"My dearest Grace, pray, pray be calm! Don't stay in this odious
London, where people have no hearts. Why not go to your Northern
castle, and live there quietly till the mystery clears itself, as no
doubt it will soon?"

"Go?" cried Lady Perivale, starting up out of the drooping attitude
in which she had given way to her distress. "Beat a retreat? Why, if
Grosvenor Square were a fiery furnace I would stay and face those
wretches--those false, false friends--till I made them know the kind of
woman I am!"

"Well, dear, perhaps that is best--if you can stand it," Susan
answered, rather sadly.

"But where is Colonel Rannock? Surely he has not been dumb! It is his
business to bring the slanderers to book!"

"That's what I told the Duchess. But Rannock has not been seen in
London since the autumn, and is said to be shooting something in the
Rockies. And now, I must rush off to my lessons. Good-bye, again, dear.
Don't forget that I am to dine with you on Friday!"

"Shall I invite a party of twenty to meet you--an impromptu party,
asked by telegraph, such as I had last year to welcome me home?" Grace
asked, bitterly. "Go, dear! Don't be too sorry for me. I shall weather
the storm. I ought to be more amused than distressed by such nonsense."

Miss Rodney dried her tearful eyes, and composed her agitated features,
on her way downstairs. The footman stood ready to open the door,
stifling a yawn behind his hand. Miss Rodney gave a quick glance round
the hall, taking in all its spaciousness and splendour, the marble
group at the foot of the double staircase, the bronze and ormolu
candelabra, the crimson carpets, softer than forest moss.

"Rich beyond the dreams of avarice--and so unhappy!" she thought, as
she hurried off to catch the Chelsea 'bus.




CHAPTER II.

 "How blest he names, in love's familiar tone,
   The kind fair friend by nature marked his own;
 And, in the waveless mirror of his mind,
   Views the fleet years of pleasure left behind,
   Since when her empire o'er his heart began--
 Since first he called her his before the holy man."


It was not often in the London season that Lady Perivale could taste
the pleasures of solitude, a long evening by her own fireside, unbroken
by letters, messages, telegrams, sudden inroads of friends breaking
in upon her at eleven o'clock, between a dinner and a dance, wanting
to know why she had not been at the dinner, and whether she was going
to the dance, or dances, of the evening, what accident or caprice had
eclipsed their star. But on this night of her return the visitor's bell
sounded no more after Susan Rodney left her. The quiet of her house was
so strange a thing that it almost scared her.

"I begin to understand what a leper must feel in his cavern in the
wilderness," she said to herself with a laugh. "The thing is almost
tragic, and yet so utterly absurd. It is tragic to discover what
society friendships are made of--ropes of sand that fly away with the
first wind that blows unkindly."

She pretended to dine, for the servants might have heard of the
scandal, and she did not want them to think her crushed by unmerited
slights. They, of course, knew the truth, since she had two witnesses
among them to prove an _alibi_, Johnson the butler, and her devoted
maid, Emily Scott.

She did not know that the first footman and the cook had both laughed
off Johnson's indignant statement that his mistress had never left
Porto Maurizio.

"You're not the man to give her away if she had gone off for a bit of
a scamper. You and Miss Scott would look the other way when her boxes
were being labelled."

"And she'd take a courier maid instead of Emily," said the cook. "After
all, it's only _finn der seecle_."

"Why don't she marry him, and ha' done with it?" said the footman.

Butler and maid were goaded into a fury by talk of this kind, and
it was only the force of _esprit de corps_, and the fact that James
was six foot one, and a first rate plate-cleaner, that prevented Mr.
Johnson sacking him on the instant.

"Did you ever know me tell a lie?" he asked indignantly.

"Or me?" sobbed Emily.

"Not on your own account," said the cook; "but you'd tell a good big
one to screen your mistress."

"And so I might perhaps," said the girl, "if she wanted screening; but
she don't, and, what's more, she never will."

"Well, all I can say is it's all over London," said James, "and it's
made it very unpleasant for me at the Feathers, for, of course, I stand
up for my lady in public, and swear it's a pack of lies. But here we're
tiled in, and I'm free to confess I don't believe in smoke without
fire."

They went on wrangling till bedtime, while Grace sat by the fire in the
little drawing-room with her brown poodle lying on the lace flounces of
her tea-gown, and tried to read.

She tried book after book, Meredith, Hardy, Browning, Anatole France,
taking the volumes at random from a whirligig book-stand, twisting the
stand about impatiently to find a book that would calm her agitation,
and beguile her thoughts into a new channel. But literature was no use
to her tonight.

"I see it is only happy people who can read," she thought. She opened
no more books, and let her mind work as it would. There had been
sorrows in her life, deep and lasting sorrow, in the early death of a
husband to whom she had been fondly attached, and in the previous loss
of a father she had adored. But in spite of these losses, which had
darkened her sky for a long time, her life had been happy; she had a
happy disposition, the capacity for enjoyment, the love of all that
was bright and beautiful in the world, art, music, flowers, scenery,
horses, dogs--and even people. She loved travelling, she loved the
gaiety of a London season, she loved the quiet of her Italian villa.
Her childhood had been spent in a rustic solitude, and all her girlish
pleasures had been of the simplest. The only child of a father who
had done with the world when he read the burial service over his
young wife, and who had lived in almost unbroken retirement in an
East Anglian Rectory. He was a student, and could afford a curate to
take the burden of parish work, in a sparsely populated parish, where
distance, not numbers, had to be considered. He kept good horses,
mounted his curate, and drove or rode about among his flock, and was
beloved even by the roughest of them.

That girl-child was the one human thing he had to love, and he lavished
love upon her. He taught her, trained her to appreciate all that is
best in literature, yet kept her simple as a child, and thought of her
as if she were still a child after her eighteenth birthday, and so was
taken by surprise when Sir Hector Perivale, who had met her at friendly
parties in the neighbourhood, came to him at the end of the shooting
season, and asked to be accepted as her future husband.

He had offered himself to Grace, and Grace had not said no. Grace had
allowed him to call upon the rector.

Mr. Mallandine looked up from his book like a man in a dream.

"Marry my Grace!" he cried. "Why, she has hardly done with her
dolls. It seems only yesterday she was sitting on the carpet over
there"--pointing to a corner of his library--"playing with her
doll's-house."

"Indeed, rector, she is a woman, and a very clever woman. She gave me
excellent advice the other day when we were threatened with a strike in
the north. She has a better head for business than I have."

"That may be," said Mr. Mallandine, smiling at him. "But she is not old
enough to be married."

"She will be nineteen on her next birthday, sir."

"What a pertinacious young man you are. Her next birthday is nearly a
year off. She shall not take the cares of a husband and a household
until she is twenty."

"That means two years, rector. What am I to do with myself all that
time?" Sir Hector asked ruefully.

"Do as other young men do. Isn't there sport enough and travel enough
for such as you? Go to Canada, to the North Pole, to the Pamirs, over
the roof of the world. I thought no young man of spirit was satisfied
till he had crossed the Pamirs, or shot lions in Bechuanaland."

"I have left off caring for such things since I have known Grace."

"Well, you'll have to possess your soul in patience. My daughter's
girlhood belongs to me. Two years hence she will be a woman, and able
to know whether she loves you well enough to live and die with you, or
whether she only wants to be called my lady. It will be hard enough for
me to part with her then."

"You shall not part with her, rector. You will have a son as well as a
daughter. That will be the only difference."

"All prospective sons-in-law say the same thing. Come, Sir Hector, I
don't want to be selfish. Grace has been the sunshine of my life ever
since she and I were left alone in the world together. I want to see
her happily married before I lay me down for the long sweet sleep; but
I will not have her marry till she has had time to fall in love and out
of love a good many times with the man who is to have the charge of her
destiny."

There was no choice but to submit, since Grace thought as her father
thought, so Sir Hector reconciled himself to a two years' engagement,
but could but smile as he thought how brief need have been his
probation had his choice fallen in the Mayfair marriage market.

Fate was on his side, after all. For a little more than half a year
Grace and he were betrothed lovers, meeting under restrictions; and the
rector had leisure to study his future son-in-law's character.

He found no evil in Hector Perivale, and he found much good--a warm
heart, an honest, open disposition, pluck such as should go with good
blood. It was quite true that Grace was the cleverer of the two, and
could even give good advice in the difficulties between capital and
labour, always in favour of concessions, yet always counselling a firm
attitude when labour put on the aspect of an enemy, and refused to hear
reason.

Then, one day, when it was least expected of him, the rector held out
his hand to Sir Hector over their evening wine, and said--

"I believe you are a good fellow, Hector, and that you will make my
Grace happy. Marry her as soon as you and she like--the sooner the
better for me!"

"Oh, sir, this is indeed generous."

"No; it is only prudent. I told you I wanted to see my daughter happily
married before I die. Well, when I was in London the other day I saw a
specialist--at the advice of Ringston, here--and he told me my life is
not quite so good as I thought."

"Oh, sir, I hope he was wrong."

"So do I, Hector. But I shall act as if I was sure he was right. There
is nothing certain about his verdict--a man and a mortal disease may
jog on for years together--so not a word to alarm Grace. I would not
have the bright morning of her life clouded by fears about me. You can
tell her that I admire your character so much that I want to secure
you at once as my son-in-law. I shall only tell her to set about her
trousseau."

Grace required a great deal of talking to, on her father's part and on
Hector's, before she was reconciled to a speedy marriage. She was sure
her father wanted her. He had not been looking well lately. He had left
off those early morning rides which had been so delightful, and which
she had often shared with him--those long scampers on the broad margins
of greensward on the edge of the pine-woods, in the freshness of the
new day. He let his groom drive for him, even his favourite cob, whose
mouth no hand but his own had been allowed to control till lately.

Her father laughed off her fears.

"Did you think I was never going to be an old man, Gracie?"

"Not yet, father! Oh, not yet for a score of years. Why, it was only
last summer everybody was telling me how young you looked--growing
younger instead of older."

"That was last summer, Gracie. Où sont les neiges d'antan? Don't you
know that when Time has seemed to stand still for ever so long, he
seems to move on very fast all of a sudden? It is all only seeming. The
sands are always falling, and the scythe is always moving--slow and
sure, my love, slow and very sure. But I shall be a happy old man when
I see my darling married to the man of her choice."

"If you call yourself an old man, I won't marry him," Grace said almost
angrily. "If you are an old man, you want a spinster daughter to take
care of you--and in that case I shall never marry."

He smiled at her with a touch of mournfulness. She would not have long
to wait, perhaps, if she insisted on staying to the end.

After this he was careful to talk in a cheerful strain, and played his
part so well that she left him for an Italian honeymoon without the
faintest apprehension of evil--left him a gay and happy bride, going
out into a beautiful world of which she knew nothing but East Anglia.

The whole of May was spent on the lakes--first Maggiore, and then
Como. They stayed at Baveno, lived most of their life on the lake, and
visited the three islands till they knew them by heart--the gardens,
the palaces, the fishermen's huts, the caffes, the people, old and
young, crones, children, boatmen, priests. Those island gardens in
their glory of Maytime made a region of enchantment that even Grace's
dreams over Rogers's Italy had never equalled. The facilities of
travel, repetition, the crowding of tourists, may have cheapened these
exquisite scenes; but to each of us on that first Italian journey they
offer the same magic philter, the same revelation of a loveliness
beyond our power of dreaming.

Then came Bellagio, Cadenabbia, Varenna, a leisurely tour of that still
lovelier lake; and then, when June began and the days waxed hot, a
quiet week at Promontogno, roaming in chestnut woods, driving up the
hill to Soglio. Then to the cool breezes of the Engadine.

It was at Pontresina that a telegram came--one of those fatal messages
that are opened so lightly, expectant of some trivial intelligence, and
which bring despair--

  "The Rector dangerously ill. Pray come home immediately.--Mary."

Mary was Mr. Mallandine's cook and housekeeper, an admirable person,
not without considerable dignity, and a black silk gown for Sundays;
but who had risen from the ranks, and was still only "Mary," as she had
been when she was a kitchen-maid at seven pounds a year.

That hurried journey through the long June days was a
never-to-be-forgotten experience. Sir Hector planned everything, so
that not a minute should be lost. They left Pontresina at two in the
morning in a carriage and four, and halted only to change horses;
reached Coire in time for the express, and halted no more till they
were at Victoria. Then across London to Liverpool Street, and then to
the grey quiet of the Suffolk Rectory, in the second evening of their
journey.

Grace was not too late. Her father lingered for nearly a month after
her return, and all the consolation that last hours and fond words,
mutual prayers, tears, and kisses, can give in the after time, were
given to her. She never forgot those solemn hours, that sweet communion
and confession of faith, her education for eternity. Never, perhaps,
until those sad hours had she known how true a Christian her father
was, or realized the perfect beauty of the Christian life and the
Christian death.

She had further evidence of his goodness in the grief of his
parishioners, to whom his bounty had been limited only by his means,
life at the Rectory being planned with a Spartan simplicity, so as to
leave the wider margin for the poor.

When all was over Sir Hector took his wife back to Switzerland; but not
to the scenes where those evil tidings had found her. He was all the
world to her now, and his heart was a fountain of tenderness. The bond
between husband and wife was strengthened by Grace's sorrow. They lived
alone in the loveliest places of the earth for more than a year, and
then it was for Hector's sake that Grace took up the burden of life,
and began her new duties as mistress of the house in Grosvenor Square,
and the Castle in Northumberland. The town house had been refurnished
while they were on their travels. All the ponderous early Victorian
rosewood and mahogany had been swept into the limbo of things that
were once thought beautiful. The chairs with curved backs and Brussels
sprouts upon their gouty legs, the acres of looking glass framed in
cabbage leaves, the loo-tables, and heavy valances shutting out the
top-light of every window, all the draperies making for darkness,
disappeared under the ruthless hand of improvement; and from the dust
and shadow of a lumber-room filled by past generations, mirrors crowned
with golden eagles, chairs with shield-shaped backs and wheatsheaf
carving, were brought out into the light of day, and were deemed worthy.

"I wonder whether anybody will ever want the loo-tables and Victorian
sideboards back again?" Grace said; but the upholsterer had provided
against that contingency by carrying everything away, to be sold for
firewood, he told Sir Hector, and a very small item on the credit side
of his account was supposed to represent their value in that capacity.

Then began Grace Perivale's new phase of existence--a life of luxury
that was as much a revelation as the loveliness of lakes and mountains,
the blue of an Italian sky. She was only twenty, and she found herself
almost a personage, one of the recognized beauties, who could not move
without a paragraph. Her appearance on a tiara night at the opera, her
diamonds, her frocks, her parties, her poodles were written about. All
the lady journalists followed her movements with unflagging pens. She
could not take up a newspaper, at least among those of the frivolous
order, without seeing her name in it.

She laughed, was inclined to be disgusted, and made mock of the papers,
but was not actually displeased. Even in East Anglia, after a round of
tennis-parties in the gardens of neighbouring squarsons, in a district
where almost everybody was a parson, and most of the parsons were
land-owners and rich--even in those rural scenes she had discovered
that people admired her; and then Sir Hector had come with his
adulation, taking fire at her beauty as at a flame, and declaring that
she was the loveliest girl in England. And at twenty to be called--even
by irresponsible young women--a queen of Society, has its intoxication.

She plunged into the world of pleasure. Her husband was a member of
all the pleasure clubs--Hurlingham, Sandown, and the rest. Had there
been a hundred he would have belonged to them all. He was popular, and
had scores of friends, and if Grace had been much less attractive, she
would have been well received for Sir Hector's sake.

She caught the knack of entertaining, and her parties were pronounced
right from the outset. She was open to advice from old hands, but had
ideas of her own, and thought out the subject thoroughly. She imparted
a touch of originality to the commonest things. Her dinner-table
surprised with some flower that nobody else had thought of.

"I expect to see ferns and green frogs at your next dinner," said Mr.
George Howard, famous in literature and politics, ultra Liberal scion
of a Liberal house, and a great admirer of Lady Perivale's. "I don't
think you can find anything new--short of frogs. They must have tiny
gold chains to fasten them to the _épergne_, like the turtle that swim
about under the jetty at Nice."

It was by the pleasantness and number of her parties that Grace
established herself as an entertainer, rather than by their splendour.
Who can be splendid in an age of African millionaires, of Americans
with inexhaustible oil-springs? She did not vie with the oil and
diamond people. She left them their proper element--the colossal. Her
_métier_ was to give small parties, and to bring nice people together.
She studied every invitation as carefully as a move at chess. Her
queen, her knights, her bishops--she knew exactly how to place them.
The knights--those choicest pieces that move anyway--were her wits and
brilliant talkers, the men whom everybody wants to meet, and who always
say the right thing. Her queens were of every type; first the beauties,
then the clever women, then the great ladies, dowagers or otherwise,
the women whose social status is in itself an attraction.

She smiled when people praised her tact and _savoir faire_.

"I have so little to think about," she said; "no child, no near
relations. And Hector spoils me. He encourages me to care for trivial
things."

"Because he cares for them himself--if you call the pleasantness of
life trivial. I don't. I call it the one thing worth thinking about. I
could name a score of women in London who have all the essentials of
happiness and yet their houses are intolerable."

Thus Mr. Howard, her self-appointed mentor. He went about praising her.
Everybody wondered that a girl of twenty, who had been reared in a
rural parsonage, could commit so few gaucheries.

"Few!" cried Howard, indignantly. "She has never been gauche. She is
incapable of the kind of blunder Frenchmen call a _gaffe_. Some women
are born with a feeling for society, as others are born with a feeling
for art."

In Northumberland, as in London, Lady Perivale's success was
unquestionable. Sir Hector's old chums--the shooting and hunting and
fishing men--were delighted with his choice, and Sir Hector himself was
in a seventh heaven of wedded bliss. One only blessing was denied him.
Grace and her husband longed for a child on whom to lavish the overplus
of love in two affectionate natures. But no child had come to them.

A child might have brought consolation in that dark season when, after
three days and nights of acute anxiety, Grace Perivale found herself a
widow, and more lonely in her wealth and station than women often are
in that sad hour of bereavement.

Her father had been the last of an old Norfolk family in which only
children were hereditary. She had neither uncles nor aunts. She had
heard of remote cousinships, but her father had held but scantiest
communion with those distant kindred, most of whom were distant in
locality as well as in blood.




CHAPTER III.

 "I see him furnished forth for his career,
 On starting from the life-chance in our world,
 With nearly all we count sufficient help:
 Body and mind in balance, a sound frame,
 A solid intellect: the wit to seek,
 Wisdom to choose, and courage wherewithal
 To deal with whatsoever circumstance
 Should minister to man, make life succeed.
 Oh, and much drawback! What were earth without?"


Now began the third phase of Lady Perivale's existence. She spent the
next three years, not in utter loneliness, but in complete retirement
from worldly pleasures. It was in this time of bereavement that her
devoted Sue was of most use to her. She persuaded Sue to travel with
her during her first year of widowhood, at the risk of losing that to
which Miss Rodney had been a slave--her connection. Grace insisted on
her friend accepting a salary to cover that jeopardized connection;
and, when they went back to London, it was Grace's care to find new
pupils to fill the gaps. When West Kensington or Balham had fallen
away, Lady Perivale sent recruits from Mayfair and Belgravia. She had
a host of girl-friends--her court, her "Queen's Maries"--and she could
order them to have lessons from her dearest Sue. In some cases she went
further than this, and paid for the lessons--girl-friends being often
impecunious--but this her friend never knew. But she may have been near
guessing the truth later, for, after that one Italian winter, Miss
Rodney would travel no more.

"I am one of the working bees, Grace," she said; "and you are trying to
make a drone of me."

"No, dear, that could never be; but I want you to have your butterfly
season."

It was while she was with her friend that they came upon the villa
above Porto Maurizio. Grace fell in love with the spot because,
although near the high-road to Genoa, it lay off the beaten track, and
was purely Italian--no Swiss-German hotel, no English tourists. The
villa was out of repair, and by no means beautiful; but some extent of
land went with it--olive woods, lemon groves, old, old mulberry trees,
festooned with vines that were looped from tree to tree, banks of
carnations, a wilderness of roses.

Lady Perivale sent for the owner's agent, and bought land and villa as
easily as she would have bought a bonnet. The agent saw her child-like
eagerness for a new toy, and only asked twice as much as the reserve
price.

"It is a place that can be made anything in the hands of an owner of
taste and means," he said; "and if you find the land a burden you can
always let it on the _métairie_ system."

"But I mean to keep the land, and employ people--to have my own olive
woods, my own oranges and lemons."

She smiled, remembering a nursery game of her childhood. Oranges and
lemons! Never had she thought to see them growing on sunlit heights,
sloping upward from a sapphire sea, to that dark line where the olives
cease and the pines begin, darker and darker, till they touch the
rugged edge of far-off snow-peaks.

It was three years before Lady Perivale went back to the world in
which everybody's business--barring the few who live for politics or
philanthropy--is to cram the utmost amusement into the shortest space
of time. The briefer the season the faster the pace. Three balls a
night. Mrs. A.'s concert jostling with Mrs. B.'s private theatricals,
and both of them crushed under the Juggernaut car of her Grace's fancy
ball. The longer the invitation the worse chance of a dull party: for
those duchesses and marchionesses can spring a great entertainment
on the town at a fortnight's notice, and empty meaner people's
dancing-rooms, and leave the Coldstreams or the Hungarians fiddling to
twenty couples in a house where there is breathing space everywhere.

Lady Perivale felt as if she were awaking from a long dream of
beautiful places and tranquil hours, awaking in the din and riot of
a crowded fair. But she opened her own little booth with a proper
dignity. She was almost glad to see old faces, and to be made a
prodigious fuss about.

She was the rage in that season of her return. There was hardly a
bachelor in town who did not want to marry her, though many were too
wise to pursue the charming prey. Her girl-friends who had married,
and her girl-friends who were still single, flocked round her, and
her house was the rendezvous of all the pretty people in London. Her
dinners, her luncheons, her little musical afternoons--a single artist,
perhaps, or at most two, and a room only half full--but, most of all,
her suppers after the play or the opera were the top of the mode.

"She spends her money on the things that are best worth having," Mr.
Howard said of her, "and that alone is genius. She breakfasts on an
egg, and dines on a cutlet, but she has taken the trouble to secure
an incomparable cook, and she gives him _carte blanche_. She drinks
nothing stronger than salutaris, but she lets me order her wine, and
gives me a free hand, as she does Herr Ganz when he organizes her
concerts. Such a woman knows how to live."

It was in this year of her return to the world of pleasure, when all
things seemed more dazzling by contrast, that she made the acquaintance
of two men whom she had not known during her married life. One was
Arthur Haldane, a man of letters, who had leapt at once into renown
by the success of a first novel--a work of fire and flame, which had
startled the novel-reading world, and surprised even the critics, in an
age when all stories have been told, and when genius means an original
mind dealing with old familiar things. Since that success Mr. Haldane
had devoted himself to more solid and serious works, and he was now
a personage in the literary world. The other was Colonel Rannock, a
Scotchman of old family, grandson of the Earl of Kirkmichael, and late
of the Lanarkshire regiment, the man who was destined to bring trouble
into Grace Perivale's smooth and prosperous life. He was a reprobate, a
man who had long been banished from the holy of holies in the temple of
society, but who contrived to whirl in the vortex, nevertheless, by the
indulgence of old friends and allies of his house, who would not cast
him off utterly so long as he was only suspected and had never been
found out. He was known to have ruined other men, callow subalterns who
had admired and trusted him; he was known to have lived in the company
of vicious women, to have said to evil, "Be thou my good"; and he was
even suspected of having cheated at cards, though that is a common
suspicion of every Captain Rook who keeps company with pigeons.

But against all this there was the man's personal charm--that subtle,
indescribable charm of a high-bred Scotchman who has lived in the best
Continental society, and is also a cosmopolitan. "A charm that no woman
could resist." That was what men who knew him well said of him.

It was this man that in an evil hour Grace Perivale admitted to her
friendship. She had not known him a week before she had been lectured
about him, assured solemnly that he ought not to cross her threshold.
Her friendly mentor, Mr. Howard, was the most importunate.

"I am old enough to be your father, Lady Perivale," he began; but she
stopped him with a laugh.

"If you say that I know something horrid is coming; though my dear
father never said a disagreeable thing to me in his life."

"Ah, but you were safe then--a little boat chained to a pier--and now
you are a fast sailing schooner racing through unknown waters. I know
the chart, and where there are shoals. You must not let Colonel Rannock
visit you."

"Why he, too, is old enough to be my father."

"No; I am ten years older than he, and thirty years more trustworthy."

"I don't care about the trustworthiness of a casual acquaintance."

"Rannock will not remain your casual acquaintance. He will make himself
your friend, whether you like it or not, unless you put him in his
place at once, or, in plain words, tell your butler you are never to be
at home to him."

"I am not going to shut my door against the most amusing man I have met
for a long time."

"Ah, that is how he begins. He amuses. It is the thin end of the
wedge. Then he interests--then--and then---- But I need not pursue the
subject. He will never reach those later stages. You will find him out
before then. But in the mean time he----"

"Why do you stop short like that?"

Howard had been nearly saying, "He will compromise you," but would
not for worlds have made an insulting suggestion to a woman he so
thoroughly believed in.

"Come, my dear Mr. Howard, you must credit me with some knowledge of
human nature, and believe that if I find Colonel Rannock unworthy of my
acquaintance, I shall know how to dismiss him. I want to be amused. I
have had two great sorrows in my life--the loss of a father I adored,
and of the best of husbands. Perhaps you don't know how sad life is
when one is always looking back."

"Do I not? I, who have lived nearly half a century!"

"Ah, no doubt you too have your griefs. But you are a sportsman and
an explorer, a politician and a philanthropist. You have so many ways
of forgetting. I have only a woman's distractions, dawdling about the
Continent, or steeping myself in London gaieties."

Mr. Howard did not pursue the argument, and he never recurred to it. He
was too proud a man to hazard a second repulse. If she made so light
of his counsel she should be troubled with no more of it. He admired
and esteemed her, and there may have been some touch of deeper feeling,
which, at his sober age, he would scarcely confess to himself, though
Lafontaine's sad question often found an echo in his breast--"Ai-je
passé le temps d'aimer?"

Lady Perivale lived in a crowd all that season, but Colonel Rannock was
a prominent figure in the crowd, and people were kinder to him than
they had been, on her account. It was thought that she would marry him,
and he would shine forth rehabilitated, rich, and a power in society;
and the clever, pushing, second-rate people who had cut him last season
began to think they had been precipitate and ill-advised. The end of
the season came in a moment, as it seemed, after Goodwood. Everybody
was going or gone, and the Park was a Sahara sprinkled with nurse-maids
and perambulators. Lady Perivale made up her house-party for her Border
Castle, but Colonel Rannock was not of the party. She let him haunt her
footsteps in London, but she would not admit him to the intimacy of
a house-guest. So much evil had George Howard's warning done him. He
tried hard for an invitation, and was irritated at failing.

"You will have no music in your villeggiatura, and what a dull set
you have chosen. Your women are nice enough, young and bright, and
pretty, and only wanting to be amused; but your men are hopeless. Frank
Lawford--a quarterly review in breeches, Canon Millighan--a Jesuit in
disguise, and Captain Grant, Sir Henry Bolton, Jack Scudamore, who live
only to fill game-bags."

"They were my husband's friends, and I am very glad for them to shoot
his birds. Poor Hector! I always think of the birds and the moor as his
still--the cruel moor that cost him his life."

Her eyes clouded as she spoke of her husband. Commonplace and kindly,
a homely figure in the drama of life, he had been her first and only
lover, her faithful and devoted husband, and, after three years of
mourning, regret was not lessened. Colonel Rannock talked again of
her house-party. He was going to Iceland to shoot things, and to live
under canvas in unconceivable roughness and discomfort. He spoke with
bitterness of a joyless holiday, and then, as if on the impulse of the
moment, confessed his passion, his jealous rage at the thought of her
surrounded by other men, and asked her to be his wife.

This was his first throw of the dice. She rejected him with a kindly
firmness which she thought would settle the question for ever. He
promised that it should be so. He would be content to know himself her
friend, and so he went off to Iceland without further murmuring.

History repeated itself next season, when people were beginning to
wonder why she did not marry him--nay, even to say that she ought to
marry him. Mr. Howard was in China, on a diplomatic mission, so there
was no prophet in Israel to warn her of coming evil. In this year
Colonel Rannock offered himself to her twice, and was twice refused;
but even after the third disappointment, he declared himself still her
friend, and the _concertante_ duets, and the dinners and suppers, at
which he was her most brilliant talker, went on. And people said, "Dear
Lady Perivale is so very unconventional."




CHAPTER IV.

 "Knowledge is now no more a fountain sealed:
   Drink deep, until the habits of the slave,
 The sins of emptiness, gossip and spite
   And slander, die. Better not be at all
       Than not be noble."


Susan Rodney and her friend dined _tête-à-tête_, in a solemn splendour
of butler and silk-stockinged footmen, and talked of music and the
Opera. They spent the evening in Lady Perivale's sitting-room on the
second floor, a delightful room, with three windows on a level with
the tree tops in the square, and containing all her favourite books,
her favourite etchings, her favourite piano, and her _marron_ poodle's
favourite easy-chair. The poodle was the choicest thing in ornamental
dogs, beautiful exceedingly, with silken hair of the delicatest brown,
and a face like a Lord Chief Justice, beautiful, but cold-hearted,
accepting love, but hardly reciprocating, thinking nothing the world
holds too good for him. Susan Rodney called him _marron glacé_.

Lady Perivale glanced at the drawing-rooms, and turned away with a
faint shiver. Their spacious emptiness glittered with a pale brilliancy
in the electric light.

"We shall be cosier in my den, Sue," she said; and they went upstairs
together, and seated themselves in low, luxurious chairs, by tables
loaded with roses and lilies of the valley.

A wood fire flamed and crackled on the amber-tiled hearth, and the
varied colouring of exquisitely bound books, the brightness of rose-bud
chintz, and satin pillows heaped on low sofas, gave an air of life and
cheerfulness which was wanting in the sumptuous spaciousness below.

"Why, what has happened to your photographs?" cried Sue, looking round
the room, where one attractive feature had been a collection of panel,
promenade, and other portraits of handsome and fashionable women, in
court gowns, in ball gowns, in tea gowns, in riding habits, in fancy
dress, nay, even in bathing dress, at Trouville or Dieppe, each in the
costume the sitter thought most becoming--photographs framed in silver,
in gold, in tortoiseshell, in ivory, in brocade, in Dresden china, in
every kind of frame that ingenious manufacturers devise for people with
expensive tastes. They had filled a long shelf at the top of the dado.
They had been stuck up in every available corner, when Sue was last in
the room; and, behold, there was not one of them left!

"Oh, I put the horrid things away," Grace said impatiently; "I
wonder I didn't burn them. Who would wish to be surrounded by lying
smiles--false friends?"

Sue said nothing; and even here, within four walls, the conversation
was still about impersonal matters, the books the friends had read in
the last half-year--a subject which both were fond of discussing--the
authors they loved, the authors they hated, the successes they wondered
at.

After an hour's talk Miss Rodney persuaded her friend to sing, but Lady
Perivale was not in voice. She sang "There was a King in Thule" with
less than her usual power, and then played desultory bits of Schumann
and Schubert, while Sue turned over a pile of new magazines.

They parted without any allusion to the scandal, except that angry
remark about the photographs.

"Good night, dear; it has been so sweet to spend a quiet evening with
you."

"Come again very soon, Sue. Come to luncheon or dinner, whenever you
can spare an hour or two."

The week wore itself out. Lady Perivale received plenty of letters,
but they were almost all of them appeals to her purse--programmes of
concerts, applications from hospitals, tradesmen's circulars; not a
single letter or card of invitation from anybody of mark.

She was not without visitors on Wednesday afternoon; but they made a
vastly different appearance in her drawing-rooms to her visitors of
last year, and there were no yellow barouches and French victorias
waiting in the square. A gushing widow with two rather tawdry
daughters, whom she had met only at charity bazaars and an occasional
_omnium gatherum_, and had severely kept at a distance, came sailing
and simpering in, followed by two bushy fringes, pert _retroussé_
noses, and suspiciously rosy lips, under picture hats of a cheap
smartness, scintillating with mock diamonds.

"Dear Lady Perivale, I know you are at home on Wednesday, so I thought
I would take my courage in my two hands, and call on you, in the hope
of interesting you in the bazaar at the Riding School. The cause is
such a good one--providing bicycles for daily governesses of small
means. I think you know my girls, Flora and Nora?"

Grace was coldly civil. She promised to think about the bicycles, and
she began to pour out tea, which had just been brought in.

"My girls" composed themselves upon low chairs, whisking the
rose-coloured flounces under their pale-green frocks into due
prominence, unconscious of a slightly draggled effect in skirts that
had done church parade on three Sundays. They scanned the spacious
drawing-rooms with eyes accustomed to the band-box limitations of a
flat in West Kensington, where, if a sudden gust blew, one could shut
the window with one hand, and the door with the other.

How vast and splendid the rooms were, and yet Lady Perivale was only
a country parson's daughter! They appraised her beauty, and wondered
at her good luck. They took in every detail of her pale lavender
frock--softest silk, tucked, and frilled, and ruched, and pleated, by
a fashionable dressmaker, until, by sheer needle-work, twenty yards of
China silk were made to look worth forty guineas. There was more work
in that little visiting-gown than in six of Nora's frocks, although she
spent most of her morning hours at her sewing machine.

"How delicious it must be to be so rich," thought Flora. "And what can
a trumpery scandal matter to a woman with a house in Grosvenor Square
and powdered footmen? It's ridiculous of mother to be 'poor thing-ing'
her."

"Flora and Nora are helping Lady de Green at the tea-stall," Mrs.
Wilfred explained. "They mean to have a quite original tea, don't you
know; Japanese cups and saucers, and tiny brown and white sandwiches."

"Nora has a German friend who can make thirty kinds of sandwiches,"
said Flora. "I believe sandwich cutting ranks before Wagner's music as
an accomplishment in Berlin."

Three young men straggled in while the tea was circulating. They were
men whom Lady Perivale knew very well, but they were not in the best
set, not the men with highly placed mothers and sisters, whose presence
gives a cachet. She thought them a shade too _empressé_ in their
satisfaction at her return to town. They hoped she was going to give
some of her delightful parties, and that she was not going to waste
time before she sent out her cards.

"The season is so short nowadays. Everybody rushes off to some German
cure before July is half over," said Mr. Mordaunt, a clerk at the
Admiralty.

Nobody asked Lady Perivale where she had spent the winter. She hated
them for their reticence, hated them for finding her in the emptiness
of her three drawing-rooms, with only that detestable Mrs. Wilfred,
and still more hateful Flora and Nora. It was so much worse than being
quite alone. But she had sworn to herself to stay in Grosvenor Square,
and could not deny herself to detrimentals. Nobody stopped long. Mrs.
Wilfred did not feel her visit a success, and the men saw that Lady
Perivale was bored.

Captain Marduke, of the Blues, outstayed the others, and put on a
certain familiarity of tone. It was the faintest shade of difference,
but Lady Perivale was aware of it, and froze him out in five minutes by
her distant manner.

He met Mordaunt at his club before dinner.

"Wasn't it awful in Grosvenor Square, Tommy?" said his friend.

"Ghastly. Don't you think she was a fool to show herself in London
after her escapade?" returned Marduke, who had been christened Reginald
Stuart Ponsonby, and was Tommy to his friends and the Society papers.

"I can't understand it," said Mordaunt, chalking his cue slowly, and
looking at the tip with a puzzled expression, as if the mystery were
there. "Such a good woman I always thought her. The very last, don't
you know, to pitch her cap over the mill. And the way she looked at us
this afternoon, through and through, with such proud, steady eyes! It's
damn perplexing."

"So it is, Bill. Your shot."

"But are people sure of the story? Is there no mistake, do you think?"
asked Mordaunt, missing an easy cannon.

"Oh! people are sure enough. It isn't one man's word, you see. Brander
met them at Ajaccio, saw her stepping into a carriage in front of the
hotel, met him face to face in the coffee-room, knew by his confused
manner that there was something up, questioned the manager, and found
they had been living there a fortnight as Mr. and Mrs. Randall. Jack
Dane saw them in Sardinia. The Willoughby Parkers came upon them in
Algiers, staying at a second-rate hotel in the town, saw them sitting
under a palm-tree, taking their coffee, as they drove by, and met them
driving in the environs. No mistaking her--as handsome a woman as you'd
see in a day's journey; no mistaking him--a wrong 'un, but a damn
good-looking demon, with the manners of Chesterfield and the morals of
Robert Macaire, the sort of man most women admire."

"Only the wrong sort of women, I think," said Mordaunt, resuming his
cue, the soldier having spaced his sentences with cannons and losers,
and made a break of twenty while he talked. "I can't understand such
a woman as Lady Perivale disgracing herself by an intrigue of that
kind--least of all for such a man as Rannock. Thoroughly bad style!"

"Women don't know bad style from good in our sex; they only know their
own by the clothes."

"If she cared for the man, why not marry him?"

"Not much! She is a rich woman, and doesn't want a husband who would
spend every shillin' in two or three years."

"Oh! but nowadays a woman can take care of her money. The law will
protect her!"

"Not from a spendthrift that she's fond of. And nowadays the clever
women have free and easy ideas of the marriage tie. They've been
educated up to it by novels and newspapers. Well, it isn't a nice
story, anyhow you look at it; but I thought it was friendly to call."

"So did I," said Mordaunt. "But I'm afraid she'd rather not have seen
us. I hope she'll go to her place in the north, and cut the whole
boiling."

"Not much left for her to cut, poor soul, if people have given her the
cold shoulder."

"She can cut Mrs. Wilfred and her girls," said Mordaunt. "I should
think she'd enjoy doing it."

       *       *       *       *       *

Lady Perivale drove in the park three or four afternoons a week
at the fashionable hour, when carriages had to move slowly, and
mounted policemen were keeping the way clear for the passing of royal
personages. Some of her women friends bowed to her coldly, and she
returned the salute with the same distance. The men lounging by the
railings were on the alert to acknowledge a bow from her; but she had a
way of not seeing them that they could hardly call offensive. The more
strait-laced among the women looked at her with unrecognizing eyes;
and she gave them back the same blank stare. Young, very handsome,
exquisitely dressed by the _faiseuse_ at the top of the mode, and
seated in a victoria whose every detail, from the blood horses to
the men's gloves and collars, was perfection, she drove to and fro,
knowing herself under a dark cloud of undeserved disgrace. Anger was
her strongest feeling. Her heart beat fast, and her cheek flushed as
she drove past those treacherous women whom she had called friends. She
had not cultivated sentimental friendships in the fashionable world.
She had no _alter ego_, no bosom friend, in society. But she had liked
people, and had believed they liked her; and it was difficult to think
they could insult her by giving credence to such a preposterous story
as some idiots had set on foot.

She sought no society, sent out no invitations to the intimates of old,
the girls who had made her little court of adorers, her Queen's Maries,
whose hats and gloves had so often figured in her milliner's bills,
since if a nice girl were assisting at her own choice of head-gear, and
cast longing looks upon some sparkling vision of roses and leghorn, or
ostrich feathers and spangled lace, what more natural than to insist
upon buying the things for her, in spite of all protests. She had
scattered such gifts with lavish hands, forgetting all about them till
surprised by the total of her milliner's bill.

"Can I have spent so much on finery in a single season? Ah, by-the-by,
I gave Kate Holloway a hat, and Emily Dashwood an ostrich fan, and
Laura Vane had an ostrich boa, and a dozen long gloves. There are ever
so many things I had forgotten." And now the Lauras and Emilys and
Kates had other patronesses to eke out the paternal allowance, and they
went gaily down the stream with the people who thought evil of Lady
Perivale.

"We never were really intimate with her, don't you know?" they
explained, to acquaintance who had seen them in her barouche or in her
opera-box three or four times a week.

Her opera-box had been one of her chief splendours, a large box on
the grand tier. Music was her delight, and, except for a scratch
performance of Il Trovatore or La Traviata, she had seldom been absent
from her place. It was at the opera that Colonel Rannock had been most
remarkable in his attendance upon her. She liked him to be there,
for it was pleasant to have the sympathy of a fine musician, whose
critical faculty made him a delightful guide through the labyrinth of
a Wagnerian opera. Their heads had been often seen bending over the
score, he explaining, she listening as if enthralled. To the unmusical,
that study of Wagner's orchestration seemed the thinnest pretext for
confidential whispers, for lips hovering too near perfumed tresses and
jewelled throat.

"No need to inquire for the Leit-motif, there," said the men in the
stalls; and it was generally supposed that Lady Perivale meant to marry
Colonel Rannock, in spite of all that the world had to say against him.

"If she hadn't carried on desperately with him last year one might
hardly believe the story," said the people who had accepted the truth
of the rumour without a moment's hesitation.

She occupied her opera-box this year, resplendent in satin and
diamonds, radiating light on a tiara night from the circlet of stars
and roses that trembled on their delicate wires as she turned her head
from the stage to the auditorium. She had her visitors as of old:
_attachés_, ambassadors even, literary men, musical men, painters,
politicians. Coldly as she received them, she could not snub them,
she could not keep them at bay altogether; and, after all, she had no
grudge against the foreigners, and her box scintillated with stars on a
gala night. It pleased her to face her detractors in that public arena,
conspicuous by her beauty and her jewels.

There were waverers who would have liked to go to her, to hold out
the hand of friendship, to laugh off the story of her infamy; but the
fiat had gone forth, and she was taboo. The bellwether had scrambled
up the bank and passed through the gap in the hedge, and all the other
sheep must follow in that leading animal's steps. Life is too short for
individual choice in a case of this kind.

She had half a mind to go to the May Drawing-room, and had no fear
of repulse from Court officials, who are ever slow to condemn; but,
on reflection, she decided against that act of self-assertion. She
would not seem to appeal against the sentence that had been pronounced
against her by confronting her traducers before the face of royalty.
The card for the Marlborough House garden-party came in due course, but
she made an excuse for being absent. She would not hazard an appearance
which might cause annoyance to the Princess, who would perhaps have
been told afterwards that Lady Perivale ought not to have been asked,
and that it was an act of insolence in such a person to have written
her name in the sacred book when she came to London.

But June had not come yet, and the royal garden-party was still a thing
of the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

As yet Lady Perivale had taken no trouble to discover how the
slanderous story had been circulated, or who the people were who
pretended to have met her. She could not bring herself to search out
the details of a scandal that so outraged all her feelings--her pride,
her self-respect, her belief in friendship and human kindness.

She had made no attempt to justify herself. She had accepted the
situation in a spirit of dogged resentment, and she faced her little
world with head erect, and eyes that gave scorn for scorn, and the only
sign of feeling was the fever spot that burnt on her cheek sometimes,
when she passed the friends of last year.

She had been living in Grosvenor Square more than a month, and her
drawing-room windows were wide open on a balcony full of May flowers,
when the butler announced--

"Lady Morningside," and a stout, comfortable-looking matron, in a
grey satin pelisse and an early victorian bonnet, rolled in upon her
solitude.

"My dear, I am so glad to find you at home and alone," said Lady
Morningside, shaking hands in her hearty fashion, and seating herself
in a capacious grandfather chair. "I have come for a confidential talk.
I only came to London three days ago. I have been at Wiesbaden about
these wretched eyes of mine. He can't do much," name understood, "but
he does something, and that keeps my spirits up."

"I am so sorry you have been suffering."

"Oh, it wasn't very bad. An excuse for being away."

"You have been at Wiesbaden, Marchioness? Then you haven't heard-----"

"What? How handsome you are lookin'. But a little too pale."

"You haven't heard that I am shunned like an influenza patient, on
account of a miserable slander that I am utterly unable to focus or to
refute."

"Don't say that, dear Lady Perivale. You will have to refute the
scandal, and show these people that they were fools to swallow it. Yes,
I have heard the story--insisted upon as if it were gospel truth; and I
don't believe a word of it. The man was seen, I dare say, and there was
a woman with him; but the woman wasn't you."

"Not unless a woman could be in Italy and Algiers at the same time,
Lady Morningside. I was living from November to April at my villa in
the olive woods above Porto Maurizio."

"And you had English visitors comin' and goin', no doubt?"

"Not a living creature from England. I use up all my vitality in a
London season, and I go to Italy to be alone with my spirit friends,
the choicest, the dearest--Mozart, Mendelssohn, Shakespeare, Browning.
I think one can hardly feel Browning's poetry out of Italy."

"That's a pity. I don't mean about Browning, though I do take half a
page of his rigmarole sometimes with my early cup of tea, my only time
for reading--but it's a pity that you hadn't some gossiping visitors
who could go about tellin' everybody they were with you in Italy."

"I have my old servants, who travelled with me, and never had me out of
their sight."

"Very useful if you wanted their evidence in a court of law; but you
can't send them to fight your battle at tea-parties, as you could any
woman friend--that clever Susan Rodney, for instance. You and she are
such pals! Why wasn't she with you part of the time?"

"She cannot leave her pupils."

"Poor creature! Well, it's a hard case."

"It is less hard since I know there's one great lady who believes in
me," said Grace, holding out her hand to the Marchioness in a gush of
gratitude.

"My dear, I never believe any scandal--even against a woman I detest,
and when I want to believe it--until I have had mathematical proof of
it. And I don't believe this of you, even if twenty people are going
about London who swore they met you honeymooning with that wretch."

"Twenty people! Oh, Lady Morningside! Susan Rodney spoke of three or
four."

"That was some time ago, perhaps. There are at least twenty now who
declare they saw you--saw you--in Algiers--Sardinia--on board the
Messageries steamer--Lord knows where. And they all swear that they
thought you one of the nicest women in London--only they can't go on
knowing you, on account of their daughters--their daughters, who read
Zola, and Anatole France, and Gabriele d'Annunzio, and talk about
'em to the men who take them in to dinner, and borrow money of their
dressmakers? I have only one daughter, and I'm never afraid of shocking
_her_. She has worked for a year in an East-end hospital, and she knows
twice as much about human wickedness as I do."

"And you don't believe a word of this story, Marchioness?"

"Not a syllable. But I know that Rannock is the kind of man my husband
calls a bad egg; and I think you were not very wise in having him about
you so much last season."

"You see, he wanted to marry me--for the sake of my money, no
doubt--they are so much more persevering when it's for one's money--and
I refused him three times--and he took my refusal so nicely----"

"One of the worst-tempered men in London?"

"And said, 'Since we are not to be lovers, let us at least be pals.'
And the man is clever--likes the books I like, and the music I like,
and plays the 'cello wonderfully, for an amateur."

"Oh, I know the wretch is clever. A fine manner, the well-born
Scotchman, polished on the Continent, what women call a magnetic man."

"I liked him, and thought people were hard upon him--and I had been
warned that he was dangerous."

"Oh, that was enough! To tell a young woman that a man is a villain is
the surest way to awaken her interest in him. It is only at my age that
one comes to understand that the man everybody abuses is no better than
the common herd."

"And I let him come and go in quite an easy way, as if he had been a
cousin, and we played _concertante_ duets sometimes, in wet weather."

"And people found him here, and saw him with you out-of-doors, and they
were talking about you last season, though you didn't know it. You are
too handsome and too rich to escape. The women envy you your looks; the
men envy you your income."

"You are not to suppose I ever cared about Colonel Rannock. I liked
his playing, and his conversation amused me--and the more people told
me that the Rannocks were unprincipled and disreputable, the more
determined I was to be civil to him. One gets so tired of the good
people who have never done wrong; and one doesn't take much account of
a man's morals when he's only an acquaintance."

"That's just what my daughter would say. Goodness and badness with her
are only differences in the measurement of the cerebrum. She'd consort
with an escaped murderer if she thought him clever. Well, my dear
child, you must come to my ball on the fifteenth of June. I am told
it will be the event of the season, though there's to be no ruinous
fancy-dress nonsense, not even powdered heads, only a white frock and
all your diamonds. I am asking everybody to wear white, and I shall
have a mass of vivid colour in the decorations, banks of gloxinias,
every shade of purple and crimson, and orange-coloured Chinese
lanterns, like that picture of Sargent's that we once raved about. You
will all look like sylphs."

"Dear Marchioness, it will be a delicious ball. I know how you do
things. But I can cross no one's threshold till my character is
cleared. My character! Good Heavens, that I should live to talk of my
character, like a housemaid!"

"Won't you come--in a white frock--and all your diamonds? They would
cringe to you. I know what they are--the silly sheep! You see, they are
good enough to call me a leader, and when they see you at my party, and
Morningside walking about with you, they'll know what fools they've
been."

"Dear Marchioness, you have a heart of gold! But I must right myself. I
must do it off my own bat, as the men say."

"You're a pig-headed puss! Perhaps you'll think better of it between
now and the fifteenth--nearly a month. I want to have all the pretty
people. And you are a prime favourite of my husband's. If duelling
weren't out of date I should fear for his life. I'm sure he'd be for
shootin' somebody on your account."

       *       *       *       *       *

We are weak mortals, when we are civilized, and live in the best
society, and that visit of Lady Morningside's, that hearty kindness
from a motherly woman who had fashion and influence, exercised a
soothing and a stimulating effect on Grace Perivale.

"I am a fool to sit quiet under such an atrocious calumny," she
thought. "There must be some way of letting the world know that I was
spending my winter alone in my Italian villa, while some short-sighted
fools thought they saw me in Africa. It ought not to be difficult. I
must get some one to help me, somebody who knows the world. Oh, how I
wish I could go to law with somebody!"

That word "law" reminded her of the man whose wisdom Sir Hector had
believed infallible, and whose advice he had taken in all business
matters, the management of his estate, the form of his new investments.
Mr. Harding, the old family lawyer, was Hector's idea of incarnate
caution, "a long-headed fellow," the essence of truth and honesty, and
as rich as Crœsus.

"Why didn't I think of him before?" Lady Perivale wondered. "Of course
he is the proper person to help me."

She sent a groom with a note to Mr. Harding's office in Bedford Row,
begging him to call upon her before he went home; but it was past five
o'clock when the man arrived at the office, and Mr. Harding had left at
four.

He had a sumptuous modern Queen Anne house at Beckenham, moved in
the best--Beckenham and Bickley--society, and amused himself by the
cultivation of orchids, in a mild way. He did not affect specimens that
cost £200 a piece and required a gardener to sit up all night with
them. He talked of his orchids deprecatingly as poor things, which he
chose for their prettiness, not for their rarity. He liked to potter
about from hothouse to hothouse, in the long summer afternoons, and to
feel that out of parchment and foolscap and ferret he had created this
suburban paradise.

Lady Perivale had a telegram from him before eleven o'clock next
morning.

"I shall do myself the pleasure of calling at 4.30. Impossible
earlier.--Joseph Harding."

There was another Harding, a younger brother, in the firm, and a
certain Peterson, who had his own clients, and his own walk in life,
which took him mostly to Basinghall Street; but Joseph Harding was the
man of weight, family solicitor and conveyancer, learned in the laws of
real property, the oracle whom landed proprietors and titled personages
consulted.




CHAPTER V.

 "For thee I'll lock up all the gates of love,
 And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
 To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
 And never shall it more be gracious.

                         O, she is fallen
 Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
 Hath drops too few to wash her clean again."


Grace Perivale could hardly live through the day, while she was waiting
for the appearance of the family solicitor. Since Lady Morningside's
visit she had been on fire with impatience to do something, wise or
foolish, futile or useful, towards clearing her character. She had
been all the more eager, perhaps, because in her morning ride she had
seen a man whose scorn--or that grave distance which she took for
scorn--pained her more than the apostasy of all her other friends.

She had ridden in the park with "the liver brigade" three or four
mornings a week, since her return from Italy, and she had found some
trouble in keeping the men she knew at a distance. They all wanted to
be talkative and friendly, praised her mount, hung at her side till
she froze them by her brief answers, warned them that her horse hated
company, that her mare was inclined to kick other horses, and then,
with a light touch of her whip, cantered sharply off, and left the
officious acquaintance planted.

"One can't expect her to be amiable when our wives and daughters are so
d----d uncivil to her," mused one of her admirers.

Some among the husbands and brothers of her friends had taken sides for
her, and argued that the story of her intrigue with Rannock was not
proven; but the women had heard it too often and from too many quarters
to doubt. They sighed, and shook their heads, and deplored that it was
impossible to go on knowing a woman of whom such a story was told.

They might not have believed it, they argued, had she not obviously
been head over ears in love with Rannock last season. They had always
been about together--at Ascot, Goodwood, at all the classical concerts,
at the opera. True, she had seldom been alone with him. There had
generally been other women and other men of the party; but Rannock had
undoubtedly been _the_ man.

That one man whose opinion Grace cared for, whose good word might
have been balm in Gilead, was not a man of fashion. Arthur Haldane
was a student, and he only appeared occasionally in the haunts of
the frivolous, where he was not above taking his recreation, now
and then, after the busy solitude of his working days and nights.
He was a Balliol man, had known and been cherished by Jowett in his
undergraduate days, and had taken a first in classics. He might have
had a fellowship had he desired it, but he wanted a more stirring part
in life than the learned leisure of a college. He was a barrister by
profession, but he had not loved the law, nor the law him; and, having
an income that allowed him not to work for daily bread, after about a
dozen briefs spaced over a year and a half, he had taken to literature,
which had been always his natural bent, and the realm of letters had
received him with acclaim. His rivals ascribed his success to luck, and
to a certain lofty aloofness which kept his work original. He never
wrote with an eye to the market, never followed another man's lead, nor
tried to repeat his own successes, and never considered whether the
thing he wrote was wanted or not, would or would not pay.

He was a prodigious reader, but a reader who dwelt in the past, and
who read the books he loved again and again, till all that was finest
in the master-minds of old was woven into the fabric of his brain. He
seldom looked at a new book, except when he was asked to review one for
a certain Quarterly to which he had contributed since the beginning of
his career. He was the most conscientious of reviewers; if he loved the
book, the most sympathetic; if he hated it, the most unmerciful.

One only work of fiction, published before he was thirty, had marked
him as a writer of original power. It was a love story, supposed to
be told by the man who had lived it, the story of a man who had found
a creature of perfect loveliness and absolute purity in one of the
darkest spots on earth, had snatched her unstained from the midst of
pollution, had placed her in the fairest environment, watched the
growth of her mind with the tenderest interest, looked forward to the
blissful day when he could make her his wife, and then, when she had
ripened into a perfect woman, had seen her ruin and untimely death, the
innocent victim of a relentless seducer.

The tragic story--which involved a close study of two strongly
contrasted characters, the deep-thinking and ambitious man, and the
child of nature whose every thought was poetry, whose every word
was music--had stirred the hearts of novel-readers, and had placed
Arthur Haldane in the front rank of contemporary novelists; but he
had produced no second novel, and many of his feminine admirers
declared that the story was the tragedy of his own life, and that,
although he dined out two or three times a week in the season, he was a
broken-hearted man.

Perhaps it was this idea that had first interested Lady Perivale. She
saw in Arthur Haldane the man of one book and one fatal love. She
longed to question him about his Egeria of the slums, the girl of
fourteen, exquisitely beautiful, whom he had torn from the clutches
of a profligate mother, while her father was in a convict prison. She
was quite ready to accept the fiction as sober truth, beguiled by that
stern realism from which the writer had never departed, but through
which there ran a vein of deep poetic feeling.

She was surprised to find no trace of melancholy in his conversation.
He did not wear his broken heart upon his sleeve. His manner was
grave, and he liked talking of serious things--books, politics, the
agitated theology of the day--but he had a keen sense of humour, and
could see the mockery of life. He was not as handsome as Rannock was,
even in his decadence, but his strongly marked features had the stamp
of intellectual power, and his rare smile lightened the thoughtful
face like sudden sunshine. He was tall and well set up, had thrown the
hammer in his Oxford days, and had rowed in the Balliol boat.

Lady Perivale had liked to talk to him, and had invited him to her
best dinners, the smaller parties of chosen spirits, so difficult to
bring together, as they were mostly the busiest people, so delightful
when caught. It was at one of these little dinners, a party of six,
that she beguiled Haldane into talking of the origin of his novel. The
company was sympathetic, including a well-known cosmopolitan novelist,
a painter of manners and phases of feeling, and all the intricacies of
modern life, the fine-drawn, the hypercivilized life that creates its
perplexities and cultivates its sorrows.

"The average reader will give a story-spinner credit for anything in
the world except imagination," he said. "I am sure Mr. Williams knows
that"--with a smiling glance across the table at the novelist of many
countries. "They will have it that every story is a page torn out of a
life, and the more improbable the story the more determined are they
that it should be real flesh and blood. Yet there is often a central
fact in the web of fancy, an infinitesimal point, but the point from
which all the lines radiate."

"And there was such a germ in your story?" Lady Perivale asked eagerly.

"Yes; there was one solid fact--a child--a poor little half-starved
girl-child. I was passing through a wretched alley between the Temple
and Holborn, when a dishevelled brat rushed out of a house and almost
fell into my arms. A man had been beating her--a child of nine years
old--beating her unmercifully with a leather strap. I went into the
house, and caught him red-handed. He was her uncle. There was an aunt
somewhere, out upon the drink, the man said, as if it was a profession.
I didn't want to go through tedious proceedings--call in the aid of
this or that society. The man swore the child was a bad lot, a thief,
a liar. I bought her of him for a sovereign, bought her as if she had
been a terrier pup, and before night I had her comfortably lodged in a
cottage at Slough, with a woman who promised to be kind to her, and to
bring her up respectably."

"Was she very pretty?" Lady Perivale asked, deeply interested.

"Unfortunately--or perhaps fortunately for herself--she was an ugly
child, and has grown into a plain girl; but she is as frank and honest
as the daylight, and she is doing well as scullery-maid in a good
family. My Slough cottager did her duty. That, Lady Perivale, is the
nucleus of my story. I imagined circumstances more romantic--dazzling
beauty, a poetic temperament, a fatal love--and my child of the slums
grew into a heroine."

"And that is the way novels are manufactured," said Mr. Williams; "but
Haldane ought not to be so ready to tell the tricks of our trade."

       *       *       *       *       *

Grace Perivale and Arthur Haldane had been friends, but nothing more.
There had been no suggestion of any deeper feeling, though when their
friendship began, two seasons ago, it had seemed to her as if there
might be something more. She looked back at last year, and saw that
Colonel Rannock and his 'cello had kept this more valued friend at a
distance. She remembered Haldane calling upon her one afternoon when
she and Rannock were playing a duet, and how quickly he had gone, with
apologies for having interrupted their music.

She had met him three or four times of late among the morning riders,
and he had neither courted nor avoided her recognition which had been
cold and formal. She did not take the initiative in cutting people, for
that would have looked as if she had something to be ashamed of. She
only made all salutations as distant as possible.

She stayed at home all day playing, reading, walking about her room,
looking at the flowers, sitting in the balcony, which she had shaded
with a striped awning, trying to make it like Italy. She was too eager
for the old lawyer's visit to apply her mind seriously to anything.

The poodle, who followed all her movements with a tepid interest,
wondered at her restlessness, and was glad when the maid came to
take him for his afternoon airing in the park, where he ran on the
flower-beds, and was regarded as an enemy by the park-keepers.

Half-past four came at last, and Mr. Harding was announced on
the stroke of the half-hour. Lady Perivale received him in
her largest drawing-room. She did not want him to see all the
frivolities--_jardinières_, book-stands, easels, eccentric
work-baskets, and fantastical china monsters--of her den, lest he
should think lightly of her. The Louis Seize drawing-rooms, with their
large buhl cabinets, holding treasures of old Sèvres and Dresden, were
serious enough for the reception-rooms of a Lord Chief Justice or an
Archbishop. Even her dress was severe, a blue cloth gown, with only a
little bullion embroidery on the primrose satin waistcoat. Her dark
auburn hair was brushed back from the broad brow, and her hazel eyes,
with golden lights in them, looked grave and anxious, as she shook
hands with the family counsellor.

"Please choose a comfortable chair, Mr. Harding," she said. "I have a
long story to tell you. But perhaps you have heard it already?"

Mr. Harding looked mystified. He was a tall, broad-shouldered man
of about sixty, with a massive brow and a benevolent head, and a
countenance that had acquired dignity since his sandy hair and foxy
beard had turned to silver.

"Indeed, Lady Perivale, I have heard nothing involving your interests."

"Well, then, I shall have to begin at the beginning. It is a horrid
business, but so preposterous that one could almost laugh at it."

She proceeded to tell him how her friends had treated her, and the
story that had been going about London. He listened gravely, and looked
shocked and pained.

"And you have really heard nothing?"

"Not a syllable. My wife and I only visit among our country neighbours,
and I suppose Beckenham people know very little of what is being talked
about in London society. Our conversation is chiefly local, or about
church matters. I never speak of my clients, so no one would know of my
interest in your welfare."

"And my good name, which is more than my welfare. Now, Mr. Harding,
advise me. What am I to do?"

The lawyer looked deeply concerned, but with the air of a man who saw
no light.

"It is a very difficult case," he said, after a pause. "Has there been
anything in the newspapers, any insolent paragraph in those columns
which are devoted to trivial personalities? I don't mean to imply that
this is trivial."

"No, I have heard of nothing in the newspapers--and I have a friend who
is always out and about, and who would have been sure to hear of such a
thing."

Mr. Harding was silent for some moments, pulling his beard with his
large white hand in a meditative way.

"Have you seen Colonel Rannock since this story got about?" he asked.

"No. Colonel Rannock is in the Rocky Mountains. Ought I to see him if
he were in London?"

"Certainly not, Lady Perivale; but I think if he were within reach you
should send a friend--myself, for instance, as your legal adviser--to
call upon him to contradict this story, and to assure your common
friends in a quiet way, that you were not the companion of his travels.
He could not refuse to do that, though, of course, it would be an
unpleasant thing to do as involving the reputation of the person who
was with him, and to whom," added the lawyer, after a pause, "he might
consider himself especially accountable."

"Oh, no doubt all his chivalry would be for her," said Grace, bitterly.
"I would give the world to know who the creature is--so like me that
three or four different people declare they saw me--me--in three or
four different places."

"You know of no one--you have no double in your own set?"

"No, I can recall no one who was ever considered very like me."

The lawyer looked at her with a grave smile. No, there were not many
women made in that mould. The splendid hazel eyes--_les yeux d'or_--the
burnished gold in the dark-brown hair, the perfect eyelids and long
auburn lashes, the delicate aquiline nose and short upper lip with its
little look of hauteur, the beautifully-modelled chin with a dimple in
it, and the marble white of a throat such as sculptors love--no, that
kind of woman is not to be matched as easily as a skein of silk.

"I think, Lady Perivale, the first and most important step is to
discover the identity of this person who has been mistaken for you,"
Mr. Harding said gravely.

"Yes, yes, of course!" she cried eagerly. "Will you--will your firm--do
that for me?"

"Well, no, it is hardly in our line. But in delicate matters of this
kind I have occasionally--I may say frequently--employed a very clever
man, whom I can conscientiously recommend to you; and if you will
explain the circumstances to him, as you have to me, and tell him
all you can about this Colonel Rannock, family surroundings, tastes,
habits----"

"Yes, yes, if you are sure he is to be trusted. Is he a lawyer?"

"Lawyers do not do these things. Mr. Faunce is a detective, who retired
from the Criminal Investigation Department some years ago, and who
occasionally employs himself in private cases. I have known him give
most valuable service in family matters of exceeding delicacy. I
believe he would work your case _con amore_. It is the kind of thing
that would appeal to him."

"Pray let me see him--this evening. There is not an hour to be lost."

"I will telegraph to him when I leave you. But he may be away from
London. His business takes him to the Continent very often. You may
have to wait some time before he is free to work for you."

"Not long, I hope. I am devoured with impatience. But can you--can the
law of the land--do nothing for me? Can't I bring an action against
somebody?"

"Not under the present aspect of affairs. If you were in a different
walk of life--a governess, for instance, or a domestic servant, and
you were refused a situation on account of something specific that had
been said against you--an action might lie, you might claim damages.
It would be a case for a jury. But in your position, the slander being
unwritten, a floating rumour, it would hardly be possible to focus your
wrongs, from a legal point of view."

"Then the law is very one-sided," said Grace, pettishly, "if a
housemaid can get redress and I can't."

Mr. Harding did not argue the point.

"When you have seen Faunce, and he has worked up the case, we may be
able to hit upon something in Bedford Row, Lady Perivale," he said
blandly, as he rose and took up his highly respectable hat, whose shape
had undergone no change for a quarter of a century.

There was a new hat of the old shape always ready for him in the little
shop in St. James's Street, and the shopman could have put his hand
upon the hatbox in the dark.




CHAPTER VI.

 "Love is by fancy led about,
 From hope to fear, from joy to doubt."


It was a week before John Faunce appeared upon the troubled scene
of Grace Perivale's life. He had been in Vienna, and he called in
Grosvenor Square at half-past nine o'clock on the evening of his
return, in answer to three urgent letters from her ladyship which he
found on his office table in Essex Street.

Susan Rodney had been dining with her friend, and they were taking
their coffee in the morning-room when Faunce was announced.

"Bring the gentleman here," Lady Perivale told the servant, and then
turned to Miss Rodney.

"You don't mind, do you, Sue? If you have never seen a detective, it
may be rather interesting."

"Mind? No! I am as keen as you are about this business. What a fool I
was not to suggest a detective at the beginning. I shall love to see
and talk with a detective. I have been longing to meet one all my life.
Unberufen," added Miss Rodney, rapping the table.

"Mr. Faunce," said the butler; and a serious-looking, middle-aged man,
of medium height and strong frame, with broad, high forehead, kindly
black eyes, and short, close-cut black whiskers, came into the room.

There was a pleasant shrewdness in his countenance, and his manner was
easy without being familiar.

"Pray be seated, Mr. Faunce," said Lady Perivale. "I am very glad to
see you. This lady is Miss Rodney, my particular friend, from whom I
have no secrets."

Faunce bowed to Miss Rodney, before seating himself very composedly
outside the circle of light under the big lamp-shade.

"I must apologize for coming so late in the evening, madam; but I only
arrived at my office, from Dover, an hour ago; and, as your letters
seemed somewhat urgent----"

"It is not a moment too late. I would have seen you at midnight.
But--perhaps you have not had time to dine. We have only just left the
dining-room. Will you let them get you some dinner there before we
begin our business?"

"Your ladyship is too good. I dined on the boat--a saving of time--and
am quite at your service."

Lady Perivale told her story, Faunce watching her all the time with
those tranquil eyes of his, never very keen, never restless. They were
absorbent eyes, that took hold of things and held them tight; and
behind the eyes there was a memory that never failed.

He watched and listened. He had heard such stories before--stories of
mistaken identity. They were somewhat common in divorce court business,
and he very seldom believed them, or found that they would hold water.
Nor had he a high opinion of women of fashion--women who lived in rooms
like this, where a reckless outlay was the chief characteristic, where
choicest flowers bloomed for a day, and delicate satin pillows were
tossed about the carpet for dogs to lie upon, and toys of gold and
silver, jewelled watches, and valuable miniatures, were crowded upon
tables to invite larceny. Yet it seemed to him that Lady Perivale's
voice rang true, or else that she was a more accomplished actress than
those other women.

"Mr. Harding was right, madam," he said, when he had heard her to the
end, and had questioned her closely upon some details. "We must find
out who your double is."

"And that will be difficult, I'm afraid."

"It may take time and patience."

"And it will be costly no doubt; but you need not be afraid of spending
money. I have no father or brother to take my part; no man-friend who
cares enough for me----" She stopped, with something like a sob in her
voice. "I have nothing but my money."

"That is not a bad thing to begin the battle with, Lady Perivale,"
answered Faunce, with his shrewd smile; "but money is not quite such
an important factor in my operations as most people think. If things
cannot be found out in a fairly cheap manner they cannot be found out
at all. When a detective tells you he has to offer large bribes to get
information, you may take it from me that he is either a fool or a
cheat. Common sense is the thing we have most use for, and a capacity
for putting two and two together and making the result equal a hundred."

"And when you have found this shameless creature what are we to do? Mr.
Harding says I can't bring an action for slander, because I am not a
housemaid, and loss of character doesn't mean loss of my daily bread."

"There are other kinds of actions."

"What--what action that I could bring? I should like to go to law with
every friend I ever had. I think I shall spend the rest of my days in
the law courts, pleading my own cause, like that pretty lady whose name
I forget."

"You might bring an action for libel, if you had a case."

"But I have not been libelled--a libel must be written and published,
must it not?"

"That is the meaning of the word, madam--'a little book.'"

"Oh that my enemy would write a book about me!"

"Are you sure there has been no offensive allusion to this rumour in
any of the newspapers?"

"How can I tell? I have not been watching the papers."

"I should advise you to send a guinea to Messrs. Rosset and Son, the
Press agents, who will search the papers for your name, and save you
trouble."

Lady Perivale made a hurried note of Messrs. Rosset's address.

"An action for libel, if any one libelled me--what would that mean?"

"It would mean a thorough sifting of your case before a jury, by two of
the cleverest counsel we could get. It would mean bringing your double
into the witness-box, if possible, and making her declare herself
Colonel Rannock's companion in those places where you are said to have
been seen with him."

"Yes, yes; that would be conclusive. And all those cold-hearted
creatures, whom I once called friends, would be sorry--sorry and
ashamed of themselves. But if there is no libel--if people go on
talking and talking, and nobody ever publishes the slander----"

"Make your mind easy, Lady Perivale. When we are ready for it _there
will be a libel_."

"I don't understand."

"You may safely leave the matter in my hands, madam, and in Mr.
Harding's. If I succeed in finding the lady who resembles you, the rest
will not be difficult."

"And you think you will find her?"

"I mean to try. I shall start for Algiers to-morrow morning."

"May I give you a cheque for travelling expenses?" Lady Perivale asked,
eagerly.

"That is as you please, madam. You may leave my account to be settled
by Mr. Harding, if you like."

"No, no," she said, going to her davenport. "In spite of what you say
about money, I want you to have plenty of cash in hand, to feel that
you have no occasion to stint outlay."

"That is what I never do, when character is at stake."

She handed him a hastily written cheque for five hundred pounds.

"This is a high figure, madam, to start with," said Faunce, as he
slipped the cheque into his letter-case.

"Oh, it's only a trifle on account. Call upon me for whatever sums you
require. I would rather beggar myself than exist under this odious
imputation."

"There is one thing more I must ask for, madam."

"What is that?"

"Your photograph, if you will be so good as to trust me with it."

"My photograph?" wonderingly, and with a touch of hauteur.

"It will help me to identify your double."

"Yes, of course! I understand."

She opened a drawer and took out a cabinet photograph of herself,
choosing the severest dress and simplest attitude.

Faunce promised to report progress from Algiers. If he drew blank
there, he would go on to Corsica and Sardinia. He would have bowed
himself out of the room, with a respectful distance, but Grace held out
her hand to him.

"You believe in me, don't you, Mr. Faunce?" she said, as they shook
hands.

"With all my heart, madam."

"And you don't always believe in your clients, I think?"

Faunce smiled an enigmatic smile.

"I have some queer clients now and then," he said.

He had taken up his hat, and Lady Perivale's hand was upon the bell,
when Susan broke in suddenly, exclaiming--

"Don't ring, Grace. Pray don't go, Mr. Faunce, unless you are in a
desperate hurry."

"I am in no hurry, madam."

"Then pray sit down again, and let us have a little talk with you--now
that we have done with Lady Perivale's business. Do you know that,
ever since I read the 'Moonstone'--and I was little more than a child
when I read that most enthralling book--I have been longing to meet a
detective--a real detective?"

"I feel honoured, madam, for my profession. People are apt to think
unkindly of our trade, though they can't do without us."

He was still standing with his hat in his hand, waiting for some sign
from Lady Perivale.

"The world is full of injustice," she said. "Pray sit down, Mr. Faunce,
and gratify my friend's curiosity about the mysteries of your art."

"I am flattered, madam, to find a lady interested in such dry work."

"Dry!" cried Susan; "why, it is the quintessence of fiction and the
drama. And now, Mr. Faunce, tell me, to begin with, how you ever
contrive to track people down when once they have got a fair start?"

"Well, you see, as we don't do it by following them about, the start
doesn't much matter, provided we can pick up a trace of them somewhere."

"Ah, but that's where the wonder is! How do you pick up the first
trace?"

"Ah, that's a secret!" Faunce answered gravely; and then, after
a pause, smiling at Susan Rodney's eager face, all aglow in the
lamplight, he added, "We generally have to leave that to the chapter of
accidents."

"Then it is only a fluke when you run a man down?" asked Susan.

Lady Perivale was sitting on the sofa, caressing the irresponsive
poodle, and too deep in thought about her own case to be greatly
concerned in the secrets of Mr. Faunce's calling. She was glad for her
friend to be amused, and that was all.

"Well, not quite a fluke," replied Faunce. "We expect a fugitive to do
something foolish, something that puzzles some thick-headed person, who
communicates with the police. A great deal of our information comes
from the outside public, you see, madam. It's often good for nothing;
but there's a little gold among the quartz."

"But if the fugitive is too clever for you?"

"Well, even if our man plays the game, we are on the look out for his
moves. You see, my lady," turning to Lady Perivale, whose obvious
indifference piqued him, "an old hand like me has a good many friends
scattered up and down the world. I am able to put a good thing in the
way of my friends every now and then. Consequently they are anxious to
help me if they can, and they keep their eyes open."

"What sort of people are these friends of yours, Mr. Faunce?" asked
Lady Perivale, feeling that the detective's shrewd eyes were upon her
face, and that he wanted her to be interested in his discourse.

"That's another secret, a secret of the trade. I can only answer
questions about myself, not about my friends. But I might suggest that
the porter of a large Metropolitan hotel, anywhere on the main stream
of travel, would be a useful ally for a man like me. Then there are
people who have retired from the French or English police, who are fond
of their old work, and not too proud to undertake an odd job."

"And these people help you?" asked Susan.

"Yes, Miss Rodney"--the name clearly spoken; no mumbled substitute for
a name imperfectly heard, or forgotten as soon as heard. John Faunce's
educated memory registered every name at the first hearing.

"Experience has taught me never to task them beyond their power. That's
the keystone of my business. Only the other day, my lady"--addressing
himself pointedly to Lady Perivale, in whom he saw signs of flagging
attention, "I nearly let some one slip through my fingers by
over-taxing the ability of one of my agents. I had great confidence in
the man--a first-rate watcher! Tell him to look out for a particular
person at a particular place, and, sure as that person came to that
place, my man would spot him, and most likely would find out where he
went. Well, I gave the fellow a little job last week that required
delicate handling--a good many discreet questions had to be put to a
certain person's domestics, and no alarm raised in their minds that
might communicate itself to their master."

"And did your man prove a failure?" Miss Rodney asked eagerly.

"He did, madam. He overdid the part--gave himself away, as the Yankees
say. The bird was scared off the nest, took wing for foreign parts, and
I might have lost him altogether. But it wasn't my man's fault. He is
quite reliable at his own work--watching. It was my own fault. I ought
to have done the thing myself."

"Then you do things yourself sometimes?" Lady Perivale asked, her
interest re-awakened, since she wanted the man to give her case his
individual attention.

"Yes, madam, often. I am going to Algiers, for instance, to hunt down
Colonel Rannock's travelling companion. I would not trust that task to
the best of my agents. I may say that, for the higher class of inquiry,
I have never found any one whom I could trust absolutely. The fact is,
no one can be sufficiently keen who hasn't the whole game in sight."

"And are you not afraid of your agents turning rogues and trying to
make money out of your clients' secrets?" asked Susan.

"No, Miss Rodney--because I never tell them my clients' secrets. They
have to ferret out certain facts, to watch certain people; but they
never know the why and the wherefore. Human nature is weak. I know my
people. They wouldn't attempt blackmail: that's the rock ahead in our
business, Lady Perivale. But they might talk, and I am not sure that
isn't worse sometimes."

"I dare say it is," said Susan; "for the blackmailer doesn't want to
peach upon his victim. It's only a question of hard cash."

"I see you understand the business, madam. I have been at the game a
good many years, and there are things I can do that would puzzle a
younger hand. Ah, Miss Rodney," said Faunce, attracted by her keen and
animated expression, "I could tell you incidents in my professional
career that would make your hair stand on end."

"Oh, pray do. I adore stories of that kind."

"But it is nearly eleven o'clock!" glancing at the Sèvres timepiece
opposite him, "and I have already trespassed too long on Lady
Perivale's patience. And I have to catch a train for Putney, where I
live when I am at home. I haven't seen my wife for ten days, and I
shall start for Marseilles at nine o'clock to-morrow morning."

"You are not often at home, I suppose?"

"No, madam. A good deal of my life is spent like Satan's, 'Going to and
fro in the earth, and walking up and down in it;' and then I have my
_pied à terre_ in Essex Street, where I am generally to be found for
business purposes when I am in London. I used to live in Bloomsbury,
where I was always on the spot, ready for contingencies; but when I
left the Force some years ago, I took a cottage at Putney--a pretty
little place enough--where my wife lives, and where I go when I have a
little leisure, and where I am supposed to be very fond of the garden."

"And don't you love your garden? It must be such a relief after your
exciting work."

"Oh yes, I like the garden. I find the slugs particularly interesting."

"The slugs!"

"Oh, there's more in a slug than most people think. His capacity has
been very much under-rated. Of course he's not a patch upon the spider.
The subtle villainy of the spider is worth a life-long study. I know
nothing but a sixty per cent. money-lender that can touch him. And the
ant--well, he's a thorough-going Philistine, always moves in a grove,
and doesn't so much appeal to my fancy. But again, I am encroaching,"
said Faunce, standing up straight and stiff, in an attitude reminiscent
of "the Force." "I wish you good night, ladies, and I hope your
ladyship will pardon me for having prosed all this time."

"I am greatly obliged to you for having given us so much interesting
information."

"And some day you will tell us one of your blood-curdling stories?"
said Susan Rodney, shaking hands with him.

"I like that man!" exclaimed Susan, when the door closed upon him. "I
have always wanted to know a detective, like Bucket, the beloved of my
childhood; or Mr. Cuff, the idol of my riper years. You must invite Mr.
Faunce to a quiet little luncheon some day. There is no question of
class distinction with a clever man like that."

Lady Perivale smiled. She was accustomed to her friend's enthusiasms
and ultra-Liberal ideas.

"It's time for me to go home, Grace. I asked Johnson to order a cab at
eleven. Oh, by-the-by, it is ages since you took a cup of tea in my
cottage. I wish you'd come at five o'clock next Saturday. I have picked
up an old print or two--genuine Bartolozzis--rural subjects--that I am
dying to show you."

"I should love to go to you, Sue. But you may have people."

"No, no; Friday is my day. I never expect any one on Saturday."

"Then I'll come. It will seem like old times--like last year, when I
had nothing on my mind."

"Oh, but that business is on Mr. Faunce's mind now, and off yours. You
are going to be in good spirits again; and I shall come and make music
with you once or twice a week, if you'll have me. There is that little
German, who fiddles so beautifully, Herr Kloster. You heard him at my
party, last year. I'll bring him to play duets with you."

"It would be delightful; but I doubt if I shall be in spirits for
music."

"Oh, I am not going to let you mope. What a fool I was not to suggest
a detective the day you came home. Good night, dear. Saturday next, as
soon as you like after half-past four."

Miss Rodney lived in a pretty little house facing Regent's Park, the
kind of house that agents describe as a bijou residence, and which
rarely contains more than two habitable bedrooms. It was a picturesque
little house, with a white front, a verandah below, and a balcony
above, and a tiny pretence of a garden, and the rent was higher than
Susan could afford when she set up in London as a teacher of singing
and the pianoforte, leaving her three sisters to vegetate in the
paternal home, a great red-brick house in a Midland market town, where
their father was everybody's family solicitor.

During the earlier years of her London career, Susan had worked hard
for her house, and for her pretty furniture, her bits of genuine
Sheraton and Chippendale, picked up cheaply in back streets and
out-of-the-way corners, her chintz curtains and chair-covers and
delicate carpets. Her own maintenance, and her one devoted servant, who
did all the work of the house, yet always looked a parlourmaid, cost so
little; and, after helping the girls at home with handsome additions to
their pocket-money, Miss Rodney could afford to dress well, and keep
her house in exquisite order, every now and then adding some artistic
gem to that temple of beauty.

The view from her windows, her old prints, her little bits of Lowestoft
china, her small but choice collection of books, were the delight of
her solitary existence; and, perhaps, there were few happier women in
London than Susan Rodney, who worked six days in the week, and rarely
for less than an eight hours' day, and who had long ago made up her
mind that for some women there is nothing better in life than freedom
from masculine control and a congenial avocation.

The afternoon sunshine was shining full upon the house-front when Lady
Perivale was announced; so the sliding venetian shutters had been drawn
across the two French windows, and Miss Rodney's drawing-room was in
shadow. Coming in out of the vivid out-of-door light, Grace did not, on
the instant, recognize a gentleman, who rose hurriedly and took up his
hat as she entered the room. But a second glance showed her that the
visitor was Arthur Haldane.

She shot an angry glance at Susan. Was it chance, or some mischievous
plan of hers that brought him here? They bowed to each other coldly,
and neither held out the hand of friendship.

"You are not going, Mr. Haldane?" said Susan. "Tea will be in directly.
You must have some tea. You know I am rather proud of my tea. It is the
only thing a pauper with one servant can be proud of."

"I--I have an engagement in the City," Haldane answered rather vaguely,
moving towards the door, but with his eyes on Grace Perivale's pale
face.

"The City? Why, the City will be dead asleep before you can get there."

"True. You are very kind. I know how good your tea is." He put down his
hat, and dropped into a chair near the sofa where Lady Perivale had
seated herself.

"I hope you are not one of those horrid men who make believe to like
tea, and then go about reviling one for offering it to them," said
Susan, who foresaw a dead silence.

"Oh no; I am a genuine tea-drinker. The male tea-drinker is by no means
a rare animal."

"When are you going to write another novel, Mr. Haldane?" asked Susan,
while the inimitable parlourmaid, in a Parisian cap, was bringing in
the tea-tray.

"You have been good enough to make that inquiry two or three times a
year, for the last five years. I know you think it flatters my vanity."

"And I shall go on asking the same question. When? When? When?" handing
him a cup and saucer, which he carried, with the cream-jug, to Lady
Perivale, without relaxing the stiffness that had come over his manner
when she entered the room.

But the moment had come when he must speak to her, or seem absolutely
uncivil.

"Don't you think there are novelists enough between Central Europe and
London without my pushing into the field, Lady Perivale?" he asked.

"Oh, but you have been in the field, and have won your battle. I think
everybody would like another story from the author of 'Mary Deane.'"

"You do not consider how easily people forget," he said.

"Oh yes, I do," she answered, moved by that faint tremor in his voice
which a less interested hearer might not have observed. "You yourself
are an instance. It is just a year since you called upon me one
afternoon--when Colonel Rannock and I were playing a duet. I suppose
our music frightened you, for you stayed hardly five minutes, and you
have been unconscious of my existence ever since."

She was determined to speak of Rannock, to let him see that the name
was not difficult of utterance; but she could not help the sudden
flame-spot that flew into her cheeks as she spoke it.

"Perhaps I had an idea that you did not want me," he said; and then his
heart sickened at the thought that this woman, whom he had honoured and
admired, whose face had haunted his solitary hours, whose beauty still
attracted him with a disquieting charm, was possibly a woman of lost
character, whom no self-respecting man could ever dream of as a wife.

He took two or three sips out of the Swansea tea-cup which Susan handed
him, put it down hurriedly, snatched his hat, shook hands with his
hostess, bowed to Lady Perivale, and had left the house before even the
most alert of parlour-maids could fly to her post in the hall.

"Well, Susan," said Grace, when the door had closed upon him. "Don't
you think you have done a vastly clever thing?"

"Anyhow, I would rather have done it than left it undone!" her friend
answered savagely, furious at Haldane's conduct.

"What on earth possessed you to bring that man and me together?"

"I wanted you to meet. I know you like him, and I know he worships you."

"Worships! And he would scarcely hand me a cup of tea--did it as if he
were carrying food to a leper! Worship, forsooth! When it's evident he
believes the worst people say of me."

"Perhaps he takes the scandal more to heart than another man would,
because you have been his bright particular star."

"Nonsense! I know he used to like coming to my house--he used to jump
at my invitations. I thought it was because I always had pretty people
about me, or that it was on account of my _chef_. But as for anything
more----"

"Well, there was something more. He was deeply in love with you."

"Did he tell you so?"

"He is not that kind of man. But he and I have been pals ever since
I came to London. I taught a sister of his when his people lived in
Onslow Square--a sister he adored. She married a soldier, and died in
India a year after her marriage, and Arthur likes to talk to me about
her. She was very fond of me, poor girl. And then, last year, I found
that he liked to talk about you--and I know the inside of people's
minds well enough to know most of the things they don't tell me."

"If he cared for me last year why didn't he ask me to marry him?"

"Because he is, comparatively speaking, a poor man, and you are rich."

"It's all nonsense, Sue. If he cared for me--in that way--he could
never condemn me upon an idle rumour."

"You allow nothing for jealousy. He thought you were encouraging
Rannock, and that you meant to marry him."

"And I had refused the wretch three times," said Grace, despairingly.

"What was the good of refusing him if you let him hang about you--lunch
at your house twice a week--dance attendance upon you at Ascot and
Henley?"

"Yes, it was foolish, I suppose. Everybody can tell me so, now it is
too late. Good-bye, Sue. Don't lay any more traps for me, please. Your
diplomacy doesn't answer."

"I'm sorry he behaved like a bear; but I am glad you have met, in spite
of his coldness. I know he loves you."

"And you think that an ostracized person like me ought to be grateful
for any man's regard?"

"No, Grace; but I think Arthur Haldane is just the one man whose
affection you value."

"I have never said as much to you."

"There was no necessity. Don't be down-hearted, dear. Things will right
themselves sooner than you think."

"I am not down-hearted. I am only angry. Good-bye. Come to lunch
to-morrow, if you want me to forgive you."

"I'll be there. I believe I am more appreciative of your _chef_ than
Arthur Haldane ever was."




CHAPTER VII.

 "There's a woman like a dewdrop, she's so purer than the purest;
 And her noble heart's the noblest, yes, and her sure faith's the surest:
 And this woman says, 'My days were sunless and my nights were moonless,
 Parched the pleasant April herbage, and the lark's heart's outbreak tuneless,
 If you loved me not!' And I, who--(ah, for words of flame!) adore her!
 Who am mad to lay my spirit prostrate palpably before her."


Lady Perivale's victoria was standing at Miss Rodney's gate, but before
she could step into it her path was intercepted by the last person she
expected to see at that moment, though he had so recently left her. It
was Haldane, who had been pacing the avenue in front of Miss Rodney's
windows, and who crossed the road hurriedly as Grace came out of the
gate.

"Will you let your carriage wait while you walk with me for a few
minutes in the Park, Lady Perivale?" he asked gravely. "I have
something to say to you--that--that I want very much to say," he
concluded feebly, the man whose distinction of style the critics
praised finding himself suddenly at a loss for the commonest forms of
speech.

Grace was too surprised to refuse. She gave a tacit assent, and they
crossed the road side by side, and went into the Park, by a turnstile
nearly opposite Miss Rodney's house. They walked along the quiet
pathway between two rows of limes that were just beginning to flower,
and through whose leafy boughs the evening light showed golden. They
walked slowly, in a troubled silence, neither of them venturing to look
at the other, yet both of them feeling the charm of the hour, and that
more subtle charm of being in each other's company.

"Lady Perivale, when I left Miss Rodney's drawing-room just now, my
mind was so overwhelmed with trouble that I wanted to be alone--wanted
time to think. I have been pacing this pathway ever since, not long,
perhaps, in actual moments, but an age in thought, and--and--the end of
it all is that, in the most profound humility and self-contempt, I have
to implore your pardon for having suffered my thoughts to wrong you. My
judgment has been to blame--not my heart. That has never wavered."

"Oh, Mr. Haldane, was it worth while to apologize? You have acted like
all my other society friends--except one. People who have known me ever
since my marriage choose to believe that I have made myself unworthy of
their acquaintance. I cannot call it friendship, for no friend could
believe the story that has been told of me."

"You cut me to the heart. No friend, you say! And I--I who have so
honoured you in the past, I was fool enough to believe the slander that
was dinned into my ear, chapter and verse, with damning iteration. I
struggled against that belief--struggled and succumbed--because people
were so sure of their facts, and because--well, I confess, I believed
the story. But I thought there might have been a marriage--that for
some reason of your own you wanted to keep it dark. I could not think
of you as other people thought, but I believed that you were lost to
me for ever. I had seen Rannock at your house, seen him about with
you--and--and I thought you cared for him."

"You were mistaken. I know now that I was foolish in receiving him upon
such a friendly footing."

"Only because the man is unworthy of any woman's confidence or regard.
Lady Perivale, I think last year you must have had some suspicion that
I was fighting a battle with my own heart."

"I don't quite follow you."

"I must be a better actor than I fancy myself if you did not know that
I loved you."

"I can see no reason for fighting battles--if--if that were so."

"Can you not? You don't know--or you did not know then--how malevolent
the world can be--this modern world, which measures everything in life
by its money value. You are rich, and I have just enough to live upon
comfortably without watching my bank-book. From the society point of
view I am a pauper."

"What would other people's opinion matter if I knew you were sincere?"

"Yes, that is the question. That was why I kept silence. My pride could
not endure that you should rank me with such men as Rannock. And there
were others of the class pursuing you--ruined spendthrifts, to whom
your fortune would mean a new lease of profligate pleasures. I saw
Rannock favoured by you----"

"He was never favoured. I liked his society because he was unlike the
rest of the world. I was sorry for him, for his disappointment, his
lost opportunities. I thought him a broken-hearted man."

"Broken-hearted? Yes, that is the reprobate's last card; and
unfortunately it often wins the game. Broken-hearted!--as if that
battered heart could break! A man who has lived only to do mischief, a
man whose friendship meant ruin for younger and better men."

"Women know so little of men's lives."

"Not such women as you."

"I confess that he interested me. He seemed a creature of whim and
fancy, fluctuating between wild fun and deepest melancholy. I thought
him generous and large-minded; since he showed no unkindly feeling when
I refused to marry him, as other men had done whom I once thought my
friends."

"Rannock looks longer ahead than other men. Be sure he did not love you
for your refusal, and that he hung on in the hope you would change your
mind. No man of that stamp was ever a woman's friend."

"Don't let us talk of him. I hate the sound of his name."

"Yet you pronounced it so bravely just now in Miss Rodney's
drawing-room, and looked me in the face, as if you defied me to think
ill of you."

"Well, it was something like a challenge perhaps. And did that convince
you?"

"_You_ convinced me. I rushed from the house in a tumult of wonder and
doubt. But I had seen you, and could not go on doubting. Your eyes,
your voice, the pride in your glance, the pride of wounded innocence,
defiant, yet pathetic! Who that had seen you could go on doubting? Lady
Perivale--Grace--can you forgive a jealous fool who made his love for
you a rod to scourge him, whose thoughts have been cruel to you, but,
God knows, how much more cruel to himself?"

"I am glad you are beginning to think better of me," she answered
quietly.

"Beginning! I have not the shadow of a thought that wrongs you. I
am humbled in the dust under your feet. I ask for nothing but to be
forgiven, to be restored to your friendship, to help you as a friend,
brother, father might help you, in any difficulty, in any trouble."

"Thank you," she said quietly, holding out her hand to him; and their
hands met in a firm and lingering grasp, which meant something more
than everyday friendliness.

"I am very glad you trust me, in the face of that odious rumour," she
said. "I confess that I felt your unkindness--for it was unkind to
hold yourself aloof like other people whose friendship I had never
particularly valued. As to their preposterous story about me, it
would be easy to answer it with an alibi, since I was at my villa
on the Italian Riviera from November to April, and have not seen
Colonel Rannock since the last Goodwood, when we were both in Lady
Carlaverock's house party."

They walked up and down the little avenue of limes till the golden
light took a rosier glow and shone upon a lower level, and until Lady
Perivale's servants thought she had gone home in somebody else's
carriage, and forgotten that her own was waiting for her.

She told Haldane all that had happened to her since her return to
London--her indignation, her contempt for her false friends, Lady
Morningside's kindness, her engagement of Faunce, the detective, and
her hope that she would be able to refute the slander in a court of law.

"Everybody in London has seen my disgrace, and everybody in London must
know of my rehabilitation," she said; and then, in a contemptuous tone,
"Is it not absurd that I must take all this trouble simply because
another woman happens to be like me?"

"And because a man happens to be a villain. I believe the thing was a
deep-laid scheme of Rannock's."

"But why should he do such a vile thing?"

"Because he wanted to be even with you--that would be his
expression--for your refusing to marry him."

"Oh, surely no man could be capable of anything so diabolical."

"I know a good deal about Rannock's antecedents, and I believe _he_
could."

"But, even if he were capable of such baseness, how could he plan the
thing so as to be met by people who know me?"

"That was not difficult. He had only to watch the papers, and throw
himself in people's way. He knew that wherever he went there would be
travellers who knew you. He chose Algiers, Corsica, Sardinia, as less
public than Cannes or Nice, and so affected an air of avoiding the rush
of tourists. God forgive me, if I wrong the man--I hate him too much to
reason fairly about him, but the fact of his absence from London this
season counts against him. It looks as if, having fired his shot, he
kept himself clear of the consequences."

"Nobody would have cut him if he had been in London!" Lady Perivale
said scornfully.

"Not more than usual. He was not liked--by the best people!"

"No! But he was so clever, so amusing, played the 'cello divinely--and
he flattered me by telling me his troubles, and how hardly the world
had used him. I thought him a victim. Oh, what an idiot I have been!"

"No, no. You have only been not quite a woman of the world."

"And I thought I was one. I thought I had learnt everything in my
half-dozen years of society, and that the pristine simplicity of my
father's parsonage was a thing of the past. And I suffered myself to be
talked about, my name bandied about."

"Give me the privilege of your friendship till you think me worthy
of a dearer bond, and I will protect you from all the errors of
unworldliness. I would not have you one jot more of a worldling than
you are. I have worldly wisdom enough for both of us--the wisdom of
Mayfair and Belgravia, which the angels call folly."

He took her to her carriage, but he did not ask to be allowed to call
upon her.

"I shall be leaving town shortly," he said, "but I hope we may meet in
the autumn."

"Are you going abroad?"

"I think so, but I have not determined the direction. I will write to
you from--wherever I am--if you will allow me."

"I shall be pleased to hear from you," she answered gently. "I am very
glad we are friends again."

On this they clasped hands and parted, lovers half avowed.

Grace went home radiant. She had always liked him. It might be that
she had always loved him. His coldness had cut her to the heart, yet
now that he was at her feet again, she respected him for having held
himself aloof while there was a shadow of doubt in his mind. The
fortune-hunter would have taken advantage of her isolation, and pursued
her all the more ardently while she was under a cloud. And she was
touched by his surrendering at once to her personal influence, to the
eyes and voice that he loved. He could not meet her face to face, and
go on doubting her.




CHAPTER VIII.

 "All we that are called women, know as well
 As men, it were a far more noble thing
 To grace where we are graced, and give respect
 There, where we are respected: yet we practise
 A wilder course, and never bend our eyes
 On men with pleasure, till they find the way
 To give us a neglect; then we, too late,
 Perceive the loss of what we might have had,
 And dote to death."


Mr. Faunce's profession, more especially since he left Scotland
Yard, had lain for the most part among the upper classes. He had
been employed in delicate investigations that had brought him in
touch with some of the mightiest in the land, and he knew his peerage
almost as well as if his own name had been recorded in that golden
book. His aristocratic clients found him as kindly and sympathetic
as he was shrewd and trustworthy. He never made the galled jade
wince by a tactless allusion. He always took an indulgent view of
the darkest case when he discussed it with the delinquent's family.
He could turn a father's wrath to pity by his shrewd excuses for a
son's misconduct, making forgery appear only a youthful ebullition,
proceeding rather from want of thought than want of honesty. But he was
always on the side of the angels, and always urged generous dealing
when a woman was in question. If wrongs had to be righted, a breach
of promise case quashed, Faunce was always the victim's advocate. His
tactfulness soothed the offended parent's pride, the betrayed husband's
self-respect. People liked him and trusted him; and the family skeleton
was brought out of the cupboard, and submitted freely to his inspection.

He knew a good deal of the lives of men about town; and among the
baser specimens of this trivial race he knew Richard Rannock, late of
the Lanarkshire Regiment. When he left Grosvenor Square, with Lady
Perivale's case neatly engraved upon the tablet of his brain, needing
no shorthand note to assist his memory, he was prepared to find that
the slander from which the lady suffered had been brought about by some
deliberate perfidy on the part of her rejected suitor. He knew of cruel
things, and dastardly things, that Rannock had done in the course of
his chequered career, mostly in the relation of hawk to pigeon; he knew
the man's financial affairs to have been desperate for the last ten
years; and that although he had contrived to live among young men of
means and position, with the reputation of being an open-hearted, wild
kind of fellow, he had lived like the buzzard and the kite, and the
cruel eye had been ever on the watch, and the hungry beak ever ready to
pounce upon the unsuspecting quarry.

Faunce's first business was to find the woman. When he had marked her
down, he would turn his attention to the man. He was in Algiers as soon
as train and boat could take him there, and being as much at his ease
in Africa as at Charing Cross, sauntered slowly under the meridian
sun along the dazzling street from the steamer to the hotel, chose
his room amidst the echoing emptiness of the corridors, where the hum
of the mosquito was the only sound, made his expeditious toilet, and,
with clean-shaved chin, spotless shirt, and well-brushed alpaca coat,
lounged into the French manager's bureau.

The manager knew Mr. Faunce, who had spent a week at the hotel
during the previous autumn, in the interests of a wronged husband,
whose high-born wife had danced away from the marital mansion with a
favourite partner, as gaily as if an elopement were only a new figure
in the cotillon. Faunce had run the poor little lady to earth in this
very hotel, hidden in an armoire, among perfumed silk petticoats and
lace flounces. He had found her, and had taken her straight home to
her husband, tearful and ashamed, but only guilty of such a girlish
escapade as husbands can forgive.

She had parted with her lover at Marseilles. He was to cross in a
different steamer, to throw pursuers off the scent. And his steamer had
been delayed, and she was alone at the hotel in Algiers, frightened out
of her wits, when Faunce retrieved her.

The manager was delighted to see the English detective, offered his
cigar-case, proposed drinks. Faunce never refused a cigar, and rarely
accepted a drink.

"Merci, mon ami, I had breakfast on the steamer half an hour ago," and
then Faunce unfolded his business.

He affected no secrecy with M. Louis, the manager, who was _bon zig_,
and the essence of discretion.

Such and such a man--here followed a graphic description of Colonel
Rannock--had been at the hotel in the last tourist season--date
unknown. It might have been before Christmas, or it might have been
any time before April. He had come from Sardinia or Corsica, or he
was going to one of those islands. He had a lady with him, young and
handsome, and he was supposed to be travelling under an alias, and not
under his own name--Rannock.

The manager looked puzzled. The most minute description will hardly
conjure up the distinct image of one particular man. There are
generally a dozen men in any prosperous hotel who would fit Faunce's
description of Colonel Rannock--tall, dark, an aquiline nose, a heavy
moustache, eyes rather too near together, forehead prominent over the
eyes, receding sharply above the perceptive ridge, hands and feet
small, air thoroughbred.

"Que diable," said the manager, "we had a very good season. Les
messieurs de cette espèce fourmillaient dans l'hôtel. I could count one
such on every finger."

"Could you count ten such women as that?" asked Faunce, taking Lady
Perivale's photograph from his letter-case and laying it on the
manager's desk.

"Sapristi!" said M. Louis, looking at Lady Perivale's photograph. "Yes,
I remember her. Elle était une drôlesse."

If Faunce's mind had harboured any lingering doubt of Lady Perivale's
innocence, that phrase would have dispelled it. In no circumstances
could the woman he had seen in Grosvenor Square have so conducted
herself as to merit such a description.

"Look at it a little closer," said Faunce, "and tell me pour sûr that
you know the lady."

"No, I don't know her. Your photograph is uncommonly like her, but
not the very woman--unless it was taken some years ago. This lady is
younger than the woman who was here last February, by at least half a
dozen years."

"The photograph was taken recently, as you can see by the dress," said
Faunce; "and now tell me about the woman who was here."

"You are looking for her?"

"Yes!"

"Forgery, or"--and the manager's eyes opened wider, and his nostrils
quivered with excitement--"murder?"

"Neither. I want the lady in the witness-box, not in the dock. Her
evidence is required in the interests of a client of mine, and I am
prepared to pay handsomely for any information that will help me to
find her."

"Monsieur Faunce has always the good sense. Well, what do you want to
know about her?"

"Everything that you or any of your personnel can tell me."

"She was here for a little over a fortnight, with her husband--now
that I think of him, just the man you describe--tall, dark, hook-nose,
prominent brow, eyes near together, heavy moustache, drank a good deal,
chiefly Cognac, the lady preferred champagne; spent every night at
the club, seldom came home till the hotel was shut; the night porter
would tell you his hours; quarrelled with the lady, tried to beat her,
and got the worst of it; came to the déjeuner with a black eye and a
scratched cheek. My faith, but they were a pretty couple! They would
have made a pretty scandal if they had stayed much longer."

"Was he able to pay his bill?"

"Oh yes; he would always be able. There were two young Americans--what
is it you others call your richards? Les oiseaux d'ouf. They went to
the club with him every night, they played piquet in his salon of an
afternoon, they brought flowers and gloves and chocolates for the
lady. The poor children! How they were played! And there was a diamond
merchant from the Transvaal. He, too, admired Madame, and he, too,
played piquet in the salon."

"And Madame; was she very civil to these gentlemen?"

"Civil? She treated them like the dirt under her feet. She laughed at
them to their noses. Elle faisait ses farces sur tout le monde. Ah! but
she had a droll of tongue. Quel esprit, quelle blague, quel chic! But
it was a festival to listen to her."

"Had she the air of a woman who had been a lady, and who had
dégringolé?"

"Pas le moins du monde. She was franchement canaille. Elle n'avait pas
dégringolé. She had rather risen in the world. Some little grisette,
perhaps; some little rat of the Opera--but jolie à croquer--tall,
proud, with an air of queen!"

"You often had a chat with her, I dare say, Monsieur Louis, as she went
in and out of the hotel?"

"Mais, oui. She would come into the bureau, to ask questions, to order
a carriage, and would stop to put on her gloves--she had no femme de
chambre--and though her clothes were handsome, she was a slovenly
dresser, and wore the same gown every day, which is not the mark of a
lady."

"In these casual conversations did you find out who she is, where she
lives, in London or elsewhere?"

"From her conversation I would say she lives nowhere--a nomad, drifting
about the world, drinking her bottle of champagne with her dinner,
crunching pralines all the afternoon, smoking nine or ten cigarettes
after every meal, and costing pas mal d'argent to the person who has
to pay for her caprices. She talked of London, she talked of Rome, of
Vienna--she knows every theatre and restaurant in Paris, but not half a
dozen sentences of French."

"A free lance," said Faunce. "Now for the name of this lady and
gentleman."

The name had escaped Monsieur Louis. He had to find the page in his
ledger.

"Mr. and Mrs. Randall, numbers 11 and 12, first floor, from February
7th to February 25th."

Randall! The name that Miss Rodney's Duchess had told her, and which
Lady Perivale had told Faunce.

"And the lady's Christian name? Can you remember that? You must have
heard her pseudo-husband call her by it."

Louis tapped his forehead smartly, as if he were knocking at the door
of memory.

"Tiens, tiens, tiens! I heard it often--it was some term of endearment.
Tiens! It was Pig!"

"Pig!--Pigs are for good luck. I wonder what kind of luck this one will
bring Colonel----Randall. And what did she call him? Another term of
endearment?"

"She called him sometimes Dick, but the most often Ranny. When they
were good friends, bien entendu. There were days when she would not
address him the word. Elle savait comment se faire valoir!"

"They generally do know that, when they spring from the gutter," said
Faunce.

He had learnt a good deal. Such a woman--with such beauty, dash,
devilry--ought to be traceable in London, Paris, or New York, anywhere.
He told himself that it might take him a long time to find her--or time
that would be long for him, an adept in rapid action--but he felt very
sure that he could find her, and that when he found her he could mould
her to his will.

There was only one thing, Faunce thought, that would make her
difficult--a genuine attachment to Rannock. If she really loved him, as
such women can love, it might be hard work to induce her to betray him,
even though no fatal consequences to him hung upon her secrecy. He knew
the dogged fidelity which worthless women sometimes give to worthless
men.

The hotel was almost empty, so after a prolonged siesta Mr. Faunce
dined with the manager in the restaurant, which they had to themselves,
while half a dozen tourists made a disconsolate little group in the
desolation of the spacious dining-room.

Faunce did not pursue the subject of the Randalls and their behaviour
during the social meal, for he knew that the manager's mind having been
set going in that direction he would talk about them of his own accord,
a surmise which proved correct, for M. Louis talked of nothing else;
but there were no vital facts elicited over the bottle of Pommery which
Mr. Faunce ordered.

"The lady was something of a slattern, you say?" said Faunce. "In that
case she would be likely to leave things--odd gloves, old letters,
trinkets--behind her. Now, in my work things are often of the last
importance. Trifles light as air, mon ami, are sign-posts and guiding
stars for the detective. You may remember Müller's hat--his murdered
victim's, with the crown cut down--thriftiness that cost the German
youth dear. I could recall innumerable instances. Now, did not this
lady leave some trifling trail, some litter of gloves, fans, letters,
which your gallantry would treasure as a souvenir?"

"If you come to that, her room was a pig-sty."

"To correspond with her pet name."

"But the hotel was full, and I set the chambermaids at work ten minutes
after the Randalls drove to the boat. We had people coming into the
rooms that afternoon."

"And you had neither leisure nor curiosity to seek for relics of the
lovely creature?"

Monsieur Louis shrugged his shoulders.

"Is my room on the same floor?"

"Mais oui."

"And I have the same chambermaid?"

"Yes. She is the oldest servant we have, and she stays in the hotel all
the summer; while most of our staff are in Switzerland."

This was enough for Faunce. He retired to his room early, after smoking
a couple of cigarettes under the palm trees in front of the hotel, in
the sultry hush of the summer night. The scene around him was all very
modern, all very French--a café-concert on the right, a café-concert on
the left--and it needed an occasional Arab stalking by in a long white
mantle to remind him that he was in Africa. He meant to start on his
return journey to London by the next boat. He was not going to Corsica
or Sardinia in search of new facts. He trusted to his professional
acumen to run the lady to ground in London or Paris.

He shut the window against insect life, lighted his candles, and seated
himself at the table, with his writing-case open before him, and then
rang the dual summons which brings the hotel chambermaid.

"Be so good as to get me some ink," he said.

The chambermaid, who was elderly and sour-visaged, told him that ink
was the waiter's business, not hers. He should have rung once, not
twice, for ink.

"Never mind the ink, Marie," he said, in French. "I want something more
valuable even than ink. I want information, and I think you can give it
to me. Do you remember Monsieur and Madame Randall, who had rooms on
this floor before Easter?"

Yes, she remembered them; but what then?

"When Madame Randall left she was in a hurry, was she not?"

"She was always in a hurry when she had to go anywhere--unless she was
sulky and would not budge. She would sit like a stone figure if she had
one of her tempers," the chambermaid answered, with many contemptuous
shrugs.

"She left hurriedly, and she left her room in a litter--left all sorts
of things behind her?" suggested Faunce, with an insinuating smile.

The chambermaid's sharp black eyes flashed angrily, and the chambermaid
tossed her head in scorn. And then she held out a skinny forefinger
almost under Faunce's nose.

"She has not left so much as that," she said, striking the finger on
the first joint with the corresponding finger of the other hand. "Not
so much as that!" and from her vehemence Faunce suspected that she
had reaped a harvest of small wares, soiled gloves and lace-bordered
handkerchiefs, silk stockings with ravelled heels.

"What a pity," he said in his quietest voice, "for I should have been
glad to have given you a couple of napoleons for any old letters or
other documents that you might have found among the rubbish when you
swept the rooms."

"For letters, they were all in the fireplace, torn to shreds," said the
chambermaid; "but there was something--something that I picked up, and
kept, in case the lady should come back, when I could return it to her."

"There is always something," said Faunce. "Well, Marie, what is it?"

"A photograph."

"Of the lady?"

"No, Monsieur, of a young man--pas grand' chose. But if Monsieur values
the portrait at forty francs it is at his disposition, and I will
hazard the anger of Madame should she return and ask me for it."

"Pas de danger! She will not return. She belongs to the wandering
tribes, the people who never come back. Since the portrait is not of
the lady herself, and may be worth nothing to me, we will say twenty
francs, ma belle."

The chambermaid was inclined to haggle, but when Faunce shrugged his
shoulders, laid a twenty-franc piece upon the table, and declined
further argument, she pocketed the coin, and went to fetch the
photograph.

It was the least possible thing in the way of portraits, of the kind
called "midget," a full-length portrait of a young man, faded and
dirty, in a little morocco case that had once been red, but was soiled
to blackness.

"By Jove!" muttered Faunce, "I ought to know that face."

He told himself that he ought to know it, for it was a familiar face, a
face that spoke to him out of the long ago; but he could not place it
in the record of his professional experiences. He took the photo out
of the case, and looked at the back, where he found what he expected.
There is always something written upon that kind of photograph by that
kind of woman.

 "_San Remo,_

 "_Poor old Tony._         _November 22th, '88._"

The 22th, the uneducated penmanship sprawling over the little card,
alike indicated the style of the writer.

"Poor old Tony!" mused Faunce, slowly puffing his last cigarette,
with the midget stuck up in front of him, between the two candles.
"Who is Tony? A swell, by the cut of his clothes, and that--well, the
good-bred ones have an air of their own, an air that one can no more
deny than one can describe it. Poor old Tony! At San Remo--condemned
by the doctors. There's death in every line of the face and figure. A
consumptive, most likely. The last sentence has been passed on you,
poor beggar! Poor old Tony! And that woman was with you at San Remo,
the companion of a doomed man, dying by inches. And she must have been
in the flower of her beauty then, a splendid creature. Was she very
fond of you, I wonder, honestly, sincerely attached to you? I think she
was, for her hand trembled when she wrote those words! Poor old Tony!
And there is a smudge across the date, that might indicate a tear.
Well, if I fail in running her to earth in London, I could trace some
part of her past life at San Remo, and get at her that way. But who was
Tony? I'm positive I know the face. Perhaps the reflex action of the
brain will help me," concluded Faunce.

The reflex action did nothing for Mr. Faunce, in the profound slumber
which followed upon the fatigue of a long journey. No suggestion as
to the original of the photograph had occurred to him when he put it
in his letter-case next morning. It was hours afterwards, when he was
lying in his berth in the steamer, "rocked in the cradle of the deep,"
wakeful, but with his brain in an idle, unoccupied state, that Tony's
identity flashed upon him.

"Sir Hubert Withernsea," he said to himself, sitting up in his berth,
and clapping his hand upon his forehead. "That's the man! I remember
him about town ten years ago--a Yorkshire baronet with large estates
in the West Riding--a weak-kneed youth with a passion for the Fancy,
always heard of at prize-fights, and entertaining fighting men, putting
up money for private glove-fights; a poor creature, born to be the prey
of swindlers and loose women."

Faunce looked back to that period of ten years ago, which seemed
strangely remote, more by reason of the changes in ideas and fashions,
whim and folly, than by the lapse of time. He searched his mind for the
name of any one woman in particular with whom Sir Hubert Withernsea had
been associated, but here memory failed him. He had never had business
relations with the young man, and though his ears were always open to
the gossip of the town, he kept no record of trivial things outside the
affairs of his clients. One young fool more or less travelling along
the primrose path made no impression upon him. But with the knowledge
of this former episode in the pseudo-Mrs. Randall's career, it ought
to be easy for him to find out all about her in London, that focus
of the world's intelligence, where he almost invariably searched for
information before drawing any foreign capital.




CHAPTER IX.

 "What begins now?"
                   "Happiness
       Such as the world contains not."


Faunce wrote to Lady Perivale on his arrival in town, and told her the
result of his journey briefly, and without detail. She might make her
mind easy. The woman who resembled her would be found. He was on her
track, and success was only a question of time.

Grace read the letter to Susan Rodney, who was dining with her that
evening. She had been in much better spirits of late, and Sue rejoiced
in the change, but did not suspect the cause. She had gone to her own
den at the back of her house when Grace left her, and had not seen the
carriage standing by the park gate, nor had the interview in the park
come to her knowledge. Her friend, who confided most things to her, was
reticent here. She attributed Lady Perivale's cheerfulness to a blind
faith in Faunce the detective.

The season was drawing towards its close. Lady Morningside's white ball
had been a success, all the prettiest people looking their prettiest in
white frocks, and the banks of gloxinias in the hall and staircase and
supper-rooms being a thing to rave about. The London season was waning.
The Homburg people and the Marienbad people were going or gone. The
yachting people were rushing about buying stores, or smart clothes for
Cowes. The shooting people were beginning to talk about their grouse
moors.

"Sue, we must positively go somewhere," Grace said. "Even you must be
able to take a holiday within an hour of London; and you may be sure I
shan't go far while I have this business on hand. You will come with
me, won't you, Sue? I am beginning to sicken of solitude."

"I shall love to come, if you are near enough for me to run up to town
once or twice a week. I have three or four pig-headed pupils who won't
go away when I want them; but most of my suburbans are packing their
golf clubs for Sandwich, Cromer, or North Berwick."

"You will come! That's capital! I shall take a house on the river
between Windsor and Goring."

"Make it as near London as you can."

"If you are good it shall be below Windsor, even if the river is not
so pretty there as it is at Wargrave or Taplow. I want to be near
London, for Mr. Faunce's convenience. I hope he will have news to bring
me. I wrote to beg him to call to-morrow morning--I want to know what
discoveries he made in Algiers."

       *       *       *       *       *

People who have twenty thousand a year, more or less, seldom have to
wait for things. Lady Perivale drove to a fashionable agent in Mount
Street next morning, and stated her wishes; and the appearance of her
victoria and servants, and the fact that she made no mention of price,
indicated that she was a client worth having. The agent knew of a
charming house on a lovely reach of the river near Runnymede--gardens
perfection, stables admirable, boat-house spacious, and well provided
with boats at the tenant's disposal. Unluckily, he had let it the day
before; but he hoped that little difficulty might be got over. He would
offer his client a villa further up the river. He would write to Lady
Perivale next morning.

The little difficulty was got over. The client, actual or fictitious,
was mollified, and Lady Perivale took the house for a month at two
hundred guineas, on the strength of a water-colour sketch. She sent
some of her servants to prepare for her coming, and she and Susan
Rodney were installed there at the end of the week.

The house and gardens were almost as pretty as they looked in
water-colour, though the river was not quite so blue, and the roses
were not quite so much like summer cabbages as the artist had made
them. There were a punt and a couple of good skiffs in the boat-house;
and Lady Perivale and her friend, who could both row, spent half their
days on the river, where Grace met some of those quondam friends
whom she had passed so often in the park; met and passed them with
unalterable disdain, though sometimes she thought she saw a little
look of regret, an almost appealing expression in their faces, as if
they were beginning to think they might have been too hasty in their
conclusions about her.

One friend she met on the river whom she did not pretend to scorn. On
the second Saturday afternoon a skiff flashed past her through the
July sunshine, and her eyes were quick to recognize the rower. It was
Arthur Haldane. She gave an involuntary cry of surprise, and he turned
his light craft, and brought it beside the roomy boat in which she and
Sue were sitting, with books and work, and the _marron_ poodle, as in a
floating parlour.

"Are you staying near here, Lady Perivale?" he asked, when greetings
had been exchanged.

"We are living close by, Miss Rodney and I, at Runnymede Grange. I hope
you won't laugh at our rowing. Our idea of a boat is only a movable
summer-house. We dawdle up and down for an hour or two, and then creep
into a backwater, and talk, and work, and read, all the afternoon, and
one of the servants comes to us at five o'clock, and makes tea on the
bank with a gipsy kettle."

"You might ask him to one of our gipsy teas, Grace," suggested Susan.

"With pleasure. Will you come this afternoon? We shall be in the little
creek--the first you come to after passing Runnymede Grange, which you
will know by the Italian terrace and sundial."

"I shall come and help your footman to boil the kettle."

He looked radiant. He had seen Lady Perivale's happy look when his boat
neared hers, and his heart danced for joy. All the restraint he had
set upon himself was flung to the winds. If she loved him, what did
anything matter? It was not the world's mistrust he dreaded, or the
world's contempt. His only fear had been that she should doubt him,
misread his motives, rank him with the fortune-hunters who had pursued
her.

"Are you staying near here?" asked Susan.

"I come up the river for a day or two now and then. There is a cottage
at Staines kept by a nice old spinster, whose rooms are the pink of
cleanliness, and who can cook a mutton chop. I keep a quire or two of
foolscap in her garden parlour, and go there sometimes to do my work.
Her garden goes down to the water, and there is a roomy arbour of hops
that I share with the caterpillars, a kind of berceau, from which I can
see the river and the boats going by, through the leafy screen, while
nobody can see me. It is the quietest place I know of near London. The
rackety people seldom come below Maidenhead."

He spent the hours between tea-time and sunset with Grace and her
friend, in a summer idleness, while the poodle, who found himself
receiving less attention from his mistress than usual, roamed up and
down, scratching holes in the bank, and pretending to hunt rats among
the sedges, evidently oppressed with ennui. Of those three friends
there were two who knew not the lapse of time, and were surprised to
see the great golden disc sink below the rosy water where the river
curved westward, and the sombre shadows steal over keep and battlements
yonder where the Royal fortress barred the evening sky.

"How short the days are getting," Grace said naively.

They two had found so much to talk about after having lived a year
without meeting. All the books they had read, all the plays they
had seen, the music they had heard--everything made a subject for
discussion; and then it was so sweet to be there, in the full
confidence of friendship, spell-bound in a present happiness, and in
vague dreams of the future, sure that nothing could ever again come
between them and their trust in each other.

"The days are shortening by a cock's step or so," said Sue, looking up
from an afternoon tea-cloth, which she was decorating with an elaborate
design in silk and gold thread, and which she had been seen engaged
upon for the last ten years.

It was known as "Sue's work." It went everywhere with her, and was
criticized and admired everywhere, and everybody knew that it would
never be finished.

"The days are shortening, no doubt," repeated Sue; "they must begin,
or we should never get to the long winter evenings, but I haven't
perceived any difference yet, and I don't think there's anything odd in
the sun going down at eight o'clock."

"Eight o'clock! Nonsense, Sue!" cried Lady Perivale, flinging down a
volume of "The Ring and the Book," which she had been nursing all the
afternoon.

"And as we are supposed to dine at eight, I think we ought to go home
and put on our tea-gowns," pursued Sue, sedately.

Can there be such happiness in life; bliss that annihilates thought and
time? Grace blushed crimson, ashamed of having been so happy.

Mr. Haldane bade them good night at the bottom of the garden steps,
where his outrigger was waiting for him. It would have been so easy
to ask him to dinner, so easy to keep him till midnight, so easy
to prolong the sweetness of golden hours. But Grace was discreet.
They were not lovers, only friends. She wanted to spin to its finest
thread this season of sweet uncertainty, these exquisite hours on the
threshold of Paradise. And then Sue might think him a bore. Sue was not
overfond of masculine society. She liked to put her feet on a chair
after dinner, and she sometimes liked a cigarette.

"I never smoke before men," she told Grace. "They think we do it to
please, or to shock them."




CHAPTER X.

             "True as steel, boys!
 That knows all chases, and can watch all hours."


In the course of that summer afternoon's talk with Grace Perivale,
Arthur Haldane had explained the change in his plans since their
meeting in Regent's Park.

The business which would have taken him away from England for some time
had hung fire, and his journey was postponed indefinitely. He did not
tell her that his contemplated journey was solely in her interests,
that he had thought of going to America in quest of Colonel Rannock,
with the idea that he, the man with whose name Lady Perivale's had been
associated, should himself set her right before that little world which
had condemned her. He knew not by what machinery that rehabilitation
could be accomplished; but his first impulse was to find the man whose
acquaintance had brought this trouble upon her.

Two days after that golden sunset in which he and Lady Perivale had
parted, with clasped hands that vowed life-long fidelity, while yet no
word had been spoken, Mr. Haldane called upon John Faunce at his _pied
à terre_ in Essex Street.

He had written for an appointment on business connected with Lady
Perivale's case, and Faunce had replied asking him to call at his rooms
in Essex Street at ten o'clock next morning. An early hour, which
denoted the man whose every hour was valuable.

He found the house one of the oldest in the old-world street, next door
to a nest of prosperous solicitors, but itself of a somewhat shabby and
retiring aspect. The bell was answered by a bright-eyed servant girl,
clean and fresh looking, but with an accent that suggested the Irish
Town Limerick, rather than a London slum--a much pleasanter accent to
Haldane's ear.

To the inquiry if Mr. Faunce lived there, she answered with a note of
interrogation.

"Mr. Wh-hat?"

"Mr. Faunce."

"Yes, he does. Any message?"

"Is he at home?"

"I don't know. I'll go and see. Wh-hat name?"

A quick-eyed scrutiny of the visitor's spotless holland waistcoat, the
neat dark stripes of the straight-knee'd trousers falling in a graceful
curve over the irreproachable boots, and the sheen of a silk-faced
coat, had assured her of his respectability before she committed
herself even so far as that.

But when this well-groomed gentleman, who was far too quietly dressed
to be a member of the swell-mob, produced an immaculate card out of a
silver case, she grasped it and dashed up the steep stairs.

"Will I tell 'um you want to see 'um?"

"Thanks."

"I shall!" and she vanished round the first landing.

She was back again and leaning over the same spot on the bannister rail
in half a minute.

"You're to be good enough to step up, if ye plaze, surr."

Mr. Faunce occupied the second floor, front and back, as sitting-room
and bedroom; the busy nature and uncertain hours of his avocations
during the last few years having made his rural retreat at Putney
impossible for him except in the chance intervals of his serious work,
or from Friday to Monday, when that work was slack. It was not that he
loved wife and home less, but that he loved duty more.

He emerged from the bedroom as Haldane entered the sitting-room, in
the act of fixing a collar to his grey flannel shirt, and welcomed
his visitor cordially, with apologies for not being dressed. He had
been late overnight, and had been slower than usual at his toilet,
as he was suffering from a touch of rheumatism. His profession was
betrayed by a pair of regulation high-waisted trousers of a thick
blue-black material, over Blucher boots, which were also made to the
sealed pattern of the Force. But his costume was rounded off by a
pepper-and-salt Norfolk jacket of workman-like cut.

There was no paltry pride about Mr. Faunce. Although a man of
respectable parentage, good parts, and education, he was not in the
least ashamed of having been for many years a respected member of the
Police. In ordinary life he somewhat affected the get-up of a country
parson with sporting tastes; but here, in his own den, and quite at his
ease, he was nothing more or less than a retired police-officer.

His rheumatism had taken him in the arm, he explained, or he would have
been at his table there writing up one of his cases.

"There is often as much in one of 'em as would make a three-volume
novel, Mr. Haldane;" and then, with a polite wave of the hand--"in
bulk," he added, disclaiming all literary pretentions, and at the same
time motioning his guest to a chair.

This laborious penwork was perhaps the most remarkable feature in John
Faunce's career. The hours of patient labour this supremely patient man
employed in noting down every detail and every word concerning the case
in hand, which may have come to the notice of himself or any of his
numerous temporary assistants, in and out of the police-force, stamped
him as the detective who is born, not made, or, in other words, the
worker who loves his work.

The room reflected the man's mind. It was a perfectly arranged
receptacle of a wonderful amount of precise information. It was like
the sitting-room of an exceptionally methodical student preparing for
a very stiff examination. The neat dwarf bookcase contained a goodly
number of standard books of reference, and a lesser number of the most
famous examples of modern fiction.

One corner of the room was occupied by a stack of japanned tin boxes
that recalled a solicitor's office; but these boxes had no lettering
upon them. A discreet little numeral was sufficient indication of
their contents for Faunce, who was incapable of forgetting a fact once
registered in the book of his mind.

"You must find papers accumulate rapidly in your work, Mr. Faunce,"
said Haldane.

"They would if I let them, sir; but I don't. When once a case is
settled or withdrawn from my hands, I return all letters and other
papers that may have reached me, and I burn my history of the case."

"You will have nothing left for your Reminiscences, then?"

"They are here, sir," the detective replied sharply, tapping his
massive brow; "and one day--well, sir, one day I may let the
reading world know that truth is stranger--and sometimes even more
thrilling--than fiction. But I must have consummate cheek to talk of
fiction to the author of 'Mary Deane.'"

Haldane started, half inclined to resent an impertinence; but a
glance at the man's fine head and brilliant eye reminded him that the
detective and the novelist might be upon the same intellectual plane,
or that in sheer brain power the man from Scotland Yard might be his
superior.

Faunce had seen the look, and smiled his quiet smile.

"It's one of the penalties of being famous, Mr. Haldane, that your
inferiors may venture to admire you. I have your book among my
favourites."

He pointed to the shelf, where Haldane saw the modest, dark-green cloth
back of his one novel, between "Esmond" and "The Woman in White."

"And now to business, sir. And first allow me to say that I am glad to
see any friend of Lady Perivale's."

"Thank you, Mr. Faunce. You must not suppose that Lady Perivale sent
me here. She did not even know that I wanted to see you; and I must
ask you not to mention my visit. I heard of what you were doing from a
friend of Lady Perivale's, not from herself, and I am here to consult
you on a matter that only indirectly affects her case."

"Well, sir, I am at your service."

"I shall be perfectly frank with you, Mr. Faunce. I believe a gentleman
of your profession may be considered a kind of father confessor, that
anything I say in this office will be--strictly Masonic."

"That is so."

"Well, then, I may tell you in the first place that Lady Perivale is
the woman whom I admire and respect above all other women, and that it
is my highest ambition to win her for my wife."

"I think that is a very natural ambition, sir, in any gentleman
who--being free to choose--has the honour to know that lady," Faunce
replied, with a touch of enthusiasm.

"I know something of Colonel Rannock's antecedents, and have met him
in society, though he was never a friend of mine; and when I heard the
scandal about Lady Perivale, it occurred to me that the best thing I
could do, in her interest, was to find Rannock and call upon him to
clear her name."

"A difficult thing for him to do, sir, even if he were willing to do
it."

"I thought the way might be found, if the man were made to feel that it
must be found. I have the worst possible opinion of Colonel Rannock;
but a man of that character has generally a weak joint in his harness,
and I thought I should be able to bring him to book."

"A very tough customer, I'm afraid, sir. A human armadillo."

"The first matter was to find him. He was said to be in the Rocky
Mountains, and I was prepared to go there after him; only such an
expedition seemed improbable at the time of year. I had heard of him
in chambers in the Albany; but on inquiry there I found he gave up his
chambers last March, sold lease and furniture, and that his present
address, if he had one in London, was unknown."

"Then I take it, sir, not having my professional experience, you were
baffled, and went no further."

"No; I wasn't beaten quite so easily. I think, Faunce, your profession
has a certain fascination for every man. It is the hunter's instinct,
common to mankind, from the Stone Age downwards. After a good deal
of trouble I found Rannock's late body-servant, a shrewd fellow, now
billiard-marker at the Sans-Souci Club; and from him I heard that
Rannock's destination was not the Rockies, but Klondyke. He left London
for New York by the American Line at the end of March, taking the
money he got for his lease and furniture, and he was to join two other
men--whose names his servant gave me--at San Francisco, on their way to
Vancouver. He was to write to his servant about certain confidential
matters as soon as he arrived in New York, and was to send him money
if he prospered in his gold-digging, for certain special payments,
and for wages in arrear. I had no interest in knowing more of these
transactions than the man chose to tell me; but the one salient fact
is that no communication of any kind has reached the servant since his
master left him, and the man feels considerable anxiety on his account.
He has written to an agent in San Francisco, whose address Rannock had
given him, and the agent replied that no such person as Colonel Rannock
had been at his office or had communicated with him."

"Well, sir, Colonel Rannock changed his mind at the eleventh hour;
or he had a reason for pretending to go to one place and going to
another," said Faunce, quietly, looking up from a writing-pad on which
he had made two or three pencil-notes.

"That might be so. I cabled an inquiry to the agent, whose letter to
the valet was six weeks old, and I asked the whereabouts of the two
friends whose party Rannock was to join. The reply came this morning.
No news of Rannock; the other men started for Vancouver on April 13th."

"Do you want me to pursue this inquiry further, Mr. Haldane?"

"Yes; I want to find Rannock. It may be a foolish idea on my part. But
Lady Perivale has been cruelly injured by the association of her name
with this man--possibly by no fault of his--possibly by some devilish
device to punish her for having slighted him."

"That hardly seems likely. They may have done such things in the last
century, sir, when duelling was in fashion, and when a fine gentleman
thought it no disgrace to wager a thousand pounds against a lady's
honour, and write his wager in the club books, if she happened to
offend him. But it doesn't seem likely nowadays."

"I want you to find this man," pursued Haldane, surprised, and a little
vexed, at Faunce's dilettante air.

He had not expected to find a detective who talked like an educated
man, and he began to doubt the criminal investigator's professional
skill, in spite of his tin boxes and reference books, and appearance of
mental power.

"In Lady Perivale's interest?"

"Certainly."

"Don't you think, sir, you'd better let me solve the problem on my own
lines? You are asking me to take up a tangled skein at the wrong end.
I am travelling steadily along my own road, and you want me to go off
at a tangent. I dare say I shall come to Colonel Rannock in good time,
working my own way."

"If that is so, I won't interfere," Haldane said, with a troubled look.
"All my anxiety is for Lady Perivale's rehabilitation, and every hour's
delay irritates me."

"You may safely leave the matter to me, sir. Festina lente. These
things can't be hurried. I shall give the case my utmost attention,
and as much time as I can spare, consistently with my duty to other
clients."

"You have other cases on your hands?"

Faunce smiled his grave, benign smile.

"Four years ago, when I retired from the C.I., I thought I was going
to settle down in a cottage at Putney, with my good little wife, and
enjoy my otium cum dignitate for the rest of my days," said Faunce,
confidentially, "but, to tell you the truth, Mr. Haldane, I found
the otium rather boring, and, one or two cases falling in my way,
fortuitously, I took up the old business in a new form, and devoted
myself to those curious cases which are of frequent occurrence in
the best-regulated families, cases requiring very delicate handling,
inexhaustible patience, and a highly-trained skill. Since then I have
had more work brought me than I could possibly undertake; and I have
been, so far, fortunate in giving my clients satisfaction. I hope I
shall satisfy Lady Perivale."

There was a firmness in Faunce's present tone that pleased Haldane.

"At any rate, it was just as well that you should know the result of my
search for Rannock," he said, taking up his hat and stick.

"Certainly, sir. Any information bearing on the case is of value, and I
thank you for coming to me," answered Faunce, as he rose to escort his
visitor to the door.

He did not attach any significance to the fact that Colonel Rannock had
announced his intention of going to Klondyke, and had not gone there.
He might have twenty reasons for throwing his servant off the scent;
or he might have changed his mind. The new gold region is too near the
North Pole to be attractive to a man of luxurious habits, accustomed
to chambers in the Albany, and the run of half a dozen rowdy country
houses, where the company was mixed and the play high.

Sport in Scotland and Ireland, sport in Norway, or even in Iceland,
might inure a man to a hard life, but it would not bring him within
measurable distance of the hazards and hardships in that white world
beyond Dawson City.

John Faunce, seated in front of his empty fireplace, listened
mechanically to a barrel-organ playing the "Washington Post," and
meditated upon Arthur Haldane's statement.

He had not been idle since his return to London, and had made certain
inquiries about Colonel Rannock among people who were likely to
know. He had interviewed a fashionable gunmaker with whom Rannock
had dealt for twenty years, and the secretary of a club which he had
frequented for about the same period. The man was frankly Bohemian in
his tastes, but had always kept a certain footing in society, and, in
his own phrase, had never been "bowled out." He had been banished from
no baccarat table, though he was not untainted with a suspicion of
occasionally tampering with his stake. He played all the fashionable
card games, and, like Dudley Smooth, though he did not cheat, he always
won. He had plenty of followers among the callow youth who laughed at
his jokes and almost died of his cigars; but he had no friends of his
own age and station, and the great ladies of the land never admitted
him within their intimate circle, though they might send him a card
once or twice a year for a big party, out of friendly feeling for his
mother--five-and-twenty years a widow, and for the greater part of her
life attached to the Court.

Would such a man wheel a barrow and tramp the snow-bound shores of the
Yukon River? Unlikely as the thing seemed, Faunce told himself that it
was not impossible. Rannock had fought well in the Indian hill-country,
had never been a feather-bed soldier, and had never affected the
passing fashion of effeminacy. He had loved music with that inborn love
which is like an instinct, and had made himself a fine player with very
little trouble, considering the exacting nature of the 'cello; but he
had never put on dilettante airs, or pretended that music was the only
thing worth living for. He was as much at home with men who painted
pictures as with composers and fiddlers. Versatility was the chief
note in his character. The Scotch University, the Army school, the
mess-room, the continental wanderings of later years, had made him an
expert in most things that people care for. He was at home in the best
and the worst society.

He was a soldier and a sportsman, tall, and strongly built, a
remarkably handsome man in his best days, and handsome still in his
moral and social decadence. There was no reason, Faunce thought, why
such a man should shrink from the dangers and hardships of the Alaska
goldfields, if the whim took him to try his luck there.

Again, there was no reason that he should not have changed his mind at
the last hour, and gone to Ostend or Spa, to risk his capital in a more
familiar way, at the gaming table instead of the goldfields. Faunce
had allies at both places, and he wrote to each of these, bidding him
find out if Rannock was, or had been, there. He was not a man who could
appear anywhere without attracting notice.

The letters written, Faunce dismissed the subject for the time
being. Colonel Rannock's proceedings seemed to him a matter of minor
importance, since he doubted if Rannock could be made instrumental in
Lady Perivale's rehabilitation. It was the woman he wanted, the woman
whose likeness to his client was the source of evil.

Women had been the chief factors in Mr. Faunce's successful _coups_,
and he had seldom failed in his management of that sensitive and
impulsive sex.

He had to find out who the woman was, and her present whereabouts.
He thought it highly probable that so handsome a woman had adorned
the burlesque stage at some period of her career, as actress or
chorus-girl. The theatre is the only arena where low-born beauty can
win the recognition which every handsome girl believes her due; and
the desire to tread the stage is almost an instinct in the town-bred
girl's mind. She has heard of actresses and their triumphs ever since
she can remember. She looks in her glass and sees that she is pretty.
She picks up the music-hall tunes, and shrills them as she goes about
the house-work, and is sure that she can sing. She skips and prances to
the organ in the court, and thinks that she can dance. She discovers
some acquaintance of her father's whose second cousin knows the
stage-manager at the Thalia Theatre; and, armed with this introduction,
her pretty face forces its way to the front row of the ballet, and her
shrill voice pipes in unison with her sister cockneys in the chorus.

Such an apprenticeship to the Drama Faunce thought probable in the
case of the lady known as Mrs. Randall; so he called upon two of the
dramatic agents, most of whom had become known to him in his efforts to
disentangle patrician youth from the snares of the theatrical syrens.

He went first to the agent of highest standing in his profession; but
this gentleman was either too much a gentleman or too busy to help him.
He glanced at Lady Perivale's photograph with a careless eye. Yes,
a remarkably handsome woman! But he did not remember anybody in the
theatrical world who resembled her. He remembered Sir Hubert Withernsea
only as one of the wealthy young fools whom one heard of every season,
and seldom heard of long, since they must either pull up or die.

"This young man died," said Faunce. "Now do you happen to remember any
lady in your line to whom he attached himself?"

"No; I don't. With a young man of that kind it's generally a good many
ladies in my line. He gives supper-parties, and chucks away his money,
and nobody cares about him or remembers him when he's gone."

"Ah, but this one had a particular attachment, and the lady was like
this," said Faunce, with his hand on the photograph.

"Non mi ricordo," said the agent, and Faunce went a little way farther
east, to one of the smaller streets out of the Strand, not more than
ten minutes' walk from his own office in Essex Street, and called
upon agent number two, whose chief business lay among "the halls," a
business that paid well and justified handsome offices, with a lady
typist, and the best and newest development in type-writing machines.

Mr. Mordaunt was in the thick of the morning's business when Faunce
entered the office, but the detective cultivated an air of never being
in a hurry, and he seated himself near an open window in a retired
spot, from which he could observe two lady clients who were engaging
Mordaunt's attention, and one gentleman client in a white hat and a
light-grey frock-coat, patent leather boots, and a gardenia buttonhole,
a costume more suggestive of Ascot than of the Strand, who was looking
at the innumerable photographs of lovely song-birds, skirt-dancers,
lion-comiques, and famous acrobats, that covered the wall, and reading
the programmes that hung here and there, lightly stirred by the summer
air, and clouded with the summer dust.

The ladies were young, handsome, in a pearl-powdery and carmine-lipped
fashion, and dressed in the top of the mode, with picture hats on
the most commanding scale, piled with the greatest number of ostrich
feathers and paste ornaments the human hat can carry.

"You must look slippy, and get me another turn, Mordy," urged the
taller damsel, whose name appeared in the theatrical papers as "Vicky
Vernon, the Wide World's Wonder." "Fact is, I ain't gettin' a livin'
wage."

"Come, now; forty pound from one hall and thirty from another----"

"It ain't enough, Mordy; nothink under the century suits my book,
and it didn't ought to suit yours, neither. You must get me another
show--another thirty quid. You know you'll get your commission off it."

Yes, Mr. Mordaunt reckoned that he would get his ten per cent.

"But, you see, Vicky, there's ever so many ladies who can sing
bet--nearly as well as you--walking about London, with their hands in
their tailor-made pockets."

"Not one of 'em whose songs have ever caught on like my 'Rats' and 'The
Demon of Drink.'"

"Those were two ripping songs, Vicky. But your new ones haven't hit as
hard. They're mawkish, Vicky; too much milk-and-water, and not enough
Tabasco. 'Rats' was a fine song--and you did the 'D.T.' first-class."

"The man who wrote 'Rats' is dead," said Miss Vernon, with a gloomy
look. "He was a genius, poor devil. Could knock off a song like that in
a day--if he could keep sober--band-parts and all."

"I wonder how much you gave him for 'Rats'?"

"Wouldn't you like to know? Well, then, not so much by ten touch-me's
as I give for this sun-shade," said the charmer, with a winning laugh,
flourishing her gold-handled parasol.

"You gave the poor devil a fiver for a song that has earned you five
thou.," said the agent. "Oh, I know the ladies. They haven't got much
head for figures, but they are closer----"

"Not closer than a music-hall agent, Mordy. They're the nailers. And
what would have been the good of giving that poor feller twenty thick
uns for a song he was glad to sell for five? He'd only have drunk
himself into his coffin a little sooner."

Here the gentleman in the white hat, who was on too friendly terms with
his professional sisters to think of removing that article of apparel,
broke in upon the conversation.

"Business is business, Queen of my Soul," he said, "but, if you expect
me to wait while you and Mordy indulge in casual patter, you don't know
the kind of man I am. Come, old chap, I want your private ear for a
little bit."

He took the agent by the buttonhole, and led him into a corner, where
they conversed in whispers for a few minutes, while the two stars of
the halls, the girl with fierce eyebrows and dark hair who sang "Rats,"
and the girl with flaxen fringe and pink cheeks, who sang baby-songs in
a pinafore, walked about the room, or stood in front of a looking-glass
twitching their veils, and correcting the slant of their hats,
whistling softly the while with rosy, pursed-up lips.

"I say, Bill, are you going to stand Chippie and me a scrap of lunch?"
inquired Miss Vernon, when the whispered interview was over.

"Nought o' t' sort, my angel; but I'll take you to a snug little
Italian ristoranty near Leicester Square, where you'll get the best
lunch in London, and I'll give you the inestimable advantage of my
company while you eat it--but when it comes to 'lardishong,' it must be
Yorkshire, my pretty ones, distinctly Yorkshire."

"There's a little too much Yorkshire about you, Bill. Hurry up! Ta,
ta, Mordy. Skip the gutter!" wheeling sharply on her Louis heels, with
an artful turn of her skirt that revealed the crisp flounces and lace
ruchings of a cherry-coloured silk petticoat. "For surely you'll be
your pint stoup, and surely I'll be mine?" shrilled the cantatrice, in
a voice whose metallic timbre made the electric globes shiver.

The three professionals bounced out of the room, and Faunce heard the
ladies' heels rattle down the stairs, and the hall door close behind
them with a bang.

"Nice, quiet, refined style, Miss Vernon," he said, as he seated
himself opposite the agent.

"Not quite what you'd like for a permanency; gets on your nerves after
a bit--eh, Mr. Faunce?" commented Mordaunt. "But she knocks 'em at
the halls with her 'Rats' and her 'Demon Drink.' She can make their
blood run cold one minute, and make 'em roar with laughter the next.
Her father died with the horrors, and she's a first-rate mimic. She
got every trick of the thing from watching the old man. It ain't every
girl of eighteen would have had the grit to do it. The song ain't a
'Ta-ra-ra,' but it has caught on, and she's making a pot of money. And
now, my dear sir, what's up with you? Who are you lookin' for, and
what's it all about?"

"I want you to throw your memory back ten years, Mordaunt. Do you
remember Sir Hubert Withernsea? He was knocking about London at that
time, I think."

"Of course I do. Yorkshire swell, regular oof-bird, and a born mug;
ran through his money as if he had an unnatural curiosity to see the
inside of a workhouse. But he was a good-natured bloke; and I've seen
some first-class company at his Sunday dinners, in a house he had in
the Abbey Road. He used to have a dinner-party every Sunday in May
and June, and a game of cards after dinner, and one met some queer
specimens there sometimes."

"Was there a lady at the head of his table?"

"Rather! There was Lady Withernsea--everybody called her Lady
Withernsea in her own house, whatever they may have called her out
of it. I knew her as Kate Delmaine, in the chorus at the Spectacular
Theatre; but it isn't for me to say he hadn't married her. He was
fool enough for anything, and he was awfully fond of her, and awfully
jealous of every man who ventured to pay her attention."

"Did you ever meet a Colonel Rannock there?"

"Did I ever dine there without seeing him? Rannock was 'mine own
familiar friend'--the Mephistopheles to Withernsea's Faust. I believe
Rannock pouched more of his stuff than anybody else in the gang,
though they were all blackguards. I never touched a card in his house;
so I can talk of them with a clear conscience. A gang of well-bred
swindlers, that's what I call them."

"The chorus-girl was handsome, I suppose?"

"Well, strange to say, she was. She was worth all the money Withernsea
spent on her; and I suppose it's about the only bargain he ever made
in which he wasn't had. She was one of the handsomest women that ever
stepped upon the Spectacular stage; and while she was behind the
footlights not a man in the stalls had eyes for anybody else."

"Was she anything like that?" asked Faunce, handing him Lady Perivale's
photograph.

"She was. Ten years ago you might have passed that off for her photo.
But she ain't up to that now."

"You've seen her lately."

"She was here the week before last, a wreck, looking ill and poor.
I never knew a handsome woman go off so sudden. I saw her in a box
at Drury Lane last Christmas, in fine form; but that's all over. She
wanted me to get her an engagement--chorus again--she was never up to
speaking parts, used to lose her head directly she had to utter. I
couldn't do anything for her. We've no use for anything old and faded
at the West End theatres. Managers won't consider it."

"Can you give me the lady's address?"

"I think I booked it," said the agent, "just to satisfy her, though I
knew it was no use--at any rate not till the pantomime season, when I
might get her an engagement for a Flora or a Juno at the back of the
stage, or a Queen in a historical procession, perhaps. Yes, here it is:
Mrs. Randall, Miss Kate Delmaine, 14, Selburne Street, Chelsea."

"Thank you, Mordaunt," replied Faunce, handing him a sovereign. "I
don't want to waste your time for nothing."

"Well, Faunce, time is money, ain't it?" said Mordaunt, pocketing the
coin with a pleasant smile.




CHAPTER XI.

   "And the Abbé uncrossed his legs,
     Took snuff, a reflective pinch.
   Broke silence: 'The question begs
     Much pondering ere I pronounce. Shall I flinch?
 The love which to one and one only has reference
 Seems terribly like what perhaps gains God's preference.'"


Faunce ate his modest luncheon at the immemorial Cock; and, after a
quarter of an hour's rest and meditation, assisted by tobacco, took
a hansom and drove to Selburne Street, which the cabman discovered,
after some research, in a labyrinth of shabby streets between the
King's Road and the Thames, to the west of the red-brick mansions
of Cheyne Walk, and all the pleasantness of fashionable Chelsea--a
wilderness of eight-roomed houses, slate roofs, narrow areas, steep
steps, dirty windows, and gutters overcharged with small children:
one of those depressing neighbourhoods which fill the stranger's
mind with a despairing pity, but where, nevertheless, there exist
worthy, hard-working people who contrive somehow to be happy, and
even comfortable--people who have their Christmas puddings and their
household affections, like the Cratchets, and who do not desire to
curse God and die.

The houses in Selburne Street were of the same pattern as most of the
other streets, and just as shabby, but a little larger. The door at No.
14 was opened by the landlady, who did not know, or apparently care,
whether Mrs. Randall was at home or out, but who bade the visitor go up
to the first-floor front and inquire.

"She's got her key," said this lady, "and I don't always hear her come
in."

Faunce went upstairs and tapped politely at the door of the front room.

"Come in, whoever you are," said a voice, with a listless melancholy in
its tone.

An odour of tobacco greeted Faunce as he opened the door, and a woman
sitting by the window threw the end of a cigarette into the street.

"Is it you, Jim?" she asked drearily, with her face towards the window;
then, turning, and seeing a stranger, she gave a cry of surprise that
had a touch of fear in it.

"What do you want?" she cried sharply, and Faunce saw that her hand
shook a little as she caught hold of a chair.

"Nerves gone. The usual thing," he thought; "drink or drugs; the usual
resource when bad luck sets in."

"I have ventured to call upon you on a matter of business, Mrs.
Randall," he said, "without writing to ask leave. But as it's a
business that may be profitable--very profitable--to yourself, I hope
you will pardon the liberty."

"Who are you?" she asked fiercely. "I don't want any of your gammon.
Who are you?"

She was a wreck. The agent had been right so far. But she was a
beautiful wreck. The brilliant colouring was faded, the cheeks were
hollow, the eyes haggard, but the perfect lines of the face were there;
and Faunce saw that she had been beautiful, and also that when she was
at her best she must have been curiously like Lady Perivale. In height,
in figure, in the poise of the head, the modelling of the throat, she
resembled her as a sister might have done.

She must have fallen upon evil days since her visit to Algiers--very
evil days. There was the pinch of poverty in her aspect, in her tawdry
morning wrapper, in the shabbily-furnished sitting-room.

"Pray don't be alarmed, madam. My business is not of an unpleasant
nature."

"I want to know who and what you are!" she said in the same tone, half
fear, half fury; "and how you had the cheek to march into my room
without sending up your name first. Do you think because I'm in cheap
lodgings I ain't a lady?"

"Your landlady told me to come upstairs, or I should not have taken
that liberty. That is my name," handing her a card, which she snatched
impatiently and looked at with a scowling brow. "I am engaged in
the interests of a lady whose social position has suffered by her
resemblance to you."

"What do you mean?"

"You were in Algiers last February with Colonel Rannock."

Her face lost colour, and her breathing quickened, as she answered--

"Well, what then?"

"You were seen by friends of my client, and mistaken for her, and the
result was a scandal which has seriously affected that lady. Now, in
the event of a libel suit, which is very likely to arise out of that
scandal, it will be in your power to put matters straight by stepping
into the witness-box, and stating that you were Colonel Rannock's
travelling companion in Algiers, and Corsica, and Sardinia last winter.
The lady will be in court, and the likeness between you and her will
explain the mistake."

"I'll see you and your lady client in---- first!" answered the
termagant. "I wonder at your cheek in coming to ask a lady to give
herself away like that. You just make yourself scarce, Mr. Faunce,"
looking at his card. "I haven't another word to say to you."

"Oh yes, you have, Mrs. Randall. You have got to ask me what recompense
I am prepared to offer you for your assistance in this little matter."

"I don't believe a word of your story; and I want to see you outside
that door."

"Come, come, madam. Is it reasonable to be so touchy with a man who
comes to propose a very profitable transaction?"

"What do you mean by profitable?"

"I mean that in the event of the libel suit coming off, and your going
into the witness-box and swearing that you were with Rannock from the
beginning to the end of that little tour, I am prepared to pay you a
hundred pounds. A hundred pounds for one morning's work. Not so bad,
eh?"

Her colour had come back, and, after a long scrutiny of Faunce's
amiable countenance, she seemed reassured.

"Sit down," she said, and seated herself opposite him, with her elbows
on the table and her chin in her hands.

He noted the wedding-ring, and two or three trumpery turquoise and
garnet rings on her left hand. Her day of splendour was past, and the
spoils of her youth had vanished.

"A hundred ain't much, if your client is a rich woman," she said. "Of
course, I can guess who she is--Lady Perivale. I've been told I'm
like her. If it's her, she can afford to pay two hundred quid as easy
as one. And I ain't going to stand up in court and tell my life and
adventures for a lower figure."

"You are a hard one, Mrs. Randall."

"I'm a hard-up one, Mr. Faunce. There's no use denying it when you see
me in such a beggarly hole as this. I ain't used to it. I've lived
like a lady ever since I was eighteen years old, and this beastly
lodging-house gets upon my nerves. That's why I was so nasty with you
when you came in," she concluded, with a little laugh that didn't sound
quite genuine.

"Well, Mrs. Randall, if you oblige my client I know she will deal
generously with you."

"Two hundred quid paid down before I go into the box; not a penny less."

"We'll see about it. In the mean time, to show good faith, there's a
trifle on account," said Faunce, handing her a ten-pound note.

He would have offered her more had he found her in better surroundings,
but he reckoned the rooms she was in at ten shillings a week, and he
thought she had come to her lowest stage.

"Thanks," she said, putting the note in a shabby _porte-monnaie_,
whose contents Faunce's eye discovered in the instant of its
opening--sixpence and a few coppers.

The door opened suddenly at this moment, and Faunce, who sat opposite,
caught one brief glimpse of the man who opened it, and who, on seeing
him, stepped back, shut it quickly, and ran downstairs. Faunce started
up, and was at the window in time to see the visitor leave the house,
and walk down the street. He was a big man, with broad shoulders and a
bull neck, flashily dressed, and with a fox-terrier at his heels.

"I'm sorry I frightened your friend away," said Faunce.

"Oh, it don't matter. He can come another time if he wants to see me,"
Mrs. Randall answered carelessly.

That sensitive complexion of hers had paled at the interruption, just
as at the mention of Rannock's name, and a gloomy look had come into
her eyes. The visitor could hardly have been the bringer of pleasant
things.

"An old friend of yours?" hazarded Faunce.

"Oh lord, yes; old enough! I've known him since I was a kid."

"But apparently not a favourite of yours?"

"I've got no favourites," she answered curtly. "All I want is to go my
own way, and not to be bothered."

"Nobody can call that an unreasonable desire, madam. And now will you
be so very kind as to oblige me with one of your photographs--one that,
in your own opinion, does you most justice."

"Then it had better be one that wasn't taken yesterday," she said.
"They wipe the wrinkles out, but they can't hide the lantern jaws.
Oh, you can have a photo if you want one; I've got plenty. The
photographers were the plague of my life when I was on the boards, and
as long as I was about London, driving my carriage. But they've left
off worrying now. There's new faces in the market."

"None handsomer than yours, madam."

She dragged open a reluctant drawer in an ill-made mahogany sideboard,
and produced half a dozen cabinet photographs, from which Faunce
selected two of the best, with polite acknowledgment of the favour.

"You have my address, Mrs. Randall," he said, rising, and taking up his
hat; "let me know if you change your quarters."

"I shan't be able to do that--on a tenner," she said; "but it will keep
me out of the workhouse for a week or two."

"By-the-by, can you tell me where Colonel Rannock is to be found at
this present time?" Faunce asked, as he shook hands with her.

Her hand was in his when he asked the question, and he felt it grow
cold. She was fond of Rannock, he thought--fond of him, and angry with
him for abandoning her.

"No, I can't," she answered, looking at him steadily, but with the same
pale change in her face that he had noted before.

"I'm told he went to San Francisco, _viâ_ New York, on his way to the
Alaska goldfields," he said.

"Yes, I believe he went to the goldfields."

"Do you know when he started?"

"Some time in March. I don't remember the date."

"Do you remember by what line he went--whether from Liverpool or
Southampton?"

"I know nothing about him--after he left London."

"Well, Mrs. Randall, expect to hear from me soon. Good-bye."

Faunce left her, pleased with his success. Everything was now easy.
There was nothing wanted but the audacious libel, which should afford
ground for an action; and that, as Mr. Faunce told Lady Perivale, would
be forthcoming.

He was satisfied, but he was also thoughtful. There had been something
unaccountable in the woman's manner: that strange mixture of anger and
apprehension, the sick, white look that came over her face when she
spoke of Rannock. Something evil there was assuredly--some hidden thing
in her mind which made that name a sound of fear.

He had studied the woman intently during the quarter of an hour's
_tête-à-tête_, and he did not think that she was a bad woman, from
the criminal point of view. He did not think she was treacherous or
cruel. If any evil thing had befallen Rannock, the evil was not her
doing. And, after all, her agitation might be only that of a woman of
shattered nerves and quick feelings, who had loved intensely and been
badly treated--cast off and left in poverty--by the man she loved. It
might be that the perturbed look which he had taken for fear was not
fear, but resentment.

He telegraphed to Lady Perivale, asking for an appointment, and
presented himself at Runnymede Grange on the following afternoon.
He had not seen his client since their first interview, and he was
astonished at the change in her countenance and manner. On the former
occasion she had been all gloom: to-day she was all brightness. The
nervous irritability, the fiery indignation were gone. She treated the
subject of her wrongs in a business-like tone, almost as a bagatelle.

"Something has happened since I saw her. Something that has changed the
whole tenor of her life," thought Faunce.

He had a shrewd idea of what that "something" was a few minutes later,
when Lady Perivale told him that she would like a friend, in whose
judgment she had confidence, to hear his report; and when Arthur
Haldane came into the room--

"This is Mr. Faunce," said Grace, in a tone that showed her friend had
been told all about him; and the two men saluted each other politely,
without any hint of their former meeting.

Faunce told Lady Perivale that he had found the woman who resembled
her, and that her evidence would be ready when it was required.

"She will not shrink from standing up in court and acknowledging
that she was with Colonel Rannock in Algiers?" asked Lady Perivale,
wonderingly.

"No, she won't shrink--provided the reward is good enough. She is
prepared to tell the truth--and--shame the devil--for two hundred
pounds."

"Give her ten times as much if she wants it!" cried Lady Perivale. "But
what are we to do if nobody libels me? Messrs. Rosset have sent me two
or three newspaper paragraphs. They are very insolent, but I'm afraid
one could hardly go to law about them."

At Faunce's request she produced the impertinent snippets, pasted on
flimsy green paper.

From the _Morning Intelligencer_: "Lady Perivale, whose small dinners
and suppers after the opera were so popular last season, has not done
any entertaining this year. She is living in her house in Grosvenor
Square, but is spending the summer in strict retirement. She may
be seen in the morning riding with the 'liver brigade,' and she
occasionally takes an afternoon drive in the Park; but she has joined
in none of the season's festivities--a fact that has caused some gossip
in the inner circles of the smart world."

From Miranda's "Crême de la Crême," in the _Hesperus_: "Among the
beauties at Lady Morningside's ball, Lady Perivale was conspicuous by
her absence, although last season she was so prominent a personage in
the Morningside set. What can be the cause of this self-effacement on
the part of a young and wealthy widow who had the ball of fashion at
her feet last year?"

There were other paragraphs of the same calibre.

"You are right, Lady Perivale," Faunce said, after having gravely read
them. "These are not good enough. We must wait for something better."

"And you think that somebody will libel me?"

"I am--almost--sure that you will be called upon to punish some very
gross libel within the next few weeks."

"Then I hope I shall have the pleasure of horsewhipping the writer, and
the editor who publishes it!" said Haldane, hotly.

"If you please, Mr. Haldane," cried Faunce, earnestly, "nothing of that
kind! It is necessary that Lady Perivale should be publicly insulted,
in order that she may be publicly justified. Nothing short of the
appearance of the woman who was mistaken for her ladyship can give the
lie direct to the scandal. I must beg, therefore, that the writer of
the libel may be held secure from personal violence."

Haldane was silent. His fingers were itching for a stout malacca and
for a scoundrel's back upon which to exercise it. He would have given
so much to focus the malignant slander that had followed the woman he
loved, and had made even him, her adoring lover, begin to doubt her,
with a wavering faith of which he was now so deeply ashamed.

Oh, to have some one to punish with sharp physical pain, some craven
hound to offer up as a sacrifice to his own remorse!




CHAPTER XII.

 "In the mute August afternoon
 They trembled to some undertune
   Of music in the silver air;
   Great pleasure was it to be there
 Till green turned duskier and the moon
   Coloured the corn-sheaves like gold hair."


The atmosphere of Grace Perivale's life was changed. John Faunce's keen
eye for character had not erred in this particular case. Lady Perivale
at Runnymede Grange was not the same woman the detective had conversed
with in Grosvenor Square.

Happy love leaves no room for troubled thoughts in a woman's mind; and
from the hour when Grace learnt that Arthur Haldane was her trusting
and devoted lover, she began to forget the frivolous friends whose
desertion she had so deeply resented. She forgot to be angry, because
she had ceased to care. That outer world, the world of Mayfair and
Belgravia, with its sordid interests and petty ambitions, the world
of South African millionaires and new-made nobility, the world in
which every smart personage was living in some other smart personage's
house, and everybody who wasn't accredited with millions was suspected
of being on the brink of insolvency; that _élite_, over-civilized and
decadent world--dazzling and alluring in the phosphorescent radiance of
decay--seemed so remote from all that makes happiness, that it could
not be worth thinking about.

Her world now lay within so narrow a circle. Her world began and ended
in a poet, critic, and romancer, whose dreams, thoughts, opinions, and
aspirations, filled her mind to overflowing. He was her world, Arthur
Haldane, the man of letters, to whom she was to be married as soon as
this preposterous scandal was swept into the world's great ragbag of
forgotten things.

The words had been spoken at last, words that had been in his heart
two years ago, when Grace Perivale's beauty first flashed like sudden
sunshine into the level grey of his life, and when he discovered that
behind the beauty there was a brain and a heart.

He had held himself in check then, had courted her society under a mask
of indifference, for more than one reason. First, because she was rich,
and a much-talked-of prize in the matrimonial market; next, because
of his jealous fear that Rannock's showy accomplishments and charm of
manner had won her heart.

"How could I hope to prevail--a dry-as-dust scribbler--against a man
who had been called irresistible?" he asked, when Grace reproached him
for his aloofness in that first year of their acquaintance.

"A dry-as-dust scribbler who had written the most pathetic story of the
last half century. Every tear I shed over 'Mary Deane' was a link that
bound me to the man who wrote the book. Of course I don't pretend that
if the man had been fat and elderly--like Richardson--I should have
fallen in love with him. But even then I should have valued him, as the
young women of those days valued the fat little printer. I should have
courted his society, and hung upon his words."

"It is not every novelist who is so lucky," said Haldane. "I think I am
the first, since Balzac, whose book has won him the love that crowns a
life."

What fairer Eden could there be than that reach of the Thames in a fine
August? Other men were turning their faces northward with dogs and
guns, ready for havoc on "the twelfth," or waiting impatiently for "the
first." But Arthur Haldane, who was no mean shot, and had invitations
to half a dozen country houses, behaved like a man who had never lifted
a gun to his shoulder. The veriest cockney could not have been happier
in that river idlesse, in which a punt-pole was his most strenuous
exertion, and to boil a tea-kettle his most exciting sport. The summer
days, the golden evenings were never too long, and the crimson of the
sunset seemed always a surprise.

"I know you must be wanting to kill things," Grace said one evening;
"and you must hate me keeping you dawdling here. I am glad you are not
grouse-shooting, for I have always dreaded the moors since my poor
Hector caught his death in the ceaseless downpour of one dreadful
August day. But why do you not go to your Norfolk friends for the
partridge-shooting?"

"You are very kind and thoughtful, but my Norfolk friends were always a
trifle boring, and they would be intolerable now, if they kept me away
from you."

"That is very flattering to my vanity. But I will not have you tied to
my apron-string."

"I will tell you if ever the string galls. Come what may, I am not
going to leave the neighbourhood of London till your lawsuit has been
settled."

They hoped that everything would be over before the late autumn, so
that they could start for Cairo at the right season; and from Cairo
they might go on to India. They were of a humour to ramble over the
world together; but in the mean time life was so sweet in the Thames
backwaters, among flowering rushes and under dipping willows, and on
the lawn at Runnymede Grange, that they seldom went as much as a mile
afield. Lovers are like children at play in a garden, who dream of
the days when they will be grown up and sail through blue skies in a
balloon, to find where the world leaves off.

Grace looked back, in many a happy reverie, and recalled that year
before the beginning of the scandal, when the man who was now her
impassioned lover had seemed to her cold and distant. Only by his
seriousness in seeking her society, his grave pleasure in ministering
to her love of books, and bringing her in touch with the choicest
things in contemporary literature, could Lady Perivale discover that
his friendship was any more than the admiring regard which every
intelligent man must needs feel for a young and beautiful woman who is
also intelligent. Much as Haldane admired beauty--from its spiritual
essence in a picture by Burne-Jones, to its earthliest form in a
Roman flower-girl on the steps below the Church of the Trinity--his
affections would never have been taken captive by beauty allied with
silliness. He was a man to whom community of thought was an essential
element in love. And, in Grace Perivale, he had discovered mind and
imagination in sympathy with his own thoughts and dreams; and he was
completely happy in her company, happy to be her friend, yet hesitating
to become her lover, till, in some future day, her intimate knowledge
of his character might make it impossible for her to misread his
motives.

       *       *       *       *       *

And then had come the bitter blow, when he, who had tortured himself
with jealous apprehensions of her liking for Colonel Rannock, heard the
story of those chance meetings in the South.

He had been vehement in his denunciation of the slander. If the story
were so far true that she was the person who had been seen with
Rannock, could any one who knew her doubt for a moment that he had a
legal right to her company, that they had been quietly married, and,
for some reason of their own, chose to delay the publication of their
marriage.

He was laughed at for his vehemence, and for his simplicity.

"Did you never hear of a woman throwing her cap over the mill?" asked
his friend. "Have you lived so long in a civilized world, and don't
you know that women are always doing the most unexpected things? Have
you known no delicately-reared woman take to the gin-bottle and drink
herself to death? Have you never heard of the household angel--the
devoted wife and mother--who, after twenty years of honourable wedlock,
went off with her daughter's Italian singing-master? And these rich
women are the very sort who go wrong. Their opulence demoralizes them.
They are petty Cleopatras, and pine for the fierce passion of a Cæsar
or a Marc Antony."

There was not much stirring in London in the early part of that season,
and the scandal about Lady Perivale was dinned into Haldane's ears
wherever he went. Young women talked about it, in allusive speech, with
a pretence of _naïveté_. What was the story? They pretended not to know
what it all meant; but they knew their mothers were not going to call
upon her ever again; so they opined that it must be something very
dreadful, considering the sort of people their mothers went on visiting
and entertaining season after season. It must be something worse than
the things that were said about Lady Such-and-Such, or even about Mrs.
So-and-So.

Haldane heard, and the iron entered into his soul; and he held himself
aloof from the woman he loved, fearing, doubting, waiting.

"If that man appears upon the scene I shall know it's all over," he
thought.

He walked from his rooms in Jermyn Street to Grosvenor Square every
night, and paced the pavements within view of Lady Perivale's windows,
steering clear of the houses where there were parties, with awnings,
and blocks of bystanders, and policemen, and linkmen. He saw the
lighted windows of the morning-room, and sometimes saw a graceful
shadow flit across the blind, and knew that she was there, and alone.
No masculine form ever passed between the lamp and the windows. Susan
Rodney appeared there once or twice a week, and he sometimes saw her
driven away in a humble four-wheeler, on the stroke of eleven. But the
figure he feared to see never crossed the threshold.

And then a man at his club told him that Rannock had not been in London
that season. He had gone under. He was said to be in America, but that
was as might be. He had come to the end of his tether.

It had been a time of agonizing doubt, expiated by almost as agonizing
remorse. But it was over now, and life was a dream of bliss--a dream of
the fast coming days when Grace Perivale would be his wife, when the
evening shadows would bring no parting, the night no loneliness.

Susan Rodney was an ideal third for a pair of lovers, as she had plenty
of interests and occupations of her own, spending all her leisure in
the composition of a light opera which she had been engaged upon for
years, with only a faint hope of ever getting it produced; perhaps in
Brussels, perhaps in Frankfort, she dared hardly think of London.

Absorbed in the thrilling delight of a quintette, or a chorus, Sue
only gave the lovers her company when they wanted it, which they very
often did, as her bright and cheerful spirit harmonized with their own
happiness. They both liked her, and were both very sure of her sympathy.

In one of their garden _têtes-à-tête_, their talk having drifted on
to Haldane's famous novel, the one work of fiction which had made his
reputation with the general reader, he confessed to having nearly
finished a second story.

"I only began it in May," he said, "during a fit of insomnia. My mind
was full of scorpions, like Macbeth's, and I think I should have gone
mad if I had not summoned those shadows from the unseen world, and set
myself to anatomize them. It is a bitter book, a story of Fate's worst
irony; and in a better period of English literature--in the day of
Scott, or Dickens and Thackeray--it would have stood no chance of being
widely read. But we have changed all that. This is the day of cruel
books. Most of us have turned our pens into scalpels. And I think this
story of mine is cruel enough to hit the public taste."

"There is nothing that touches your life or mine in it?" Grace asked,
with a touch of alarm.

"No, no, no; not one thought. I wrote it while I was trying to forget
you--and trying still harder to forget myself. The shadows that move
in it bear not the faintest resemblance to you or me. It is a sordid
book, a study of human meanness, and the misery that dull minds make
for themselves: pale-grey miseries that gradually draw to a focus and
deepen to blood-red tragedy. But it has one redeeming feature--one
really good man--a city missionary, humbly born, plain, self-educated,
but a Christ-like character. I should have burnt the book unfinished
but for him. He came to my relief when my story and I were sinking into
a slough of despond."

"You talk as if the web were not of your weaving, as if you had no
power over the figures that move in it."

"I have no such power, Grace. They come to me as mysteriously as the
shadows in a dream, and their spell is strong. I cannot create them;
and I cannot change them."

She wanted him to read his story to her before it was printed; but this
was just the one thing he could not do. He could not imagine himself
reading his own words.

"It would make me hate my work," he said. "Every clumsy phrase, every
banal word, would leap out of the page and gibber at me as I read. I
will bring you the first copy fresh from the press, and when you have
read it you shall tell me afterwards whether I am ever to write another
story."

"You shall write another, and another, and go on writing," she answered
gaily. "You will give me a second world, a world peopled with strange
or lovely creatures--villains as colossal as Milton's Satan, heroines
as innocent as his Eve. My life in the world of your imagining
will be almost as intense as your own. You will give me a second
existence, better than the everyday world. You will tell me about your
dream-people, won't you, Arthur, as they spring into life?"

"The fear is that I shan't be able to refrain from talking of them, to
the other half of my soul."

"You cannot weary the other half by much talking."

"Do you think not? I can imagine a husband's art becoming an
unspeakable bore to his wife."

"Not if she loves him and loves his art."

"Ah, there's the rub."

Lady Perivale was recalled from the shadow-world of the novelist by the
substantial apparition of John Faunce, who arrived unannounced on a
sultry afternoon, and found her sitting in the garden with Mr. Haldane
and Miss Rodney, at a table strewn with all the new magazines and some
of the old poets, in those miniature editions that so lend themselves
to being carried about and not read.

"I thought I might venture to call without notice," said Faunce, "as I
have some rather important news for your ladyship."

"Indeed!"

"A libel--a most audacious libel," said Faunce, taking a paper from his
pocket.

"Where? where? What paper?" Grace and Sue exclaimed excitedly.

"Strange to say, in a society paper of most respectable character,
though of a somewhat limited circulation," replied Faunce; "a paper
which, to my knowledge, has never offended in this manner until
now--the _Bon Ton and Cricket Review_, a journal printed at Kennington,
and mostly circulated in the South of London."

He handed the paper to Lady Perivale, who turned the leaves hurriedly,
too agitated to read a line for the first few minutes.

It was an eminently proper paper--a paper that told of dances at
Tooting, private theatricals at Norwood, and At Homes at Tulse Hill,
a paper that described dresses and millinery, and gave receipts for
cornflower creams and jellies made without wine, for cleaning kid
gloves and making golden hair-dye. Pages were devoted to the Oval,
and other pages to school cricket. There was the usual short story of
the ultra-smart world. There was a Denmark Hill celebrity at home.
There was everything nice and proper that a Society paper should
have; and there, amidst all this respectability--like a hideous wen
upon a handsome face--appeared three atrocious paragraphs about Lady
Perivale's _tête-à-tête_ tour with Colonel Rannock; the first setting
forth the surprise of the lady's friends on meeting her travelling
alone with a man of dubious character; the second debating whether
the freedom of _fin-de-siècle_ manners would not permit of any lady
travelling with any gentleman without causing scandal; the third, of a
somewhat grosser tone, winding up with a couplet from Pope:

 "Nor Cæsar's empress would I deign to prove,
 No, make me mistress to the man I love."

"It's abominable!" cried Grace, flushing crimson, and throwing down the
paper in a rage.

"And you tell me I'm not to horsewhip the scoundrel who wrote that!"
said Haldane, who had read the paragraphs over her shoulder.

"I do--most decidedly," answered Faunce, edging away from him with an
involuntary movement. "We wanted a libel--a gross libel--and we've got
it. We are going to bring an action against the proprietor of the _Bon
Ton_, but we are not going to put ourselves in the wrong by assaulting
him first. No, sir, we shall proceed against the proprietor, editor,
and printer of the _Bon Ton_, and we shall ask for exemplary damages."

"Damages!" exclaimed Grace. "Do you suppose I want the loathsome
creature's money?"

"Why not make it a criminal suit, and send him to prison?" asked
Haldane.

"I think not, sir. Her ladyship's solicitors, Messrs. Harding, have
gone into the matter with me, and we are agreed that a criminal action
is not advisable."

"How does this thing happen to appear so long after the circulation of
the scandal?"

"Ah! that's the question," said Faunce, blandly. "You see, fashionable
gossip takes a considerable time to cross the Thames and filter down to
Tooting. The proprietor--and editor--lives at Tooting, and I dare say,
to his mind, the slander appeared a novelty. I'm glad he didn't get
hold of it sooner, for we should not have been prepared to deal with
the case as we are now."

Miss Rodney had picked up the _Bon Ton_, and was reading the paragraphs
with a frowning brow.

"How can you look at that atrocious stuff?" cried Grace, snatching the
paper from her and rolling it into a ball for her poodle, who rushed
across the lawn with it and then laid himself down and proceeded to
tear it into shreds with his paws and teeth.

"It's lucky that isn't the only copy in existence, Lady Perivale," said
Faunce.




CHAPTER XIII.

 "They draw a nourishment
 Out of defamings, grow upon disgraces;
 And, when they see a virtue fortified
 Strongly above the battery of their tongues,
 Oh, how they cast to sink it!"


One of the most interesting cases in the Law Courts that winter was
_Perivale_ v. _Brown Smith_, a claim of £10,000 damages on account of a
gross libel published in a paper of which the defendant was editor and
proprietor.

Brown Smith pleaded justification, and it was said that he was going to
make a good fight, and that he would produce witnesses who had met the
lady and gentleman on their travels as Mr. and Mrs. Randall.

The case came on late in November, when there were a good many people
in town, staying for the weeks before Christmas, or passing through;
and the court was packed with smart clothes and well-known faces.
Conspicuous among these curious impertinents were two well-known
figures in the little world of Belgravia and Mayfair: Lady Morningside,
whose ample person, clothed in black satin and chinchilla, filled a
considerable space on the privileged seats; and the spare and wiry
form of "the most honourable," her husband, a man whose weather-beaten
countenance, trim whiskers and keen eye, cut-away coat and Bedford
cords, indicated the indomitable sportsman.

Eye-glasses and opera-glasses glittered across the fog, and the point
to which they were chiefly directed was the figure of Lady Perivale, in
a neat black gown, with cape and toque of Russian sable, seated in the
well of the court, with Arthur Haldane sitting beside her.

There was much whispering among the eye-glasses about the lady and her
companion.

"She is as handsome as ever," said one; "I was told she had gone off
dreadfully. Rather audacious to bring this action, ain't it?"

"Rather a dangerous move, I should think."

"Oh! she's got Sir Joseph Jalland. He always wins when there's a pretty
woman to orate about. You'll see, he'll make the jury shed tears."

"What odds will you give me against that fat man in the corner being
the first to weep?"

"Hush! It's going to begin."

Mr. Waltham, Sir Joseph's junior, opened the pleadings in an undertone,
which sent all the picture-hats distracted. They thought they were
losing the fun. And then a thrill ran round the Court as Sir Joseph
Jalland rose in his might, adjusted his pince-nez, trifled with the
leaves of his brief, and then slowly began to unfold his case. The
deep, grave voice made all the aigrets shiver, and every lorgnette and
binocular was turned to him.

"This greatly injured lady--this lady, whose life of blameless purity,
life spent in an exalted sphere--in the sheltered haven of a congenial
marriage, this lady whose spotless character should have shielded her
from the lightest breath of slander, has been made a target for the
salaried traducer of a venomous rag that calls itself a newspaper, and
has been allowed to drivel its poisonous paragraphs week after week,
secure in its insignificance, and a disgrace to the Press to which it
pretends to belong," flinging down the _South London Bon Ton_ on the
desk before him, with a movement of unutterable loathing, as if his
hand recoiled instinctively from the foul contact. "She has been made
the subject of a slander so futile, so preposterous, that one marvels
less at the malice of the writer than at his imbecility. A woman of
gentle birth and exalted position, hemmed round and protected by all
those ceremonial ramparts that are at once the restraint and privilege
of wealth and social status, is supposed to have roamed the Continent
with her paramour, braving public opinion with the brazen hardihood of
the trained courtesan."

This and much more, in its proper place and sequence, did Sir Joseph's
deep voice give to the listening ears of the Court, before he summoned
his first witness, in the person of the plaintiff, Grace Perivale.

Her evidence was given in a steady voice and with perfect self-control.

"Did you ever travel on the Continent with Colonel Rannock?"

"Never."

"Were you in Corsica in the January of this year?"

"No."

"Or in Algiers in February?"

"No."

"Will you be so good as to say where you were living during January and
February last?"

"I was at my villa near Porto Maurizio from November last year until
the beginning of April in this year."

Sir Joseph had no more questions to ask. The defendant's counsel
exercised his right to cross-examine the witness, who stood facing the
Court, calm and proud, but deadly pale.

"Were these paragraphs in the--er"--looking at his brief--"_Bon Ton_,
the first you had heard of a scandal associating your name with Colonel
Rannock's, Lady Perivale?" he asked blandly.

"It was the first time such a scandal had appeared in print."

"But the scandal was not unfamiliar to you?"

"No."

"You had heard of it before?"

"Yes."

"On several occasions?"

"I was told that such a thing had been said."

"And that your friends believed it?"

"Not one!" the witness answered indignantly. "No friend of mine
believed one word of the story!"

She flushed and paled again as she spoke. She shot one involuntary
glance towards the man who was so much more than a friend, and who had
almost believed that slander.

"You will admit, I think, Lady Perivale, that the story had been common
talk for a long time before this society journal got hold of it?"

"I know nothing about common talk."

"That will do, Lady Perivale," said the counsel.

Lady Perivale's butler and maid were the next witnesses.

They had been with their mistress at Porto Maurizio from November to
April, during which period she had never been absent from the villa for
twenty-four hours.

The defendant's counsel cross-examined both witnesses, and made a
praiseworthy--but unsuccessful--attempt to cast ridicule and doubt
upon the two old servants, whom he tried hard to place before the jury
as overpaid and venal hirelings, willing to perjure themselves to any
extent for their employer. He gratified his professional vanity by
letting off two or three forensic bon-mots, and succeeded in raising
a laugh or two at the expense of the country-bred Abigail and the
dignified London butler; but the endeavour to weaken their testimony
was an ignominious failure.

"That, my lord, would complete my case," said Sir Joseph Jalland,
"were it not essential that the falsehood and the folly of the slander
in this scurrilous rag," striking the _Bon Ton_ with his open hand,
"should be stamped out at once and for ever; and in order that this may
be effectually done--to prove indubitably that Lady Perivale was not
with Colonel Rannock during his Continental wanderings last winter, I
shall produce the person who was with him."

Miss Kate Delmaine stepped into the box, admirably dressed, like Lady
Perivale, in a black cloth gown, and wearing a sable toque almost of
the same fashion. A murmur of surprise ran round the Court, an excited
whispering and twittering, which the usher hastened to suppress.

Seen in that November gloom, the witness looked like Grace Perivale's
double.

Kate Delmaine! There were some among the wigs and gowns, and some among
the smart audience who remembered her in her brief career, a girl of
startling beauty, whose dazzling smile had beamed across the footlights
at the Spectacular Theatre for a season or two. They had seen, admired,
and forgotten her. She rose before them like the ghost of their youth.

"Will you tell me where you were living last February, Miss Delmaine?"
Sir Joseph began quietly, when her carmine lips had hovered over the
Book: "from the 7th to the 25th?"

"I was at the Mecca Hotel, in Algiers."

"Alone?"

"No. Colonel Rannock was with me."

"You were in Corsica and in Sardinia before that, I believe?"

"Yes."

"Also with Colonel Rannock?"

"Yes."

"In what capacity were you travelling with him?"

The phrase produced a faint titter, and the younger of the smart young
ladies became suddenly occupied with their muffs and lace handkerchiefs.

"We were travelling as Mr. and Mrs. Randall, if that's what you want to
know!" Miss Delmaine replied, with a look that challenged the Court to
think the worst of her.

"That is precisely what I want to know. You were going about with
Colonel Rannock as his wife--under the _nom de guerre_ of Randall?"

"Yes."

"Good! Pray, Miss Delmaine, can you tell me where Colonel Rannock is at
this present time?"

The witness had given her evidence in an agitated and angry manner
from the beginning. The bloom on her cheeks was hectic, and not rouge,
as the smart young women thought. Her eyes were unnaturally bright,
splendid eyes, that flashed angry fire. She had stood up boldly in her
place, defying the world's contempt; but it seemed as if the effort had
been too much for her. She looked distractedly round the court, turned
white as ashes, and fell in a dead faint, before she had answered the
counsel's question, which was irrelevant, and might not have been
allowed.

There was the usual rush with glasses of water and smelling-salts, and
the witness was carried out of court.

The Court then adjourned for luncheon. The picture-hats all waited,
sniffed salts and eau de Cologne, nibbled chocolates, hungry, and
yawning for want of air, but determined to see it out.

There was bitter disappointment for the curious impertinents when,
on the judge returning to his seat, Sir Joseph Jalland informed his
lordship that Mr. Brown Smith had offered an ample apology for the
offensive article in his paper, and that his client had no desire to
continue the action in a vindictive manner.

The judge highly approved of this course.

"If Lady Perivale brought this action in order to clear her character
of a most unmerited aspersion, she has been completely successful, and
can afford to be lenient," said his lordship, with feeling.

The defendant was to publish his apology, both in his own paper and
such other papers as Sir Joseph should name. He was to destroy every
number of his paper still unsold, and to call in any numbers remaining
in the hands of the retail trade, and was further to give one hundred
guineas to any charitable institution selected by the plaintiff.

Only to Lady Perivale's solicitors and to Mr. Faunce was it known
that the defendant would not be out of pocket either by this hundred
guineas, or for the costs of the action, against which a considerable
sum had been paid into his banking account by Mr. Faunce, before the
libel--written by that very Faunce, in collaboration with one of the
ladies who did the _Bon Ton_ gossip--appeared in Mr. Brown Smith's
popular journal.

Faunce had said there would be a libel when it was wanted, and Faunce,
who was an old friend of Brown Smith's, had produced the libel. Nobody
was any the worse, and Society was deeply humiliated at discovering
how cruelly it had misjudged a charming member of its own privileged
body. Lady Morningside and her husband made their way to Lady Perivale
directly the judge left his seat, and the old Marquis, with an
old-fashioned gallantry that recalled "Cupid" Palmerston, bent over
Grace's ungloved hand and kissed it: a demonstration that thrilled the
smart hats and eye-glasses.

Cards and letters of friendly congratulation poured in upon Lady
Perivale at Grosvenor Square that evening--letters from the people who
had cut her, making believe that the aloofness had been all on her side.

"And now, dear, after this plucky assertion of yourself, I hope you are
not going to shut yourself from your old friends any more. It has been
so sad to see No. 101 empty all the season, and not even to know where
you were to be found," concluded one of those false friends.

Grace flung the letters into her waste-paper basket with angry scorn.

"To think people can dare to pretend they did not know I was in town,
when I drove in the park nearly every day!" she exclaimed.

"I hope you are satisfied, madam," said Faunce, when he called upon
Lady Perivale the day after the trial.

No one had seen Faunce in court, though Faunce had seen and heard all
that happened there. His work had been finished before the case came
on, and the family solicitors in Bedford Row took all the credit of the
successful result, and congratulated Lady Perivale upon their acumen in
retaining Sir Joseph Jalland.

"I hope you are satisfied, madam," Faunce said modestly, when he called
in Grosvenor Square, in response to Lady Perivale's request.

"I am more than satisfied with your cleverness in bringing the wretched
business to an issue," she said; "and now all I hope is that I may be
able to forget it, and that I shall never hear Colonel Rannock's name
again."

"I hope you will not, madam--not in any unpleasant connection," Faunce
answered gravely.

"I must refer you for your professional charges to my lawyers, Mr.
Faunce," pursued Grace. "But I must beg you to accept the enclosed as a
token of my sincere gratitude for the trouble you have taken, and as a
souvenir of your success." She handed him an envelope.

"I assure you, Lady Perivale, I do not require anything beyond the
ordinary payment for my time and trouble."

"Oh, but you must take this, to please me," she answered. "I want you
to remember that I value your services at more than their professional
price."

She gave him her hand at parting, as she had given it at the end of
their first interview, and he thought more of that cordial handshake
than of her present, which he found to be a cheque for £500.

In the third week in December there was a very quiet wedding at St.
George's, Hanover Square, a marriage which was celebrated at half-past
eight o'clock in the morning, and at which the only witnesses were
Susan Rodney and Mr. George Howard, newly returned from Pekin--a
wedding so early and so quiet as to escape the most invincible of the
society paragraphists, the insatiable pens that had been writing about
this very marriage as an imminent event.

The bride's dark-grey cloth gown, sable-bordered travelling-cloak, and
black chip hat offered no suggestion of wedding raiment. The breakfast
was a _parti carré_ in the dining-room at Grosvenor Square; and the
married lovers were able to leave Charing Cross at eleven by the
Continental Express without provoking any more notice from the crowd
than the appearance of a beautiful woman, perfectly dressed for the
business in hand, and leading the most perfect thing in brown poodles,
must inevitably attract. The honeymooners were established at their
hotel in Cairo before the paragraphists had wind of the marriage.




CHAPTER XIV.

   "But now with lights reverse the old hours retire,
 And the last hour is shod with fire from hell.
   This is the end of every man's desire."


During the four months which had elapsed since Faunce's first visit to
Kate Delmaine, alias Mrs. Randall, the detective had contrived to keep
an observant eye upon the lady; but he had not succeeded in arriving
on a more friendly footing with her, although he had obliged her on
several occasions with a small advance on account of the promised
reward.

He had called three or four times at the lodging-house in the dingy
street near the Thames, and she had received him civilly. He had
detected a lurking anxiety under the assumed lightness of her manner--a
carking care, that seemed to him of some deeper nature than the need
of money, or the sense of having fallen upon evil days. He would not
have been surprised to see her depressed and out of spirits; but he was
at a loss to understand that ever-present anxiety, and that nervous
irritability which seemed allied with fear.

He remarked to her, in a friendly way, on the state of her nerves, and
advised her to see a doctor. He urged her to live well, and to take
the utmost care of herself, to which end he was liberal with those
ten-pound notes on account.

"I want you to look your best when you appear in court," he said, "to
show that you are every bit as handsome a woman as Lady Perivale."

"He always said I was," she answered, with a sigh.

"Colonel Rannock? He knew and admired you before he ever saw Lady
Perivale, didn't he, now?" asked Faunce, who, for reasons of his own,
was very anxious to make her talk of Rannock; but she answered curtly--

"Whether he did or whether he didn't, it's no business of yours."

The gloomy look had come back to her face; and Faunce was more and more
convinced that, whatever her anxiety was, it was in some way connected
with Colonel Rannock.

He had brought Rannock's name into the conversation whenever he could,
and with an artful persistence, and the name had always a depressing
influence. She spoke of him reluctantly, and she seldom spoke of him
dry-eyed. Once she spoke of him in a past tense. It could be no common
fate that had left such aching memories.

Without actually "shadowing" the lady during this interval, he had
contrived to keep acquainted with her movements and associations, and
he had discovered that almost her only visitor was the man whom he had
seen on that first day--the man who had opened the door, glanced into
the room, and hurried away at sight of a stranger. Even this person
was not a frequent visitor, but he called at irregular hours, which
indicated a friendly footing.

It had not taken Faunce very long to identify this person as an
individual well-known to the patrons of the prize-ring--a pugilist
called Bolisco, who had been one of Sir Hubert Withernsea's _protégés_,
and had often sat at meat and drink in the very much mixed society in
the Abbey Road. Bolisco had been at the zenith of his renown ten years
ago, when Withernsea was burning that brief candle of his days which
had guttered into the grave before he was thirty; but the pugilist's
reputation had considerably declined since then. He had been beaten
ignominiously in three or four public encounters, had seen his star
go down before younger and steadier men, and was no longer good for
anything better than a glove-fight at a second-rate tavern. One of
those glove-fights had ended fatally for Bolisco's opponent; and
there had been some among the lookers-on who accused him of brutal
roughness towards a weaker man, which had resulted in death. No blame
had attached to Bolisco in the opinion of the coroner's jury; but the
patrons of the Fancy had given him the cold shoulder since that unlucky
accident, which had happened more than a year ago.

In the course of that semi-shadowing Faunce had found out some details
of Kate Delmaine's life during the last half-year. He found that she
had occupied the shabby first-floor in Selburne Street since the
beginning of March, that she had come there straight from "abroad,"
and that her trunks were covered with foreign labels--Ajaccio,
Algiers, Marseilles, Paris, Calais. She had arrived with a great load
of personal luggage, fine clothes, and other portable property, the
greater part of which had been gradually made away with. She would go
out in a cab with a large cardboard box, and come home half an hour
afterwards on foot, having left box and contents at a pawnbroker's in
the King's Road.

Betsy, the sixteen-year-old maid-of-all-work, from whom Faunce derived
most of his information, had been a close observer of the first-floor
lodger, and was pleased to impart her knowledge and her impressions to
the amiable Faunce.

Mrs. Randall was very down-hearted, Betsy told him, and would sit and
cry for the hour together. Did she drink? Well, only a brandy-and-soda
now and then, but she used to stick a needle into her arm that made her
sleepy, and she would lie on the sofa all the afternoon and evening
sometimes, like a dead thing. The girl had heard her moan and groan in
her sleep when she took her a cup of tea in the morning, and she would
wake with a frightened look, and stare about her "wild-like," as if she
didn't know where she was.

Had she many visitors?

None, except the dark gentleman with the broken nose; and he did not
come very often, or stay long. They had words sometimes--very high
words--and once, in one of their quarrels, she went into hysterics, and
was "regular bad," and screamed at him like a lunatic. The missus had
been obliged to go upstairs to her, and tell her she wouldn't stand
such goings-on any longer. She'd have to clear out if she couldn't
behave like a lady.

All this to hear did Mr. Faunce seriously incline; and he now began to
do a little shadowing on Mr. Bolisco's account.

He knew that in all probability he was wasting his time; but the old
hunter's instinct of the Scotland Yard days was upon him, and he wanted
to know what ailed Kate Delmaine over and above the natural depression
of a woman of her class out of luck.

He had provided for her comfort, had been to her as a guardian angel,
as the time for her appearance in Court drew near. He had advised her
how to dress the part, and had ascertained what Lady Perivale was going
to wear, in order that Mrs. Randall's costume should in some degree
resemble hers. He had gone to Regent Street on the day before the case
came on, and bought a fur toque, after the fashion of Lady Perivale's
sable.

"It is only a paltry bit of skunk," Mrs. Randall declared
contemptuously, after she had blown the fur about and examined it with
a depreciatory scrutiny; but when she put it on before the cloudy
looking-glass in her parlour she owned to being pleased with herself.

"I wonder if you believe I was once a handsome woman," she said to
Faunce.

"I know you are a handsome woman now, and that you've only to take a
little more care of yourself to be as handsome as ever you were," he
answered gravely, being a kind-hearted man and really sorry for her.

"That's skittles!" she answered. "I've come to the end of my tether.
I've nothing to live for, and I'm sick of wishing I was dead, for it
don't come off. And I don't want to kill myself; that's too cheap. I
hate the idea of an inquest, and 'The deceased was once known as this,'
and 'The deceased was once t'other.' I'm a lady, Mr. Faunce, and I
loathe being magged about in the newspapers."

       *       *       *       *       *

Now that Lady Perivale's action had ceased to be a nine days' wonder,
and the lady herself was a happy wife, travelling by easy stages
towards the land of ancient monuments and modern amusements, pyramids
and golf links, Sphinxes and croquet, colossal sepulchres of unknown
Pharaohs, and monster hotels with unknown tariffs; now that he had
accomplished his task and had been handsomely rewarded, it might seem
that John Faunce's interest in Grace Perivale's double would cease and
determine. Strange to say that interest grew rather than diminished,
and he contrived to see his little friend, the lodging-house slavey,
once or twice a week, and so to be informed of all Mrs. Randall's
proceedings; indeed, his love of detail led him to ask Betsy for an
old blotting-book of the first-floor lodger's, which had been flung
upon the dustheap, and which the girl had retrieved from that foul
receptacle for the sake of its picture cover.

"Most people collect something," he told Betsy; "my fancy is old
blotting-paper."

"Well, I never did!" exclaimed the damsel. "I know many as collecks
postage-stamps, but I never heerd as blotting-paper was valuable!"

"It is, Betsy--sometimes," in token of which Mr. Faunce gave her
a crown piece for the ragged book, with its inky impress of Mrs.
Randall's sprawling penmanship.

Faunce had paid his witness the balance of the promised reward, £120,
in bank-notes, the evening after the trial, and he was prepared to hear
she had taken wing.

Surely with a sum of money in hand she would leave that dismal street,
and hurry away to some more attractive locality. To Paris, perhaps, to
buy fine clothes, and flaunt her recovered beauty in the Bois; or to
Monte Carlo, to try her luck at the tables. It was in the character of
such a woman to squander her last hundred pounds as freely as if she
had an unlimited capital behind it.

She had talked of leaving her lodgings, the little handmaiden Betsy
told him, but it hadn't come off. She had given a week's notice, and
then had cut up rough when the missus took a lady and gentleman to look
at the rooms. She wasn't going to be chucked out like a stray dog,
she'd go when she wanted, and not before.

"I don't believe she'll never go," Betsy said, with a wise air. "She
ain't got it in her to make up her mind about nothink. She sits in the
easy-chair all day, smokin' cigarettes and readin' a novel, or lays on
the sofa, and seems only half awake. And of a evening she gets dreadful
low. She says she hates the house, and won't sleep another night in it,
and yet when morning comes she don't offer to go. And then, she's that
under his thumb that if he say she's not to leave, go she won't."

"You mean the dark gentleman?" said Faunce.

"Of course I do. There ain't any other as I knows on."

"Do you think she is--attached--to the dark gentleman?"

"I know she's afraid of him. I've seen her turn white at his step on
the stairs, and she's always upset after he's been to our place, and
sits and cries as if her heart was breaking. There, I do feel sorry
for her! She's a real good sort. She give me this here hat," added the
slavey, tossing her beplumed and bejewelled head. "It was bought in
the Harcade, and it ain't been worn above half a dozen times, only the
sea-water damaged it a bit when she was travelling."

So sincere and deep-rooted was Faunce's interest in Mrs. Randall, that
he took considerable pains to follow the movements of her friend Mr.
Bolisco, whom he tracked to his lair in a sporting public-house at
Battersea--an old, tumble-down building in a shabby street close to the
river, a house that had once been a respectable roadside inn, and had
once been in the country.

Faunce took some note of the famous prize-fighter's habits, which
were idle and dissolute, and of his associates, who belonged to the
lowest order, the ragged fringe of rascality that hangs upon the edge
of the sporting world. It was sad to think that so disreputable an
acquaintance could dominate the life of a fine, high-spirited creature
like Kate Delmaine. But, much as he was interested in a beautiful
woman, who was travelling on that dismal journey which is called
"going to the dogs," Mr. Faunce felt that his evening walks with
Betsy, and his occasional look in at the Gamecock at Battersea--that
sporting rendezvous where Mr. Bolisco had his "diggings,"--were so
much dilettante trifling, and mere waste of time. His work in relation
to Kate Delmaine was finished; and whatever mystery there might be in
her life, mystery involving even a crime, it was no business of his to
investigate it.

Somewhat reluctantly, therefore, like a baffled hunter who turns
from the dubious trail of the beast he has been pursuing, Mr. Faunce
discontinued his visits to Chelsea, and went no more, in his character
of a well-to-do idler interested in the prize-ring, to the public-house
across Battersea Bridge.

"I must be getting a regular amateur," he told himself, "if I can't
have done with a case when my work is finished."

       *       *       *       *       *

Christmas came as a pleasant diversion, and during that jovial season
Faunce deserted his rooms in Essex Street, forgot that he was a
detective, and remembered that he was a citizen and a husband. The
turkey and beef, the pudding and mince-pies did credit to Mrs. Faunce's
judgment, and the skill of an unpretentious cook, who did not scorn to
bare her robust arms to the elbow, and hearthstone the doorstep before
she fried the morning rasher.

The catering had been Mr. Faunce's own work. It was his falcon
glance that had detected the finest Norfolk turkey in a row of
eighteen-pounders, the ripest York ham out of a score of good ones.
The champagne which he bought for his guests, the ten-year-old Scotch
whisky which he drank himself, were all of the best, and the villa at
Putney had the air of plenteous comfort in a small space which pervades
a well-found ship.

With his wife sitting opposite to him, and an old friend on either
side, Faunce enjoyed the harmless pleasures of social intercourse,
and cleared his mind of crime and mystery, and did not go back to his
office in Essex Street until the general holiday was over, and the
flavour of Christmas had faded out of the atmosphere.

It was on the day after his return to everyday life that Faunce
received a message from Scotland Yard, bidding him go there immediately
on important business, a summons that he made haste to obey, since many
of those cases which had afforded him profitable occupation within the
last few years had come to him by the recommendation of his old chiefs
in the Criminal Investigation Department.

He found one of those chiefs seated in his private room, engaged in
conversation with a short, stout gentleman of middle age and pleasing
countenance, who looked like a soldier--fair-haired, intelligent, and
fussy.

"This is Mr. Faunce, Major Towgood," said the chief.

"Delighted to make your acquaintance, Faunce!" exclaimed the Major, in
a breathless way, bouncing up from his chair, wanting to shake hands
with Faunce, and suppressing the desire with a backward jerk; "and if
Mr. Faunce," turning to the chief, "can do anything to set my poor
mother-in-law's mind at rest about that scapegrace of hers, I shall
be very grateful--on my wife's account, don't you know. Personally, I
shouldn't be sorry to know he had gone under for good."

"Major Towgood is interested in the fate of a Colonel Rannock, his
connection by marriage, who has not been heard of for some time."

"Not since last March, early in the month--sold his sticks--and started
for the Yukon River," interjected Major Towgood again breathlessly, and
with his eyes opened very wide.

"Colonel Rannock's disappearance--if it can be called a
disappearance--has caused considerable anxiety to his widowed
mother----"

"Women are such forgiving creatures, don't you know," interrupted the
Major. "Talk of seventy times seven! There ain't any combination of
figures that will express a mother's forgiveness of a prodigal son."

"And I have told Major Towgood," pursued the chief, with a shade of
weariness, "that I can highly recommend you for an inquiry of that
sort, and that if Colonel Rannock is to be found above ground--or under
ground--you will find him."

"I'll do my best, sir."

"And now, my dear Towgood, I don't think I can do any more for you."

Major Towgood jumped up and bustled towards the door. But he wasn't
gone yet. His gratitude was overpowering; and the chief had to back him
out of the room, politely, but decisively.

"You are just the man we want, Faunce," said the Major, as they walked
down a long corridor that led to the staircase. "Your Chief has told
me all about you--you were in the Bank of England case, he said, and
the Lady Kingsbury case--and--ever so many more sensation trials--and
now you're on your own hook--which just suits us. The Chief and I were
at Sandhurst together, don't you know, and he'd do anything for me.
But he's a busy man, a very busy man; and I always respect a man's
business, pull myself up short, don't you know, wouldn't waste his time
or bore him, on any account."

"They haven't much time to spare in this building, sir," assented
Faunce.

"Of course not. Magnificent building--splendid institution--fine body
of men the police--but there ought to be three times as many of 'em.
Eh, Faunce, that's your opinion, ain't it?"

"No doubt, sir, there ought to be more of them, if it would run to it."

"But it won't, no, of course it won't. Another penny on the income-tax
this year! We shall see it a shilling before we've done with it."

"We should see it half a crown, sir, if everything was done as it ought
to be done."

"True, true, Faunce. A social Utopia, and the taxpayer with hardly
bread to eat. Well, I want to take you straight to my mother-in-law,
who will tell you all about her worthless son--a bad egg, Faunce, a
bitter bad egg, and not worth a ha'porth of the anxiety that poor old
lady has been feeling about him. She lives at Buckingham Gate. Shall we
walk?"

"By all means, sir. May I ask what particular circumstances have caused
this uneasiness on Mrs. Rannock's part--and from what period her
anxiety dates?"

"Well, you see, Faunce, Rannock left England in March--late in
March--to go to Klondyke--a wild-cat scheme, like most of his
schemes--and from that day to this nobody who knows him--so far as we
can discover--has received any communication from him."

"Is that so strange, sir? I shouldn't think that when a man was digging
for gold among a few thousand other adventurers, at the risk of being
frozen to death, or murdered if he was lucky, he would be likely to
trouble himself much about family correspondence?"

"Well, no doubt it's a rough-and-tumble life, but still, I'm told they
do get the mails, and do keep somehow in touch with the civilized
world; and, blackguard as Rannock is, he has been in the habit of
writing to his mother three or four times a year, and oftener. I
believe there is a soft spot in his heart for her. But you'll see the
old lady, and she'll tell you her troubles," concluded Major Towgood,
"so I needn't say any more about it."

In spite of which remark he talked without intermission all the way to
Buckingham Gate.




CHAPTER XV.

                     "Happy he
 With such a mother! faith in womankind
 Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high
 Comes easy to him, and tho' he trip and fall
 He shall not blind his soul with clay."


The Honourable Mrs. Rannock, widow of Captain Rannock, second son of
Lord Kirkmichael, lived in a narrow-fronted Queen Anne house facing
Wellington Barracks. It was one of the smallest houses to be found
in a fashionable quarter, and the rent was the only thing big about
it; but Mrs. Rannock had lived at Court for the greater part of her
life, having begun as a maid-of-honour when she and her Royal mistress
were young, and she could hardly have existed out of that rarefied
atmosphere. Refinement and elegance were as necessary to her as air
and water are to the common herd; she would have pined to death in a
vulgar neighbourhood; her personal wants were of the smallest, but her
surroundings had to be the surroundings of a lady.

Everything in the house was perfect of its kind. It was furnished with
family relics, Sheraton and Chippendale furniture that had been made to
order by those famous cabinet-makers for the Rannocks of the eighteenth
century, a buhl cabinet that had come straight from the Faubourg St.
Germain in the Red Terror, when Paris was running with innocent blood,
and the _ci-devants_ were flying from ruin and death.

The street door was painted sky-blue, the hall and staircase were
white, the rich colouring of the wall-papers made a vivid background to
the sober tones of the old furniture, and in the dainty drawing-room,
with its apple-blossom chintz and exquisite Chelsea china, the
daintiest thing was old Mrs. Rannock, with her pink-and-white
complexion, silvery hair, patrician features and bearing, tall and
slender figure, rich brocade gown, and Honiton cap with lappets that
fell almost to her waist.

She was an ideal old lady, _grande dame_ in every detail. She had been
painted by Hayter and sketched by D'Orsay. The semi-transparent hand,
which lay on the arm of her chair, had been modelled by sculptors
of renown, had been carved in marble and in ivory, when she was the
beautiful Mary Rannock.

She was nearly eighty, and had been a widow for a quarter of a century,
drifting placidly down the river of time, with very few pleasures and
not many friends, having outlived most of them, and with only one
trouble, the wrong-doing of the son she adored.

She had hoped so much for him, had burnt with ambition for him, had
destined him for a high place in the world; and he had forfeited every
friendship, missed every chance, disappointed every hope. And she
loved him still, better than she loved her daughter and her daughter's
children; better, perhaps, because his life had been an ignominious
failure; better because of that boundless compassion which she felt for
his ill-fortune.

"My poor Dick has never had any luck," she would say excusingly.

She received Mr. Faunce with pathetic eagerness, like a drowning man
clutching at the first spar that floats within his reach.

"Pray, be seated," she said graciously. And then, turning to her
son-in-law, she said, "I should like to have my talk with Mr. Faunce
quite alone, Harry," at which Major Towgood bounded from his chair with
a snort of vexation.

"But surely, my dear mother, since I know all the circumstances of the
case, and as a man of the world, I can be of some use."

"Not while I am talking to Mr. Faunce, Harry. I want to keep my poor
old head calm and cool."

"Well, dear, you are the best judge, but really----"

"Dear Harry, it will be so kind of you to leave us alone."

"Well, mother, if that's so----" and the impetuous little Major puffed
and blew himself out of the room, and might have been heard fuming on
the landing, before he went downstairs to console himself with a cigar
in the dining-room.

"My son-in-law is an excellent creature, Mr. Faunce, but he talks too
much," said Mrs. Rannock. "No doubt he has told you something of the
circumstances in which I require your help."

"Yes, madam."

"And now ask me as many questions as you like. I will keep nothing from
you. I am too anxious about my son's fate to have any reserve."

"May I ask, madam, in the first place, what reason you have for being
anxious about Colonel Rannock?"

"His silence is a sufficient reason--his silence of nearly ten months.
My son is a very good correspondent. I don't think he has ever before
left me two months without a letter. He is a very good correspondent,"
she repeated earnestly, as if she were saying, "He is a very good son."

"But have you allowed for the rough life at Klondyke, madam, and the
disinclination that a man feels--in a scene of that kind--to sit down
and write a letter, dead beat, perhaps, after a day's toil?"

"Yes, I have allowed for that, but I cannot believe--if my son were
living"--her eyes filled with irrepressible tears in spite of her
struggle to be calm--"and in his right mind, with power to hold a
pen--I cannot believe that he would so neglect me."

"And you have written to him, I conclude, madam?"

"I have written week after week. I have sent letters to the Post Office
at San Francisco and at Dawson City, where my son told me to address
him--letter after letter."

"Have you communicated with Colonel Rannock's late body-servant?"

"Chater? Yes, naturally. What do you know of Chater?"

"Very little, madam. I happened to hear of him from a gentleman who had
also been making inquiries about your son."

"For what reason?"

"In Lady Perivale's interest. The gentleman has since married Lady
Perivale."

"Mr. Haldane! Yes, I heard of the marriage. I was glad to hear of it.
Lady Perivale had suffered a great injustice from her likeness to that
wretched woman."

"Pardon me, madam. You know the saying--Cherchez la femme. If you can
tell me anything about that woman, and Colonel Rannock's relations with
her, it may help me in my search for him."

"Oh, it is a sad, sad story. My dear son began life so well, in his
grandfather's regiment. There had been Rannocks in the Lanarkshire ever
since Killicrankie. He was a fine soldier, and distinguished himself
in Afghanistan, and it was only after he made that wretched woman's
acquaintance that he began to go wrong--seriously wrong. He may have
been a little wild even before then, but not more than many other young
men. It was that woman and her surroundings that ruined him."

"I take it that happened about ten years ago."

"Ten years? Yes. How did you know that?"

"I had occasion to look into Miss Delmaine's past life, madam. Pray
tell me all you can about her."

"It was an infatuation on my son's part. He saw her at the theatre,
where people made a great fuss about her on account of her beauty,
though she was no actress. She had a fine house in St. John's Wood, at
the expense of a young man of large means--whom she ruined, and who
died soon after. My son became a frequent visitor at the house. There
were Sunday dinners, and suppers after the theatre, and my son was
always there, madly in love with Miss Delmaine. Whether she was more
to him than an acquaintance in those days I cannot say. Certainly he
had no quarrel with Sir Hubert Withernsea. But after that unhappy young
man's death Kate Delmaine's influence upon my son wrecked his career.
He left the Army when the Lanarkshire was ordered to Burmah, rather
than leave her, and not daring to take her with him. I don't know what
kind of life he lived after that, although I saw him from time to
time; but I know he was under a cloud, and there were only a few of
his father's old friends who were civil to him, and asked him to their
houses."

"Did you know of Colonel Rannock's courtship of Lady Perivale, madam?"

"Yes, indeed. It was my earnest hope that he would succeed in it."

"Did you know the lady, and know of her likeness to Miss Delmaine?"

"No. I go very little into society. I am an old woman, and only like
to see old friends. And you must understand that I never saw Miss
Delmaine."

"Do you think your son was in love with Lady Perivale?"

"Yes, I believe he was. Or it may be that he only liked her because of
her resemblance to that woman."

"And was he very angry when she refused him?"

"Yes, I know he was wounded--and even angry."

"Do you think that disappointment, and other troubles, might have
induced him to take his own life?"

"No, no, no; I couldn't believe that for one moment. My son has faced
death too often--has risked his life in a good cause, and would never
throw it away like a coward. I know how brave he is, what a strong will
he has--a will strong enough to overcome difficulties. It was like him
to think of Klondyke when he was ruined."

"Did you know that he was in Algiers with Miss Delmaine last February?"

"Not till I read the report of Lady Perivale's libel suit. I thought he
had broken with her finally two years ago, and I believe at the time
he had. I need not tell you that I did not obtain my knowledge of that
unhappy connection from my son himself. You will understand a mother's
keen anxiety, and that I had other sources of information."

"Yes, madam, I can understand. I do not think I need give you any
further trouble to-day; but if you will oblige me with your son's
photograph--a recent likeness--it may be of use in this matter."

"Yes, I can give you his photograph, taken last year."

Mrs. Rannock opened a velvet case on the table next her chair, and the
wasted white hands trembled ever so faintly as she took out a cabinet
photograph and gave it to Faunce.

"Thank you, madam. I shall wait upon you again directly I have any
fresh information; but I must warn you that an inquiry of this kind is
apt to be very slow; and I fear you can give me no suggestion as to
where to look for Colonel Rannock in the event of his having changed
his mind and not gone to Klondyke."

"No, no; I cannot think that he would change his mind. He was with
me the day before he started, full of hope and excitement. He was
enthusiastic about the wild life in Alaska, and would not listen to my
fears and objections. Oh! Mr. Faunce, if anything evil has happened to
him, these grey hairs will go down in sorrow to the grave."

Again the uncontrollable tears welled into her eyes. She rose, and
Faunce took the movement as his dismissal.

"You may rely upon my most earnest endeavours, madam," he said, and
quietly withdrew, as she stretched a trembling hand to the bell.

"Poor soul! I'm afraid there must be sorrow for those grey hairs before
we come to the end of the story," mused Faunce, as he walked back to
his rooms.

He wrote to Chater, the valet, asking him to call in Essex Street next
morning on particular business concerning Colonel Rannock; and the
valet appeared, with exact punctuality, neatly clad, with well-brushed
hat and slim umbrella, and a little look about the clean-shaved
chin, broad chest, and close-cut hair, that told Faunce he had once
shouldered arms, and swung round to the "Right turn!" in the white dust
of a barrack-yard.

Chater was eminently a man of the world, very easy to get on with, when
he had heard Faunce's credentials, and knew what was wanted of him,
in Mrs. Rannock's interests. He had been Rannock's soldier-servant in
Afghanistan, and had lived with him between eleven and twelve years.

"And I think you liked him," said Faunce.

"Yes, sir; I liked my master. He was a devil, but he was the kind of
devil I like."

"And I suppose you knew Miss Delmaine?"

"Couldn't help that, sir. She was a devil, and the kind of devil I
don't like. She was the ruin of my master--blue ruin, Mr. Faunce. He
might have kept inside the ropes but for her."

"Did you know anything of his courtship of Lady Perivale?"

"Of course I did, sir. I had to carry the 'cello backwards and forwards
between the Albany and Grosvenor Square."

"Do you think he cared much for Lady Perivale?"

"Well, I believe he did, in a way. He was cuts with Miss Delmaine just
then. She'd been going on a little too bad. There was a prize-fighter,
a man she'd known from her childhood, that was always after her, and
the Colonel wouldn't stand it. Mind you, I don't believe--to give the
devil his due--she ever cared for the fellow, but I think she liked
making my master jealous. She is that kind of aggravating creature that
knows her power over a man, and can't be happy until she's made him
miserable. And then there were rows, and a regular burst up, and the
Colonel swore he'd never see her again."

"And it was after the quarrel that he courted Lady Perivale?"

"Yes, it was after. He was knocked all of a heap the first time he met
her ladyship, on account of her likeness to Kate. 'She's the loveliest
woman I ever saw since Mrs. Randall was at her best,' he said, for he
was always free with me, having lived under canvas together, and me
nursing him through more than one bout of Indian fever--'and she's an
oof-bird,' he said, 'and I shall be on the pig's back if I marry her.'
And I know he meant to marry her, and tried hard--left off cards and
drink, and cut all the young fools that he used to have hanging about
him, and turned over a new leaf. I'd never known him keep steady so
long since we came from India. But when he found it was all no go, and
Lady Perivale wouldn't have him, he was furious. And when she went off
to Italy in the autumn, he took to the cards again, and drank harder
than ever, and went a mucker one way and another, and by December he
had made it up with Kate, and they went off to Nice together the week
before Christmas, with the intention of crossing over to Ajaccio."

"Why didn't you go with your master?"

"I had business to do for him in town. He wanted to get rid of his
chambers and furniture, and I had to find a purchaser, and he wanted
it all carried through very quietly, for there was a money-lender who
thought he had a bill of sale on the goods."

"You succeeded in that?"

"Yes; I got him a fair price for his lease and furniture. I would give
a good deal to know where he is, and what became of that money."

"Was it much?"

"Six hundred and forty pounds. Three hundred for the lease, which had
only two years to run, and three hundred and forty for the furniture,
at a valuation."

"Did he take all the money with him when he started for America?"

"No; he paid me half a year's wages, on account of a year and a half
due, and he spent a little on himself, but he had five hundred and
fifty pounds in his pocket-book, in bank-notes, when he left Waterloo."

"In bank-notes. Do you know the figures?"

"Yes; there were two hundred-pound notes, and four fifties, the rest
tens and fives. I wrote a list of the numbers at his dictation."

"Have you kept that list?"

"I believe I have a copy of it among my papers. I copied the figures,
knowing what a careless beggar the Colonel is, and that he was as
likely as not to lose his list."

"Why did he take the money in bank-notes?"

"He had been told that a cheque-book wouldn't be of much use to him in
San Francisco, and no use at all at Dawson City, where he would have to
buy most of his outfit--furs, and mining tools, and a lot more."

"What put Klondyke into his head, do you think?"

"A pal of his, a Yankee, was going to try his luck there. My master was
always fond of adventure, and never minded roughing it; so the scheme
took his fancy."

"Chater," said Faunce, in a very earnest voice, "do you think Colonel
Rannock ever got as far as Klondyke?--as far as Dawson City?--as far as
'Frisco?--as far as New York?"

"God knows, sir! I think the case looks--fishy."

"I have reason to know that he wasn't at 'Frisco in time to start for
Vancouver with the pal you talk of, Mr. Bamford--and that Bamford and
another friend sailed without him."

"I know that, sir. Mr. Haldane, the gentleman who came to me for
information, told me the result of his inquiry."

"And this made you rather uneasy, didn't it, Chater?"

"Well, I didn't like to hear it, Mr. Faunce. But my master is a rum
sort. He might change his mind at the last minute. He might go back to
her."

"He didn't do that, Chater. I can answer for him."

"What do you know about her?"

"A good deal. Was she at Waterloo to see your master off by the
boat-train?"

"Not she! They had one of their quarrels in Paris--and he left her
there to find her way home by herself."

"You say home? Had she any house in London?"

"No, she'd never owned a house since the Abbey Road. She was in
lodgings near Cheyne Walk before she went to Nice."

"Decent lodgings?"

"Oh yes, topping."

"And she didn't show up at the boat-train?"

"He didn't travel by the boat-train. He went the night before--by the
Bournemouth express."

"The four-fifty-five?"

"Yes."

"Was he going to stay in Southampton that night?"

"I suppose so. He didn't tell me what was up. He seemed a bit excited
and put out, and hadn't a word to throw at a dog."

"Did he promise to write to you from America?"

"Yes, he was to write to me directly he landed. He had instructions to
give me."

"Do you know of any Southampton friends of Colonel Rannock's?"

"Can't say I do. He has had yachting pals there sometimes in summer,
but there wouldn't be any of that sort in March."

"Mrs. Rannock is alarmed at being without letters from her son since
last March. Do you consider that an alarming circumstance?"

"Yes, Mr. Faunce, I do. My master was fond of his mother, in his way.
He didn't mind victimizing her to the extent of her last sovereign,
poor old lady, when he was hard pushed; but he was attached to her,
in his way. And I don't think he would have made her unhappy by not
writing to her, if it had been in his power to write. I give him that
much credit."

"Well, Chater, we shall have to set the cable at work, and find out
what we can at Dawson City. And now tell me your opinion of Mrs.
Randall, alias Delmaine. You describe her as a bit of a shrew; but do
you know if she was really attached to the Colonel?"

"I believe she worshipped him, in her way. I--well, a letter she wrote
him after their worst quarrel--the row that parted them for over two
years--forced itself on my attention--happening to take it up in a
casual way--and I must say it was a letter to melt a stone; but it came
just when the Colonel was going all he knew for Lady Perivale, and he
took no notice of it."

"And two years after he went back to her. That was weak, wasn't it?"

"I suppose it was, sir. But, after being much with a stuck-up person
like Lady Perivale, a spirited, free and easy creature like Kate
Delmaine would exercise a fascination."

"And you don't think she ever played him false? You don't think she
cared for the prize-fighter? What was his name, by-the-by; Bolisco,
wasn't it?"

"Yes, sir, Jim Bolisco. No, she never cared a straw for him--a great
ugly brute, with a cock-eye. She'd known him when she was a child--for
her people were very low--father kept a small public out Battersea way;
and it ain't easy for a woman to shake off that sort of friend. Bolisco
was took up by Sir Hubert Withernsea, and used to dine at the Abbey
Road sometimes, much to the Colonel's disgust. No, I don't believe Kate
ever had the slightest liking for that man; but I sometimes used to
fancy she was afraid of him."




CHAPTER XVI.

 "Later or sooner by a minute then,
 So much for the untimeliness of death,--
 And as regards the manner that offends,
 That rude and rough, I count the same for gain--
 Be the act harsh and quick!"


His interview with Chater left John Faunce troubled in mind, and deeply
meditative. Had there been a crime, or was the disappearance of Colonel
Rannock a fact easily accounted for in the natural course of events?
The mother's conviction that some evil had befallen him was after all
founded on an inadequate reason. If he had gone to Klondyke, as he
intended, the whole fabric of his life would have been changed, and the
man who while in the civilized world corresponded regularly with his
mother, might well forget his filial duty, in the daily toil and hourly
dangers, hopes, and disappointments of the struggle for gold. It was
difficult to judge a man so placed by previous experience or everyday
rules. The most dutiful son might well leave home letters unwritten; or
a letter, trusted to a casual hand, might easily go astray.

Then there was always the possibility that he had changed his plans;
that he had stayed in New York or in San Francisco; that he had chosen
some other portion of the wild West for his hunting ground; that he
had spent the summer fishing in Canada, or the autumn shooting in the
Alleghanies; and, again, that his letters to England had been lost in
transit.

Faunce would not have been disposed to suspect foul play on so slight
a ground as the absence of news from the wanderer, but there had been
that in Mrs. Randall's manner and countenance which had excited his
darkest suspicions, and which had been the cause of his undiminished
interest in her proceedings.

If there had been a crime she knew of it, had been in it, perhaps. He
had watched her and studied her, but he had never questioned her. The
time was not ripe for questioning. He did not want to alarm her by the
lightest hint of his suspicions. She was too important a factor in the
mystery.

He called on her on the evening after his interview with Chater, and
persuaded her to go to a theatre with him. It was the first time he had
assumed the attitude of established friendship, but although she seemed
surprised at the invitation, she accepted it.

"I shall be glad to get out of this hole for a few hours," she said,
with an impatient sigh, as she pinned on her hat before the glass over
the mantelpiece, the little fur toque in which she had charmed the jury.

Faunce took her to see a musical comedy, a roaring farce from start to
finish, in which the most popular low comedian in London gave a free
rein to his eccentricities; and he watched his companion's face from
time to time while the auditorium rocked with laughter at the wild
fun. Not a smile illumined that gloomy countenance. He could see that
she was hardly conscious of the scene, at which she stared with fixed
melancholy eyes. Once she looked round at the people near her, with a
dazed expression, as if she wondered why they were laughing.

It is recorded of the first Napoleon that he once sat through a broad
farce with an unchanged countenance; but then his shoulders bore the
burden of empire, the lives and fortunes of myriads.

The experience of this evening went far to confirm Faunce's ideas. He
took Mrs. Randall to an oyster shop, and gave her some supper, and then
put her into a cab and sent her back to Selburne Street.

Just at the last, when he had paid the cabman and given her the man's
ticket, her face lighted up for a moment with a forced smile.

"Thank you no end for a jolly evening," she said.

"I'm afraid it hasn't been very jolly for you, Mrs. Randall. You didn't
seem amused."

"Oh, I don't think I'm up to that sort of trash now. I had too much of
it when I was on the boards. And the more comic the show is, the more I
get thinking of other things."

"You shouldn't think too much; it'll spoil your beauty."

"Oh, that's gone," she said, "or, if it ain't, I don't care. I'd as
leave be a nigger as a 'has been,' any day. Good night. Come and see me
soon; and perhaps, if you take me to a tragedy next time, I may laugh,"
she added.

"There's something bitter bad behind that," mused Faunce, as he tramped
across the bridge to Waterloo Station for the last Putney train, "but,
for all that, I can't believe she's a murderess."

Faunce spent the next morning in his den in Essex Street poring over
a book to which he had frequent recourse, and of which he was justly
proud, since it was the wife of his bosom who had compiled this
register of passing events for his study and use, a labour of love on
her part, achieved with abnormal slowness, and kept closely up to date.
The book was carried home to Putney on the first of every month, and
Mrs. Faunce's careful hands added such paragraphs bearing on the scheme
of the work, as she had cut out of the newspapers during the previous
four weeks.

It had pleased this good helpmeet to think that she was assisting her
husband in his professional labours, and the gruesome nature of her
researches had never troubled her.

Mrs. Faunce's book was a large folio bound in red levant leather, and
containing newspaper cuttings, pasted in by the lady's careful hands,
and indexed and classified with neatness and intelligence.

The volume was labelled "Not accounted for," and was a record of
exceeding ghastliness.

It contained the reports of coroners' inquests upon all manner of
mysterious deaths, the unexplained cases which might have been murder,
the "found drowned," the nameless corpses discovered in empty houses,
in lodging-house garrets, on desolate heaths and waste places; a
dismal calendar of tragic destinies, the record of hard fate or of
undiscovered crime.

Steadily, carefully, John Faunce searched the spacious pages where the
scraps of newspaper type stood out against a broad margin of white
paper. He began his scrutiny at the date on which Colonel Rannock was
said to have left London, and pursued it without finding any fact worth
his attention till he came to a paragraph dated May 30, and extracted
from the _Hants Mercury_, a popular bi-weekly newspaper, published in
Southampton.

"STRANGE DISCOVERY AT REDBRIDGE.--An inquest was held yesterday
afternoon at the Royal George, Redbridge, on the body of a man,
which had been found the previous day by some workmen engaged on the
repair of the road by the river. Their attention was attracted by
the proceedings of some gulls that were hovering and screaming over
a discarded boat that lay keel upwards in the slime and weeds of the
foreshore, at a spot where the tide must have washed over it day by
day. The timbers were so rotten that they crumbled under the men's
hands as they tried to lift the boat; but worthless as it was, they
found it carefully secured with two strong stakes which had been thrust
between the timbers at stern and bow, and driven deep into the beach
below the soft ooze and shifting mud that moved with every tide.

"The men pulled up the stakes and turned the keel over, and, almost
buried in the mud, they found the body of a man which had evidently
been lying there for a long time, and of which even the clothing was so
decomposed as to be unrecognizable. The most careful scrutiny failed
to afford any indication of identity, except the name of a well-known
West End tailor on the trousers-buttons, and the fact that the unknown
had been tall and strongly built. The doctor's evidence showed that
the back of the skull had been fractured by some blunt instrument,
and by a single blow of extraordinary violence. Death must have been
almost instantaneous. The inquiry was adjourned in the hope of further
evidence transpiring."

Other notices followed at short intervals, but no further evidence had
"transpired." A verdict of murder by some person or persons unknown had
ended the inquiry.

"Curious," mused Faunce, after reading the report a second time, and
with profound attention, and then he went on with his book till he came
to the last extract from a recent paper, another unknown victim of an
unknown murderer, pasted on to the page a week ago. And of all those
unsavoury records there was only that one of the body hidden under the
discarded boat that engaged his attention.

He knew Redbridge, a village street with its back to the water, a few
scattered houses along the shore, a homely inn, a bridge, and for
the rest a swampy waste where the reeds grew tall and rank, and the
wild duck skimmed. He knew the solitude that could be found along
that shore, not a quarter of a mile from pleasant cottage houses, and
lamplit village shops, and the gossip and movement of the inn. A likely
spot for a murderer to hide his victim; and this was clearly a case
of murder, the stealthy murderer's sudden blow, creeping noiselessly
behind the doomed man's back, with the strong arm lifted ready to
strike.

That single blow of great violence indicated the murderer's strength.
But where and how had the blow been dealt, and what connection could
there be between Colonel Rannock's supposed departure from Southampton,
and the body found on the shore at Redbridge, four miles away?

The question was one which John Faunce told himself that he had to
answer. The answer, when arrived at, might have no bearing on the case
in hand, but it had to be found. Faunce's science was an inductive
science, and he was always asking himself apparently futile questions
and working hard at the answers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Faunce spent the evening in his snug little sitting-room at Putney,
and his sole recreation during those domestic hours was furnished by
Mrs. Randall's discarded blotting-book, which he had not examined since
he obtained it from the little servant in Selburne Street.

With a clear table and a strong duplex lamp in front of him, Faunce
took the leaves of blotting-paper one by one, and held them between his
eyes and the light, while Mrs. Faunce, reading a novel in her armchair
by the fire, looked up at him every now and then with an indulgent
smile.

"At your old blotting-paper work again, Faunce," she said. "I don't
fancy you'll get much information out of that ragged stuff. There's too
much ink, and too many blots and splotches."

"It's not a very good specimen, Nancy; but I suppose I shall come to
something before I've done. It's finnicking work; but it almost always
pays."

"You're so persevering; and then you love your work."

"If I didn't I should never have stuck to it, Nancy. It's rather trying
work for any man that hasn't a heart like the nether millstone; and I'm
afraid I haven't."

Faunce had been at work nearly two hours, and his wife's interest
in a transcendently lovely heroine and a repulsively plain hero was
beginning to flag, before he came upon a blurred and broken line that
rewarded his patience.

In that splotched and besmeared labyrinth of lines the detective's
trained eye had discovered--

1. A date, March 27.

2. Two words, "meet me----"

3. A line of fragmentary syllables, "Sou--ton--est--o'clock."

4. Three words, "always loved you."

5. "Your--nd----"

6. "ig----"

This much, the inky impression of a heavy hand and a broad-nibbed pen,
Faunce was able to decipher upon two sheets of blotting-paper.

That last item, the letters "ig," with a flourish under the g, was the
most significant part of his discovery.

The letter had been signed with the lady's pet name, "Pig," and Faunce
told himself that to only one man would she have so signed herself--the
lover who had called her by that name at the Mecca Hotel, and whose
playful invention was doubtless responsible for the endearing sobriquet.

"She told me she did not know whether he sailed from Southampton or
Liverpool," mused Faunce, "yet here, under my hand, is the evidence
that she asked him to meet her at Southampton West."

He went to Southampton next day, and called at the office of the
American Line. If Colonel Rannock had carried out his intention there
must be some record of his passage to New York.

There was such a record, and a startling one, for it proved that he had
not gone to America by the ship in which he meant to sail.

After some difficulty, and being referred from one clerk to another,
Faunce found the young man who had booked Colonel Rannock's passage in
the _Boston_ on Friday, March 29, the evening before she sailed.

"He came after seven o'clock, when the office was shut," said the
clerk. "I was at work here, and as he made a great point of it I booked
his berth for him. He suffered for having left it till the eleventh
hour, for there were only two berths vacant--the two worst on the ship.
He grumbled a good deal, but took one of them, paid the passage money,
and left his cabin trunk to be sent on board next morning. And from
that day to this we have never heard of him. He gave us no address, but
we have his trunk, and we hold the cash to his credit, and I suppose
he'll claim it from us sooner or later."

"Was he alone?"

"He was alone when he came into the office, but there was some one
waiting for him in a cab outside, and I believe the some one was a
lady. He spoke to her as he came in at the door, and I heard her answer
him. 'Don't be all night about it, Dick,' she said."

"Thank you," said Faunce. "His friends are getting anxious about him,
but, for all that, I dare say he's safe enough, and he'll call upon you
for that passage money before long."

"If he's above ground I should think he would," answered the clerk,
"but I must say it looks rummy that he hasn't claimed the cash and the
trunk before now," and Faunce left the office more and more concerned
about that corpse under the disused boat.

The steamer _Boston_ was to leave the docks late on Saturday afternoon.
Why did Colonel Rannock go to Southampton on Friday, and how did he
propose to spend the intervening hours? More questions for Faunce to
answer.

A woman was with him at Southampton--a woman who had not travelled
with him from Waterloo, since he was alone when Chater saw the evening
express leave the platform. Who was the woman, and what was her
business on the scene? That she had addressed him by his Christian name
showed that she was not the casual acquaintance of an idle hour.

Faunce believed that he had found the answer to this question in Mrs.
Randall's blotting-book. If the letter that had left its fragmentary
impression on the blotting-paper had been sent to Colonel Rannock, a
letter urging him to meet her at Southampton West, it would account for
his going there the night before the steamer left. From those scattered
words, and that signature, "Your fond Pig," Faunce concluded that Kate
Delmaine had written to the man she loved, pleading for a parting
interview, and that Rannock had responded to her appeal.

There were other questions for Faunce to answer, and it was in the
quiet pursuit of knowledge that he took himself to the hotel which he
deemed the best in Southampton, engaged a bedroom, and ordered a dinner
in the coffee-room at the old-fashioned hour of six.

Before dining he called upon the coroner, who was also a well-known
family solicitor, and heard all that gentleman could tell him about the
inquest at Redbridge, which was no more than had been recorded in the
local newspaper.

Faunce having revealed himself in his professional capacity, the
coroner expressed his own opinion freely.

"I made up my mind that it was a murder case, and a bad one," he said;
"I've got the tailor's buttons in my criminal museum. Dash, Savile Row.
That stamps the victim as a stranger. We Southampton people don't get
our clothes in Savile Row."

The fashionable tailor's name was the only link between the nameless
corpse and the world of the living; the sole clue to identity.

There was no one in the coffee-room at six o'clock, and Faunce dined
snugly at a small table near the fire, where he was able to enjoy a
_tête-à-tête_ with the head-waiter, an old servant of the hotel, and
possessed of that vast extent of local and general knowledge which
seems the peculiar property of head-waiters and hotel-porters. The
porter's knowledge takes a wider range; but the waiter has the more
subtle mind.

Faunce started his inquiry with a bold guess.

"Do you happen to remember a lady and gentleman who dined here one
Friday evening in March last year--a tall man, good-looking, and a very
handsome woman. He was to leave for New York next day."

"We get a good many people who are going to New York, sir--chiefly
Americans who want to look about the neighbourhood--but I do call to
mind such a gentleman dining here one night in the spring of last
year--for the special reason that he engaged a bedroom, and didn't
occupy it, and also that he left a crocodile dressing-bag that has
never been claimed from that day to this."

"Should you remember his face, do you think, if you saw his photograph?"

"I think I might, sir. I don't often forget a face that I've waited
upon--unless it's no more than a casual drink and out again."

Faunce produced his capacious letter-case, in which there were
half-a-dozen cabinet photographs.

He selected one, and showed it to the waiter.

"Was this the man?"

"No, sir, not a bit like him."

Faunce showed him another.

"No, sir."

Faunce took out the other four, and laid them on the table. The
waiter's square forefinger alighted instantly on Colonel Rannock's
photograph.

"That was the man, sir."

"Good! Now I want you to tell me anything you can remember about this
gentleman and the lady who was with him. Take your time. I shall be
here all the evening."

"There's not much to tell, sir, except the odd thing of his not coming
back to the hotel. You see, sir, it's in this way. He and she comes in
after eight o'clock. He gives me his bag, and tells me to order his
room for him, and he orders dinner, anythink on the premises, as quick
as possible, in a private room. I offers him the cartdurving, and he
orders a bottle of Wachter, and they has their dinner cosy and quiet,
all to theirselves. I can see as she is upset about something, and I
gather that he's starting for New York next day, and that he's going to
Klondyke. He sends me out of the room when the dishes are on the table,
and I gather that they want to talk--but in taking in the tart--which
they don't touch--and the cheese, I hear her persuade him to go for a
turn by the water after dinner. He doesn't seem to want to go, but she
presses it, saying as she has a splitting head, and thinks the night
air will do her good. She looks pretty bad, as white as chalk, and her
eyelids red with crying."

"Well, they went out together, I suppose?"

"Yes, they has their coffee and their liqueur--she has two goes--and
then they go out. It must have been near eleven, for they sat a long
time over their dinner, and the night was pitch dark. If they was
strangers they might have walked into the water as easy as walk beside
it; but whatever they did, that's the last we ever see of 'em, and my
master was out of pocket for two dinners and a bottle of champagne; but
there's the crocodile bag, and even if it's full of brickbats, it's
worth three or four sovereigns to anybody as a bag; and if the gent
don't turn up at the end of the year we shall put in an advertisement
that, if not claimed, it will be sold to pay expenses."

"Did it never strike you that the gentleman might have met with foul
play?"

"Well, no! There was her, you see. Two of 'em could hardly have got
made away with and nobody hear of it. I expect he was running away with
somebody else's wife, or some other rum start, and they went off to
Jersey by the steamer that starts at midnight."

"And you've never given the matter a thought since that night, I
suppose?"

"Well, sir, it wasn't my business to think about it. I ain't in the
detective line, thank God."

Faunce smoked the cigar of thoughtfulness by the coffee-room fire,
went to bed at ten o'clock, and was out after an early breakfast next
morning, strolling by the water between all that is left of the old
city wall and the West Station. The tide was in, and the wavelets
plashed gaily against the low parapet, and Faunce saw how by a false
step in the darkness any one might drop into eight or nine feet of
water. But then there was the medical evidence of that smashing blow on
the skull. Nor could any theory of accidental drowning account for the
finding of the body four miles away, battened down under a rotten boat.

Faunce spent the rest of his morning in desultory conversation with
three or four men who let out boats for hire, in whose ways and customs
he showed a keen interest, wanting to know the how, when, and where
of their letting, and if ever they lost a boat. He discovered one
case--happening late in the previous March--of a man who had had a
narrow escape of losing a handsome skiff, which had been taken "off"
him one afternoon by a stranger, and which had been found adrift next
morning near the West Station, and never a sixpence of the day's hire
did he get from that swindling rascal.

Faunce tested the boatman's memory by close questioning about the
stranger's personal appearance, and with some difficulty arrived at
certain broad characteristics which had impressed the man at the time
of the hiring.

"There was not many people wanting boats so early in the year," he
said; "but this one told me as he had a niece living at Hythe, and
wanted to give her an afternoon on the water. 'It may be dark when I
brings back your boat,' he says, 'but I'm an old salt, and you needn't
be afraid I shall damage her.' He was a big, powerful-looking chap, and
he had something of a seaman's look, so I trusted him--and that's how
he tret me," concluded the boatman, resentfully.

"If you can find me the precise date of that hiring, I'll give you a
sovereign for it," said Faunce.

Thus stimulated, the boatman knew he could find the date. He had a
rough-and-ready ledger in which he entered most hirings, and cash
received--and he had certainly noted down the loss of a day, and the
way he'd been swindled.

Faunce went home with him to a queer little slum between the river and
the bar gate, and did not leave him till he had a copy of the man's
entry in his pocket-book.

"I may want your evidence next assizes," he said; "but if I do, you'll
be paid for your time."

"Thank 'ee, sir. I knew that bloke was a bad 'un."

These were all the answers to his questions that Faunce could find
in Southampton. He went back to town that afternoon, and he spent a
rollicking evening at the Battersea Gamecock, in the company of Mr.
Bolisco and a little knot of his admirers, of whom some were "bookies,"
and others, members of the pugilists' noble profession. The evening's
talk was mostly of the Turf and the prize-ring, and it furnished Faunce
with no direct answers to his questions; but it enabled him to turn the
full light of his psychological science upon Bolisco's character and
temperament.

"A wild beast on two legs," was Faunce's summing up of the pugilist, as
he strolled away from the sporting tavern.

He was closeted for an hour next morning with the landlord of the
Gamecock, from whom he received more than one direct answer to his
questions.

First, as to the link between Kate Delmaine, alias Prodgers, and Jim
Bolisco?

Mr. Lodway, the present landlord, had been barman when Bill Prodgers
had the Gamecock, and he remembered Kitty Prodgers running about,
fifteen years old, a rough-headed girl in a pinafore; but always a
beauty, and always with a devil of a temper. She was an only child, and
motherless. Nobody knew anything about her mother, who had died before
Prodgers took the Gamecock. The girl and her father used to quarrel,
and Bolisco, who lodged in the house off and on, used to stick up for
her, and Prodgers and he sometimes came to blows.

"And this," concluded Mr. Lodway, "was the beginning of their walking
about together."

"They were sweethearts then, Kate and Bolisco?"

"Well, they kind of kep' company, though she was such a kid that nobody
thought it was going to lead to anything. Bolisco was a good-looking
chap then, before he got his smeller smashed in the mill with the
Hammersmith nigger. They kep' company for a year or two, off and on,
for it wasn't in Kate to go on long with anybody without quarrelling;
and then, after one of her rows with her father, she walks off and gets
herself engaged at the Spectacular Theatre, straight off. She was such
a clipper at seventeen that she had but to show herself to a manager to
get took on. He'd have engaged forty such, I reckon, at the same price.
The father was drinking as much as he knew how by that time, and things
were going to the bad here, and he took no more trouble about the girl
than if she'd been a strayed kitten: but me and one or two more went
after her, and found her in decent lodgings in Katherine Street, and as
straight as a die. But six months after that she had her house in St.
John's Wood, and her brougham, as smart as a duchess; and the mug who
was paying the piper was one of Bolisco's patrons, a Yorkshire bart,
very young, and as green as a spring cabbage."

"And Bolisco was still hanging about her?"

"Lord! yes; he wasn't likely to lose sight of her while she had the
spending of that young softy's rhino."

"Mr. Bolisco is a bit of a spendthrift, I take it."

"Above a bit. Never could keep his money long, and yet never was
guilty of a generous action, as I know of. It's all gone backing wrong
'uns--sometimes horses, sometimes pugilists. Of course, he's had the
straight tip now and again, and has pulled off a good thing; but as a
rule, Bolisco ain't lucky. Why, to my certain knowledge he had four
hundred pound spare cash less than a year ago--won it over the City and
Suburban--and I don't believe he's got a tanner except what she gives
him."

"Meaning Mrs. Randall?"

"Just so! And he owes me nine weeks' board and lodging. I shouldn't
take it as quiet as I do, if he wasn't a bit of a draw. The young 'uns
like to see him and hear him talk."

"And he sets a good example in the way of hard drinking?"

"Oh, I don't encourage any man to drink more than he can stand. But as
long as he can carry his liquor like a gentleman----"

"You don't put the skid on. But how did you come to know of this money
of Bolisco's, last March?"

"I didn't say anythink about March."

"No, but it was about March--or April last year, that Bolisco was
flush, wasn't it?"

"It was after Epsom Spring; and that was near the end of April."

"True. Did he show you the cash?"

"He brought the notes to me to get changed for him--four fifties and
two hundreds. He'd been paid short, and he wanted tenners and fivers. I
paid the two hundreds to my brewer, and gave Bolisco my cheque for the
lot, on the London and Provincial, Battersea Branch."

"Did you keep the numbers of the notes?"

"Not me. I got the collector's receipt for the money, and that was good
enough for me. I paid the four fifties into my account at the L. and P."

"You hadn't often known Bolisco as flush as that?"

"Well, perhaps not. He's often been able to flourish a tenner, or a
twenty-pun' note, after a race; but he didn't use to deal in fifties
and hundreds. 'Why, Jim,' says I, 'you've been getting out of your
depth.' 'Why, yes, mate,' says he, 'may be I've been a bit out of my
depth.'"




CHAPTER XVII.

 "All of us sinful, all with need of grace,
   All chary of our life,--the minute more
 Or minute less of grace which saves a soul,--
   Bound to make common cause with who craves time,
 We yet protest against the exorbitance
   Of sin in this one sinner, and demand
 That his poor sole remaining piece of time
   Be plucked from out his clutch: put him to death!
 Punish him now! As for the weal or woe
   Hereafter, God grant mercy! Man be just,
 Nor let the felon boast he went scot-free!"


The sky was dull and leaden, and there was a fine rain falling--the
kind of rain that means to stay--when Faunce bent his footsteps from
Sloane Square to Selburne Street, Chelsea.

"The kind of atmosphere that slackens fiddle-strings and women's
nerves," thought Faunce. "I shall find her in the doldrums."

"Well, Betsy, how's your first floor to-day?" he asked, when the little
servant opened the door.

"Oh, she's in one of her nasty tempers--just because the sittin'-room
chimley smoked all the mornin'--and she's that low! But you'll cheer
'er hup, I dessay."

"I don't know about that, Betsy," said Mr. Faunce, who did not feel
himself the harbinger of joy.

"Come in, can't you?" Mrs. Randall said peevishly, when he knocked at
the door.

She was crouching over the fire, in a room that was grey with smoke,
and she was wearing a terrible garment of soiled and crumpled plush,
with a ragged bead trimming--a garment she called her tea-gown, but
which on her "low" days was breakfast, tea, and dinner gown, and
sometimes served also as bed-gown, when the morphia needle had been
freely used, and she flung herself upon her bed in a casual way, to
dream through the long night.

"Oh, it's you!" she said. "Come and sit down, if you can breathe in
this stifling hole. That beast of a chimney left off smoking an hour
ago, but I can't get the smoke out of the room, though I had the
winder open till I got the shivers. Well, what's your news?" she asked
carelessly, by way of starting the conversation.

"Bad," he answered, in a grave voice. "Very bad. I have just come from
Southampton."

It was nearly four o'clock, and the London light was waning, but it was
light enough for him to see the livid change in her customary pallor.

"Well, old chap, and what may you have been doing there?" she asked,
with an attempt at sprightliness. "Been to see your sweetheart, or to
offer yourself for M.P. at the next vacancy?"

"I have been looking for a murdered man," he said.

Her eyes fixed themselves on his face in wondering horror.

"That ain't a very lively sort of occupation," she said, after a pause,
still keeping up that assumption of gay indifference. "I hope the party
wasn't a near relation."

"No; he was not of my blood, nor of yours; but he was bound to you by
every link that should make a man's life sacred. He was bound to you
body and soul, and you helped to murder him."

"Oh, my God!" she cried; "oh, my God! Man alive, don't talk to me like
that. Take the poker and smash my head open; but don't talk like that!"

"I must. I pity you, but I can't spare you. It is my trade to drag
secret crimes into the light of day."

"You're a detective," she cried. "Oh, you paltry cad, you hypocrite,
you coward, to come hanging about me and pretending to be my friend."

"I'll be the best friend you ever had, if you'll give me the chance.
Come now, Mrs. Randall; your life's been a misery to you ever since
that night by Southampton Water."

Her terrified gaze widened as he spoke. She looked at him as if a
spirit of supernatural omniscience, a Nemesis in human form, were
before her.

"If this bad business had never come to light, if nobody had ever come
to know how Colonel Rannock was murdered, if Bolisco had never been
brought to book----"

She started at the name, but the Medusa face remained unchanged.

"How much would your life have been worth to you? Could you have ever
been a happy woman?"

"No, no, no," she wailed, "never again! I loved him! He was the only
man I ever loved. I used him badly enough, God knows; but he was the
only one, the only one. Poor old Tony was a good sort, and I made a
fool of him and helped him to ruin himself, and I was sorry when he
went off in a decline. Poor chap! He just chucked his life away. Too
much fizz, and too much card-playing and late hours. Poor old Tony. He
was only six and twenty when the doctors gave him over."

"But Rannock was the favourite," said Faunce.

"Yes, Dick was my one true love--the handsomest, the cleverest, the
bravest, and always the gentleman--always the gentleman," she repeated,
sobbing, "though I don't mean to say he was straight at cards. He had
to get his money somehow, poor fellow."

"You loved him, and you lured him to his death. You told Bolisco
where he was going, and that he was carrying his money with him, in
bank-notes."

"My God, yes! I told him. I was always a blabbing fool."

"You wrote the letter that took him to the shambles, and you stood by
and saw the blow struck."

"Great God! Do you think I knew what was coming? Do you think I'm a
fiend from hell dressed up like a woman?" she cried, with wildest
vehemence. "I wrote the letter--I was told to, and I had to obey. I
asked him to meet me at Southampton. Jim said if he could see Rannock
before he left England he could get a few pounds out of him for old
sake's sake; and Jim was as near beggary as a sporting man with a few
old friends left can be. I never thought he meant harm. Dick and he had
been friendly in the old days in the Abbey Road, and it seemed likely
enough that Dick would give him a helping hand. I didn't want to write
that letter, mind you, but I was bullied into doing it. You don't know
what Bolisco is."

"Yes, I do. I know he's a cold-blooded murderer, and that while you
and Rannock were walking by the water, Bolisco crept up behind you and
struck him on the back of his head with a life-preserver--a blow that
fractured his skull."

"Did any one see?" she gasped. "Oh, God, I've heard the dip of the oars
as the boat crept up to the wall--I've heard it all through the night
sometimes, in a dog's sleep--dip--dip--dip--and then a step on the
pavement behind us, and then a crash, and the dull thud when Rannock
fell. And I've sat by this fire in the half-light, as we're sitting
now, and I've seen him lying on the ground, and Bolisco kneeling by
his side emptying his pockets--note-case, watch, tie-pin, pulling
off his rings, tearing out his shirt-studs and links, as quick as
lightning--and then making me help to drag him to the boat. And I fancy
I am standing alone by the river, in the darkness, hearing the dip of
the oars fainter and fainter in the distance. It was like a horrible
dream then; and it has been a horrible dream to me ever since, a dream
that I dream over and over again, and shall go on dreaming till I die."

Her voice rose to a shriek. Faunce saw the fit of hysteria coming, and
snatched the morphia bottle and the morphia needle from the table where
his observant eye had marked them in his first survey of the room, the
practice of his profession having taught him that the first thing to do
on entering a room was to make a mental inventory of every object in it.

He held Mrs. Randall's wrist, and gave her a strong dose of her
favourite sedative.

"My poor friend, you have been hardly used," he said. "But your duty
lies straight before you. As an accessory after the fact, the law
will deal lightly with you, and you will have every one's pity. You
must turn Queen's evidence, and help us to punish Colonel Rannock's
murderer."

"That I'll never do!" she said emphatically.

"Oh, but surely, if you loved this man, you must want to avenge his
murder. Think what a cruel murder it was! A strong man struck down
in the prime of life. Think of that unburied corpse, lying hidden on
the solitary shore, the waters rolling over it as the tide rose and
fell--unknown, unhonoured. If you loved him, you must want to avenge
his murder."

"I ain't going to peach upon Jim Bolisco," she said doggedly. "And if I
was capable of it, my evidence would be no good."

"Why not?" asked Faunce, startled.

"Because he's my husband; and a wife can't give away her husband.
That's law, ain't it, Faunce?"

"Your husband? Is that true?"

"Gospel truth. We were married at Battersea Church when I was just
turned seventeen. I didn't care for him, and he's been a log round my
neck ever since. But he was in luck just then, and he used to give me
presents--bits of jewellery, and smart hats, and such-like--and he was
the first as ever took notice of me and told me I was handsome. And
he said he should take a cottage at Wandsworth, with a bit of garden,
and I was to be missus, and have a girl to wait upon me. But his luck
turned soon after our wedding--which was on the strict q.t.--and he
never took that cottage, and we never told father or anybody else. Jim
said our marriage was just a bit of a lark, and we'd best forget it;
but when I had a fine house and was flush of money, and might have
been Lady Withernsea for good and all, but for him, he didn't forget
it. I know what blackmail means, Mr. Faunce. I have been paying it
ever since I was eighteen. I had to find money for Bolisco when he
wanted it, for he swore he'd claim me as his wife if I didn't. I've had
what's-his-name's sword hanging over my head all these years, and I got
to hate the man worse every year; and now I hate him--I hate him,--I
hate him with every drop of blood in my veins! I turn cold when I hear
his step on the stair. I never look at him without remembering that
night, and my poor Dick lying on the ground, and Bolisco's wicked hands
tearing open his coat and searching his pockets, like a wild beast
mauling its prey."

"And you want to see him suffer for that brutal murder, don't you?"

"No; I want nothing but to have done with it all. Just to be out of it,
that's what I want. Do you think if they were to hang Bolisco, it would
set my mind at rest, or make me forget what a shrew I was to poor old
Dick, and how he forgave me, and came back to me after I'd treated him
so bad, and how I wrote the letter that lured him to his death? What do
I care what becomes of Bolisco? Let him murder somebody else, and get
nabbed for that. I don't care. Nothing will stop my bad dreams, till I
fall asleep for the last time: and then, who knows? There may be bad
dreams underground as well as above; or one long dream of hell-fire and
worms that gnaw."

"Come, come, Mrs. Randall, you mustn't despair," Faunce said kindly.

He was sorry for her, and yet what comfort could he offer? He looked
at her in her ruined beauty, and thought of her life, and the two men
whose lives she had spoilt. She had sown the wind, and she was reaping
the whirlwind, and he saw no hope for her in the black future.

What was he to do? He had come to her prepared to make his _coup
d'état_, having calculated that he could startle her into a revelation
of the murder, in which he believed her to have been an unwilling
accessory. He had succeeded, but his success was worth nothing if this
one all-important witness could not be heard.

He drove to Scotland Yard, put the facts of the case before the
assistant-commissioner, and Bolisco was arrested late that night at the
Game Cock, on suspicion of being concerned in the murder of Colonel
Richard Rannock. The evidence against him, excluding Kate Delmaine's
confession, was weak, but there was no time to lose, as she was likely
to warn him of his danger.

If the numbers of the notes he had changed could be identified with
Chater's list, there would be strong presumptive evidence against him,
and other facts might come to light on inquiry to strengthen the chain
of circumstance. Faunce relinquished the case to the Public Prosecutor.
It had passed beyond the region of private interests. A murder so
atrocious concerned the world at large, and the conviction of the
murderer was a matter of public importance.

One most painful duty Faunce had to perform, and he set about it with a
heavy heart. He had to tell Mrs. Rannock the story of her son's death.
Soften the details as he might, it was a terrible story to tell, and he
decided that it would be better for her son-in-law to be the bearer of
these dismal tidings.

He called on Major Towgood, whom he found in a small house nearer
Vauxhall Bridge than Eccleston Square, but by courtesy in Belgravia.
The Major received him in a little den darkened by a monster pile of
red brick flats, which he called the library.

"Well, Faunce, any news of the prodigal son?"

"Yes, sir."

"Bad news?"

"Very bad news, sir. I came to you in order that you might break it to
Mrs. Rannock."

"It will have to stand over, Faunce. Mrs. Rannock is very ill. I may
say she is dangerously ill."

"Indeed, sir? That's sudden, for it's only four days since I received
her instructions, and she then appeared in fair health, considering her
age."

"Yes, she was a wonder for her age, but always delicate--a bit of
porcelain that ought to have been behind glass in a cabinet. And she
was eaten up by anxiety about Rannock. She took a chill, coming round
here to see my wife, who is laid up, the evening after you saw her,
and it developed into influenza, or congestion of the lungs--God knows
what! The doctors only tell me she is old, and that her life hangs by a
thread; but I'm afraid we shall lose her, Faunce."

"If that sweet old lady dies without hearing what I have to tell her, I
think those who love her best will have cause to thank God, sir; for I
believe my story would kill her."

"Is it as bad as that?"

"It couldn't be worse, sir."

Faunce related his discoveries, and Major Towgood agreed that at all
cost the truth must be kept from the murdered man's mother. In her
intervals of consciousness she had repeatedly asked about Faunce and
the progress of his inquiry. And there had been hours of delirium in
which she thought the fondly-loved son was at her bedside. She had
taken a strange doctor for him, and had talked to him as to her son.

No, she must not know while the knowledge could possibly be kept from
her. But should she recover, and leave her room, the newspapers would
tell her of Bolisco's arrest, and the inquiry before the magistrate
at Southampton, where he was to be taken on the following day. And
it would not be possible to keep the newspapers from her. For her to
recover, and know her son's tragic fate, would mean a broken heart that
death alone could cure.

"Perhaps you're right, Faunce. Even my wife would hardly wish the dear
old lady to struggle back to life to suffer such a crushing blow. Poor
Dick! We always knew that woman would be his ruin. His sin has found
him out."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rannock murder was the _cause célèbre_ of the next few months.
The inquiry before the Southampton magistrate was adjourned from week
to week, and the case against James Bolisco gradually developed, till
the chain of evidence became as strong as circumstantial evidence well
can be. The numbers of the notes paid to the Wandsworth brewer by the
landlord of the Game Cock were traced, and proved identical with the
numbers in Chater's list. Bolisco was sworn to by the boatman as the
man who hired his boat on the date of Colonel Rannock's journey to
Southampton, and whom he never saw after the hiring. Bolisco was also
identified by the landlord of a humble little inn on the road between
Redbridge and Southampton, as having come to his house after midnight,
on that same date, in a strange condition, his boots and trousers
smothered in river mud, and one of his hands torn and bleeding. He had
hurt it with a hammer, he said. He ate a heavy supper, drank half a
bottle of brandy, paid his bill before he went to bed, and left next
morning before anybody in the house was astir.

Another link in the chain was a life-preserver which a Redbridge boy
had picked up in a lane leading from the river to the village street,
and on which were found minute splinters of bone, and tufts of human
hair, adhering to the heavy leaden knob. Chater pronounced the hair to
be of the colour and texture of his master's, while the surgeon, who
had given his evidence before the coroner, considered this formidable
weapon the kind of instrument calculated to cause the fracture he had
described at the inquest.

The victim's watch and tie pin, a valuable ruby, had been pawned by the
murderer late in the year, and a West-end pawnbroker swore to Bolisco
as the man from whom he received them. Watch and pin were identified by
Major Towgood.

Bolisco had carried out his design with a kind of brutal carelessness
of consequences which might have seemed more natural in one of Nero's
gladiators, a half-tamed savage from Dalmatian forests, than in a
son of the London streets. He had presumed upon the consciousness of
brute force, and when the inquest was over, and his victim's identity
unsuspected, he had considered himself safe for life. He stared at the
witnesses in a blank surprise, as one fact after another was marshalled
against him, and stood with bent brows, in a sullen apathy, at the end
of the proceedings, when he heard himself committed for trial at the
next assizes.

In the dock at Winchester, and in the condemned cell at Newgate, he had
time to reflect upon his mistakes, and to think how he might have done
the thing better.

That was James Bolisco's repentance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Rannock did not live to know of her son's ghastly fate. Her
frail life ended peacefully before Faunce's discovery was a week old.
Her last breath expired in words of love, her last movement was a
feeble motion of her hand towards the beloved figure which her fancy
had conjured out of thin air, the figure of her son, standing by her
bedside, as she had seen him again and again in delirious dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

Faunce did all that compassionate kindness could do for Bolisco's
wretched wife. The impression of her letter in the blotting-book had
been one of the links in the chain of circumstance, for, taken in
conjunction with Chater's evidence, it showed why Rannock had gone to
Southampton the day before the American steamer started. Her position
as Bolisco's wife made her impossible as a witness; but her letter was
evidence, and her relations with the murderer became as notorious as
every other detail in the story of the crime.

"It can't hurt me," she told Faunce, the night after the death sentence
at Winchester. "I'm past hurting. Bolisco's better out of the world,
for he'd never stop doing harm as long as he was in it--and the sooner
I follow him the better for me."

Faunce proved a kind friend to the unhappy woman whose days and nights
were haunted by the image of her murdered lover. Broken in spirits,
all the evil ways of her dissipated youth wreaking their revenge upon
health and beauty, the physician to whom Faunce took her pronounced her
doom. The hand of death was upon her. It was only a question of time.

"If she stays in London she will hardly last through the winter," he
told Faunce. "I should recommend Bournemouth or Ventnor--Ventnor for
choice. And she may rub along through next summer. But you must stop
the morphia habit."

"I'll do what I can," said Faunce; "but I am a busy man. She is not
of my kith and kin. Only I don't want her to die like a dog without a
friend near her."

"She has been a very beautiful woman," said the doctor pityingly. "One
must be sorry for such a life thrown away."

Faunce engaged Betsy, the good-natured lodging-house drudge, to take
care of Mrs. Randall, and took them to cottage lodgings at Ventnor, not
far from the Consumption Hospital; and in that lovely spot, facing the
blue water, Kate Delmaine lived through the summer and autumn after
Bolisco's execution. Faunce looking in at the cottage now and then--a
flying visitor from Portsmouth or Southampton--to see that she was
being properly cared for.

He had found her almost penniless in her Chelsea lodgings after the
trial at Winchester, her last five-pound note having been sent to the
lawyer who had undertaken Bolisco's defence. It was Lady Perivale's
generous gift upon which he was now drawing for Kate Delmaine's comfort.

"After all I owe it to her that I was able to pull the business through
so easily," he told himself, "and it's only fair that she should profit
by my client's liberality."

The end came when November mists were rolling up the Channel, and the
late roses were beginning to droop in the cottage garden. The end came
peacefully, and not without the consolations of religion, for Mrs.
Randall's landlady was a good Church-woman, and in touch with her
parish priest, who was kindly and sympathetic, and able to understand a
broken heart, even in a difficult subject, like this woman, whose life
had been a stranger to all good influences.

"You've been a fast friend to me, Faunce," she said, when she was
dying, and he had been summoned hastily for the last farewell; "and if
I'd known a hard-headed, kind-hearted chap like you ten years ago I
might have been a better woman. Well, I had my fling. There's not many
women have had more of their own way or been more looked up to than I
was in poor old Tony's time: there's not many women that ever had a
truer lover than Dick Rannock, with all his faults. He couldn't keep
straight with the cards," she murmured, beginning to wander; "but he
was every inch a gentleman. Christ have mercy on his soul!"




EPILOGUE.

Grace Haldane To Susan Rodney.


 "Villa Rienzi, Rome, April 15.

"You ask me, dear Sue, when I am going back to Grosvenor Square. If I
were guided by my feelings at this present hour I should reply 'Never!'
But feelings and inclinations may change, and my present distaste for
London society and disgust at the thought of my London acquaintance
may give way to the whim of the moment, and a sudden fancy for art, or
music, or drama, which only London can give.

"I hope I am not a vindictive woman, but I own that I can never again
take pleasure in the society of the people who so cruelly wronged me,
the so-called friends who were willing to believe in misconduct that
should have seemed impossible to any one who knew me; and who were not
brave and honest enough to come to me and discover the truth from my
own lips.

"The tragedy of Colonel Rannock's death has impressed me deeply. It
is appalling to think of that energetic spirit, that soul of fire,
quenched in a moment by a murderer's hand--of the man once so admired
and beloved lying unknown and unwept in that solitary spot where the
waters rose and fell over his unhallowed grave.

"I can but remember his talents, his charm of manner, and the days when
I was perhaps nearer loving him than I suspected at the time. Thank God
for that better and truer lover who came to my rescue, and who had but
to enter the circle of my life to influence it for ever. Had I never
known Arthur Haldane I might have married Colonel Rannock, and my fate
might have been wretched, for I believe the only attraction I ever
had for him, over and above my fortune, was my likeness to that other
woman, his bad angel.

"No, Sue, I am not going to bury myself alive, as you suggest. We have
a host of friends in this enchanting cosmopolitan city--Italians,
Americans, English, French, Germans, Russians, choice spirits whose
love of art and beauty has brought them here, and whose pleasures take
a higher range than expensive dinners at newly-opened restaurants, and
occasional contact with Royal personages.

"Arthur and I are utterly happy here. The atmosphere suits his work,
and puts me in good spirits. We have found a delicious villa at Tivoli,
where we shall retire towards the end of May, and where our days and
nights will be spent in a garden of roses and lilies, with a fountain
that makes music all day long. In the mean time this city furnishes
inexhaustible pleasures and interests, and life is so vivid and joyous
that I feel as if I only began to live when I came here.

"Of my husband I need not write, for I think you know all that he is
to me; and in August, when we go to our place on the Scottish Border,
which I used not to like, but which Arthur says he shall adore, I hope
my dear old Sue will break away from troublesome suburban pupils and
come to us for a long visit. By that time Arthur's new novel will be in
the Press, and by that time, if all go well, there will be a young life
in our home which will give new joys to our lives.

 "Ever your loving friend,
 "Grace Haldane.

"P.S.--Pray never again address me as 'Lady Perivale.' I hate that
semi-detached style. I am Mrs. Arthur Haldane, and am proud to bear my
husband's name."




The Author's Autograph Edition.

 _Cloth gilt, 2s. 6d._       _Picture Boards, 2s._

  1. LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET.
  2. HENRY DUNBAR.
  3. ELEANOR'S VICTORY.
  4. AURORA FLOYD.
  5. JOHN MARCHMONT'S LEGACY.
  6. THE DOCTOR'S WIFE.
  7. ONLY A CLOD.
  8. SIR JASPER'S TENANT.
  9. TRAIL OF THE SERPENT.
 10. THE LADY'S MILE.
 11. LADY LISLE.
 12. CAPTAIN OF THE VULTURE.
 13. BIRDS OF PREY.
 14. CHARLOTTE'S INHERITANCE.
 15. RUPERT GODWIN.
 16. RUN TO EARTH.
 17. DEAD SEA FRUIT.
 18. RALPH THE BAILIFF.
 19. FENTON'S QUEST.
 20. LOVELS OF ARDEN.
 21. ROBERT AINSLEIGH.
 22. TO THE BITTER END.
 23. MILLY DARRELL.
 24. STRANGERS AND PILGRIMS.
 25. LUCIUS DAVOREN.
 26. TAKEN AT THE FLOOD.
 27. LOST FOR LOVE.
 28. A STRANGE WORLD.
 29. HOSTAGES TO FORTUNE.
 30. DEAD MEN'S SHOES.
 31. JOSHUA HAGGARD.
 32. WEAVERS AND WEFT.
 33. AN OPEN VERDICT.
 34. VIXEN.
 35. THE CLOVEN FOOT.
 36. THE STORY OF BARBARA.
 37. JUST AS I AM.
 38. ASPHODEL.
 39. MOUNT ROYAL.
 40. THE GOLDEN CALF.
 41. PHANTOM FORTUNE.
 42. FLOWER AND WEED.
 43. ISHMAEL.
 44. WYLLARD'S WEIRD.
 45. UNDER THE RED FLAG.
 46. ONE THING NEEDFUL.
 47. MOHAWKS.
 48. LIKE AND UNLIKE.
 49. THE FATAL THREE.
 50. THE DAY WILL COME.
 51. ONE LIFE, ONE LOVE.
 52. GERARD.
 53. THE VENETIANS.
 54. ALL ALONG THE RIVER.
 55. THOU ART THE MAN.
 56. SONS OF FIRE.
             AND


57. ROUGH JUSTICE (Just Issued).

  THE WORLD says:--"'Rough Justice,' one of the best of Miss Braddon's
  later novels, is now included in the publisher's small, pretty, and
  cheap edition of her works. The book is admirably printed, easy to
  hold, and very smart in its red and gold binding."

  THE DAILY NEWS says:--"The book is an astonishing example of Miss
  Braddon's sustained powers, of her inventiveness, her vigour of
  style, and the humaneness of her character-drawing."

  THE DAILY CHRONICLE says:--"This, perhaps, is the most daring thing
  Miss Braddon has written."


ALSO READY, A CHEAP EDITION OF

LONDON PRIDE. _Cloth, 2s. 6d._


UNDER LOVE'S RULE. 6s.

THE CHRISTMAS HIRELINGS. 3s. 6d.

 _Profusely illustrated._


 LONDON:
 SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO., LTD.

